CITY OF PAXTON, ILLINOIS
Code of Ordinances
2025 S-38 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-07-05, passed 7-8-25
State legislation current through ILCS 2025, Pamphlet #1
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CITY WARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the City of Paxton, Illinois shall be
designated as the Code of Paxton and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   CITY, MUNICIPALITY, or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. The City of Paxton,
irrespective of its population or legal classification.
   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The Council of the City of Paxton.
   COUNTY. Ford County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Ford County, Illinois.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.  
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of such officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at
any time after that date.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD, or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and
all bridges thereupon.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Paxton.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals. (ILCS
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the City of
Paxton. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include such persons in the employ
of a city as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall hereafter be
appointed and sworn as police officers.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
village, city, county, state, or federal governments, officers and agencies
thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized
public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares, and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The city code hereby adopted, and as
hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of new titles,
chapters, or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in Section 1 of Article
VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic, and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law, it
shall be:
      (1)   The proper handwriting of that person, or in case he is unable to
write, his proper mark, or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, except as otherwise provided by law.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.”
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday
or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Mayor and
City Council may be fully carried out.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the same as
those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the city shall be as set by federal law.
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section.
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder.
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder.
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context
clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was
not intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code of ordinances by
the City Council.
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. Such references
shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer or office, unless
the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not limited
to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the City
Council or a certain city officer or employee to make additional regulations
for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all regulations of
a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the codification and
not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the city. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text of the
section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-2-1) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-85). An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following
the text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute
for further information. Example:
      § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      The city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
      all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information
Act.
   Statutory reference:
      Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this city
for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined not more
than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Statutory reference:
   Limitations on penalties, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 1-2-1.1
CHAPTER 11: CITY WARDS
Section
   
11.01   City wards
§ 11.01 CITY WARDS.
   (A)   The First Ward of the City of Paxton shall be all that portion of the
city east of the following described line, to-wit: commencing at the
intersection of the centerline of Vermilion Street with the north line of the
alley extending in an easterly and westerly direction through the center of
Block 3 and Block 13 in the Original Town of Prospect City, now City of Paxton,
east of the Illinois Central Railroad, and proceeding northerly on said
centerline of Vermilion Street to the centerline of Spruce Street; thence
easterly on said centerline of Spruce Street to the centerline of Union Street;
thence northerly on the centerline of Union Street to the city limits on the
north and being north of the following described line, to-wit: Commencing at
the southwest corner of Lot 8 in Block 13 in the Original Town of Prospect
City, now City of Paxton, east of the Illinois Central Railroad; thence
continuing easterly along the north boundary of the alley located in Block 13
and Block 23 in the Original Town of Prospect City, now City of Paxton, east of
the Illinois Central Railroad; thence continuing easterly along the north
boundary of the alley located in Blocks 33 and 43 in Pells Addition to Paxton,
east of the Illinois Central Railroad, to the point of intersection of said
alley with the centerline of High Street; thence southerly along the centerline
of High Street to the centerline of Meridian Terrace; thence easterly along the
centerline of Meridian Terrace to the centerline of Park Lawn; thence easterly
along the centerline of Park Lawn to the centerline of Fall Street; thence
north along the centerline of Fall Street to the centerline of Roselawn Drive;
thence east along the centerline of Roselawn Drive to the city limits on the
east.
   (B)   The Second Ward of the City of Paxton shall be all that portion of the
city north of the following described line, to-wit: commencing at the west
boundary of the City of Paxton and the centerline of Center Street continuing
thence easterly along the centerline of Center Street to the centerline of
Vermilion Street and being west of the following described line, to-wit:
commencing at the centerline of the intersection of Center Street with the
centerline of Vermilion Street; thence northerly on said centerline of
Vermilion Street to the centerline of Spruce Street; thence easterly on said
centerline of Spruce Street to the centerline of Union Street; thence northerly
on the centerline of Union Street to the City Limits on the north.
   (C)   The Third Ward of the City of Paxton shall be all that portion of the
city that lies south of the following described line, to-wit: commencing at the
west boundary of the City of Paxton and the centerline of Center Street,
continuing thence easterly on the centerline of Center Street to the centerline
of Vermilion Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Vermilion Street
to the centerline of Larson Street; thence east on the centerline of Larson
Street to the centerline of Washington Street; thence south on the centerline
of Washington Street to the south line of Glen Cemetery, extended; thence east
along the present city limits to the west line of Cambridge Heights
Subdivision; thence south along the west line of Cambridge Heights Subdivision
to the centerline of East Washington Boulevard; thence east along the
centerline of East Washington Boulevard to the city limits on the east.
   (D)   The Fourth Ward of the City of Paxton shall be all that portion of the
city east of the centerline of Vermilion Street not included in the First Ward
and Third Ward.
(Ord. 84-36, passed 11-12-84; Am. Ord. 02-32, passed 8-12-02)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL; MAYOR
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
33.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
34.   EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES AGENCY
      
35.   CITY POLICIES
      
36.   TAXATION AND FINANCE
      
37.   PURCHASING; SALE OF CITY PROPERTY
      38.   CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL; MAYOR
Section
City Council
   
30.01   Meetings of Council
   
30.02   Standing committees
   
30.03   Public meeting speaking rules
   30.04   Attendance of meetings
Mayor
   
30.10   Elective officers
   
30.11   Mayor's bond
   
30.12   Shall sign commission
   
30.13   Preside at meetings of Council
   
30.14   Supervise conduct of officers
   
30.15   Grant licenses
   
30.16   Sign contracts
   
30.17   Appoint officers; fill vacancies
   
30.18   Call citizens to enforce law
   
30.19   Supervision of police
   
30.20   Other duties
Cross-reference:
   Compensation of Aldermen, see §
33.31
CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.01 MEETINGS OF COUNCIL.
   (A)   Any regular meeting of the City Council falling upon a legal holiday
shall be held on the next following secular day, at the same hour and place.
   (B)   Commencing January 2016, the City Council shall hold its regular baord
meeting on the second Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. to be held in the City
Hall. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, or by any three members of
the Council, whenever in his, her or their discretion it may be deemed
necessary; in which event it shall be the duty of the City Marshal to cause
each member of the Council to be personally served with a notice of such
special meeting or by leaving a copy thereof at his or her usual place of
business or residence. The notice shall state the object of the meeting, and no
business shall be transacted at any special meeting except such as is stated in
the notice.
(Ord. passed 8-7-33; Am. Ord. passed 9-4-34; Am. Ord. passed 5-7-51; Am. Ord.
15-32, passed 12-14-15)
§ 30.02 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Mayor, at the beginning of each fiscal
year to appoint the following named standing committees, the first named member
of each committee to be the chairperson thereof, each committee to consist of
not less than four members and each committee to have at least one alderman
from each ward thereon:
   First:      Committee on Community;
   Second:      Committee on City Property;
   Third:      Committee on Economic Development:
   Fourth:      Committee on Finance/Budget;
   Fifth:      Committee on License/Permits/Zoning/Insurance;
   Sixth:      Committee on Long Term Planning;
   Seventh:   Committee on Public Safety;
   Eighth:      Committee on Public Works.
   (B)   (1)   Community. Works with the Chamber of Commerce, with PRIDE and
other community organizations.
      (2)   City Property. In charge of all city buildings, grounds, parks and
airport.
      (3)   Economic Development. Supervises Tax Increment Finance and other
city finance incentives, reviews and recommends proposals for redevelopment.
      (4)   Finance/Budget. Provide guidance in all financial matters of the
city. Review the annual budget and set long term financial goals.
      (5)   Licenses/Permits/Zoning/Insurance. Supervises issuance of licenses,
permits by the city, and shall supervise, study and advise for insurance of
city owned property, equipment, vehicles and special events.
      (6)   Long Term Planning. Plans and budgets for long term improvements
and equipment purchases - 24 months or longer.
      (7)   Public Safety. Supervises all matters pertaining to Police
Department and the Emergency Response Services Agency.
      (8)   Public Works. Supervises the water supply to the city, matters
pertaining to surface water drainage and storm sewers. Supervises all matters
pertaining to the sanitary sewer system and all improvements, machinery and
equipment belonging to these systems. Public Works Committee will have charge
of and direct all improvements on the public thoroughfares, the opening, laying
out, widening extending and vacating the same and keeping the same in a proper
and safe condition.
(Ord. 02-40, passed 10-14-02; Am. Ord. 13-27, passed 5-13-13; Am. Ord. 16-02,
passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 16-30, passed 10-11-16)
§ 30.03 PUBLIC MEETING SPEAKING RULES.
   Public comment. Pursuant to the city’s rule-making authority set forth in
the Illinois Open Meetings Act, the rules governing public comment at all
Council meetings of the Mayor and Aldermen of this city shall be as follows:
   (A)   There shall be a public comment period listed as a “Public” item on
each meeting agenda for all Council meetings of the Mayor and Aldermen of the
city;
   (B)   All persons wishing to address the Council and comment upon city
business during that public comment period at such Council meetings shall
complete the sign-in sheet available at the meeting;
   (C)   Only those persons who have filled out such a speaker’s sign-in sheet
will thereafter be called to the podium, or other location as designated by the
Mayor, during the public comment period to address the Council and comment upon
city business although the Mayor may call on others as he or she deems
appropriate;
   (D)   All those speakers called to speak shall first identify themselves,
and if they choose, give their residential address by street, town, village or
city, before they offer any comment to the Council;
   (E)   Speakers shall limit their commentary to five minutes. Should any
speaker wish to offer further comment to the Council beyond the time allotted,
they may tender such further comments to written form to the Deputy Clerk;
   (F)   The Mayor shall have the authority, in his or her sole discretion, to
extend the time to speak;
   (G)   The City Council, upon motion, second and approval, shall have the
authority to extend the time to speak as provided in said motion;
   (H)   Speakers shall relate their commentary to matters of city business;
   (I)   Speakers shall at all times address the Council, not the audience;
   (J)   Speakers shall offer their commentary only from the podium;
   (K)   Speakers shall confine their remarks to commentary;
   (L)   Speakers shall not use their commentary in an attempt to interrogate
Council members nor in an attempt to force the body to engage in debate;
   (M)   Speakers shall return to their seat or leave the meeting room at the
end of their remarks;
   (N)   Speakers shall refrain from unduly repetitious commentary;
   (O)   Speakers shall not employ profane or threatening language nor shall
they engage in any personal attacks;
   (P)   Speakers shall respect both the decorum of the public meeting and the
authority of the Mayor as the Council’s presiding officer; and
   (Q)   Speakers whose behavior disrupt the conduct of the public meeting or
threaten the public safety are subject to removal from the meeting by the
Sergeant at Arms or individual designated by the Mayor upon a finding by the
Mayor that the speaker’s behavior has violated this rule.
(Ord. 18-13, passed 7-2-18)
§ 30.04 ATTENDANCE OF MEETINGS.
   The corporate authorities of the city have determined, and do restate their
determination, that it is appropriate, necessary, and in the best interests of
the city and its residents to adopt the requirements of Section 7 of the Open
Meetings Act as the policy for remote attendance of meetings of the City
Council by any member who is unable to participate for the reasons stated
therein.
(Ord. 2024-03-01, passed 3-12-24)
MAYOR
§ 30.10 ELECTIVE OFFICERS.
   The elective officers of the City of Paxton shall be: A mayor, eight
aldermen, and a city clerk.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
§ 30.11 MAYOR'S BOND.
   The Mayor shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute a
bond to the city with such sureties as the City Council shall approve,
conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of the office and
according to the statute in such case made and provided.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
§ 30.12 SHALL SIGN COMMISSION.
   The Mayor shall sign all commissions, licenses and permits granted by
authority of the City Council, except as otherwise provided, and such other
acts and deeds as by law or ordinance may require his official signature.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
§ 30.13 PRESIDE AT MEETINGS OF COUNCIL.
   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council, preserve order
and direct the general course of business.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
§ 30.14 SUPERVISE CONDUCT OF OFFICERS.
   The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all officers of the corporation,
inquire into all reasonable complaints made against them or any of them, and
cause all their neglects or violations of official duty to be promptly
corrected or reported to the proper tribunal for trial and punishment. He shall
have power, whenever he may deem it necessary, to require of any of the
officers of the city, to exhibit all their official books and papers in any
wise pertaining to the affairs of their office and to the city.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
§ 30.15 GRANT LICENSES.
   The Mayor shall grant licenses for the purposes authorized by this
subchapter to all persons duly qualified according to ordinance, as he may deem
proper, unless the City Council shall otherwise designate and provide, and he
may revoke the same for cause.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
§ 30.16 SIGN CONTRACTS.
   The Mayor shall sign all contracts authorized to be entered into by the City
Council, and shall see that the same are faithfully performed.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
§ 30.17 APPOINT OFFICERS, FILL VACANCIES.
   The Mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the City
Council, all officers of the city whose appointment is not otherwise provided
for by law; and whenever a vacancy shall occur in any office, which by law or
ordinance he is empowered and required to fill, he shall, within 30 days after
such vacancy, communicate to the City Council the name of his appointee to such
office for their approval.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
§ 30.18 CALL CITIZENS TO ENFORCE LAW.
   The Mayor is authorized to call upon any male inhabitant of the city, above
the age of 18 years, to aid in enforcing the laws of this state or the
ordinances of the city.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
§ 30.19 SUPERVISION OF POLICE.
   The Mayor shall exercise general supervision over all police officers and
shall remove any police officer who shall fail to properly perform his duties,
reporting the fact of such removal, and his reasons therefor, to the City
Council at its next regular meeting thereafter.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
§ 30.20 OTHER DUTIES.
   In addition to the above and foregoing, and to the duties imposed upon him
by the statutes of the state of Illinois, the Mayor shall perform all such
other duties, pertaining to his office as are or maybe required of him by the
ordinances of the city.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Effect
   
31.002   Appointments
   
31.003   Terms
   
31.004   Assignment of duties
   
31.005   Armed services
   
31.006   Records
   
31.007   Moneys received
   
31.008   Oath
   
31.009   Bond
   
31.010   Salaries
   
31.011   Arrests
   
31.012   Termination of office
   
31.013   Impersonation
   
31.014   Interfering with officers
   
31.015   Inspection by city officers
   
31.016   Fiscal year
   
31.017   Employee not liable
   
31.018   Expenses - reimbursement
City Comptroller
   
31.025   Creation of office
   
31.026   Bond
   
31.027   Powers and duties
   
31.028   Documents; custody
   
31.029   Estimate of expenses
   
31.030   Ex officio city collector
   
31.031   Warrants
   
31.032   Records of outstanding bonds
   
31.033   Special assessments
   
31.034   Additional duties
   
31.035   Appeal to City Council
   
31.036   Office hours
City Clerk
   
31.050   Bond
   
31.051   Attend meetings, keep journal, issue notices
   
31.052   Deliver papers and the like to committees
   
31.053   Signatures
   
31.054   Money collected
   
31.055   Accounts
   
31.056   Seal
   
31.057   Documents
   
31.058   Indices
   
31.059   Computerized records
   
31.060   Prepare licenses, commissions and the like
   
31.061   Record ordinances
   
31.062   Preserve books, papers and the like
   
31.063   Report to Council
   
31.064   May appoint deputies
   
31.065   Additional duties
   
31.066   (Reserved)
   
31.067   Payment on certain claims prior to City Council approval
City Treasurer
   
31.080   Appointment
   
31.081   Deposit of interest earned
Handicapped Coordinator
   
31.095   Appointed
Building Administrator
   
31.105   Office created; duties
City Attorney
   
31.120   Appointment of attorney
   
31.121   Duties
Cross-reference:
   For further city official and employee policies, see
Chapter 33
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 EFFECT.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply alike to all officers and
employees of the city, regardless of the time of the creation of the position
or the time of the appointment of the officers.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
§ 31.002 APPOINTMENTS.
   Where no specific provision is made to the contrary, the Mayor shall
designate or hire all employees of the city with the consent of the appropriate
committee of the City Council. In the case of officers, he or she shall appoint
such officer and department heads, with the advice and consent of the City
Council. For those positions covered by any type of tenure of office law, the
statutory provisions applicable therefor shall be complied with.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
§ 31.003 TERMS.
   (A)   Every appointed officer shall hold office for the term of one year or
until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
   (B)   Employees shall serve as long as their services are deemed necessary
by the Mayor, subject to the provisions of the tenure of office law. Unless
otherwise provided, the term of each office shall expire on the last day of
April following the appointment.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
§ 31.004 ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall have the power to assign to any employee any duties he or
she sees fit. Where the duties of an office are not provided for by law the
Mayor may designate such duties with the advice and consent of the Council.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
§ 31.005 ARMED SERVICES.
   (A)   Any officer or employee of the city now holding or having at the time
of his or her enlistment of induction held a position of the city who has
enlisted or who hereafter enlists or who has been or may hereafter be ordered
into active federal service or inducted into the land or naval forces of the
United States or the State of Illinois, pursuant to act of Congress or the laws
of the State of Illinois, shall be considered as being on furlough or leave of
absence during his or her period of training and service and for an additional
period of 40 days after he or she is honorably discharged or relieved from such
training and service or for such other or additional period of time as may be
provided by act of Congress, and unless incapacitated at the time of such
discharge or relief from such service for the performance of the duties
required by his or her employment, shall be restored without loss of seniority
to the position previously held by him or her or to such other position as his
or her status would have entitled him or her had he or she been continuously in
active service of the city during the period of such leave of absence.
   (B)   The city shall during the period of such furlough or leave of absence
occasioned by reason of the foregoing make payment to any pension or retirement
fund created and in operation by force of law, legislative enactment or
ordinance of the city, a sum equal to the deduction which would have been made
from such employee’s or officer’s salary had he continued in the active service
of the city. The city shall further make payment to the appropriate pension
fund trustees of concurrent contributions or other credits from the municipal
corporation from taxes levied or to be levied for such purpose as may be
provided in the act creating such pension fund.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of all city officers to do all things necessary
to be done and to perform all acts required to carry out and effectuate the
purposes and intent of the foregoing divisions of this section, and, in the
case of pension fund trustees, to treat the payments herein before first
mentioned in the same manner and with the same effect as if such payments were
deductions from the salary of such employee.
   (D)   Any person dishonorably discharged from the active federal service or
from the land or naval forces of the United States or the State of Illinois
shall forfeit any and all rights, privileges and immunities provided for in
this section.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
§ 31.006 RECORDS.
   All records kept by any officer of the city shall be open to inspection by
the Mayor or any member of the Council at all reasonable times, whether or not
such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
§ 31.007 MONEYS RECEIVED.
   Every officer or employee other than the Treasurer of the city shall at
least once each day turn over all moneys received by him or her in his or her
official capacity to the City Clerk with a statement showing the source from
which the same was received.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
§ 31.008 OATH.
   Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon his or her duties,
take the oath prescribed by law.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
§ 31.009 BOND.
   Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Council upon entering
upon the duties of his or her office, give a bond in such amount as may be
determined by the Council and with such sureties as it may approve, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office or position.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
§ 31.010 SALARIES.
   All officers and employees of the city shall receive such salaries as may be
provided from time to time by ordinance. No officer or employee receiving a
salary from the city shall be entitled to retain any portion of any fees
collected by him or her in the performance of his or her duties as municipal
officer or employee in the absence of a specific ordinance provision to that
effect.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75; Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 7-23-07; Am. Ord. 09-48,
passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 10-20, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11;
Am. Ord. 12-31, passed 6-25-12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord. 14-10,
passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord. 15-08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15;
Am. Ord. 2024-06-01, passed 6-11-24)
§ 31.011 ARRESTS.
   The Mayor, members of the City Council, as well as every member of the
Police Department are declared to be conservators of the peace with such powers
to make arrests as are given to the conservators of the peace by statute.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
§ 31.012 TERMINATION OF OFFICE.
   Every officer and employee of the city, upon the expiration of his or her
term for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his or her successor all books
and records which may be the property of the city; and if no successor has been
appointed within one week after the termination of office, such property shall
be delivered either to the City Clerk or to the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
§ 31.013 IMPERSONATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate without lawful authority
any city officer or employee. Any person violating this section shall be fined
as set forth in §
10.99 for each offense.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 31.014 INTERFERING WITH OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any officer or employee of
the city while engaged in the duties of his or her office or employment. Any
person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined as set forth in § 10.99 for each offense.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 31.015 INSPECTION BY CITY OFFICERS.
   (A)   Any officer or employee of the city who is authorized to enforce
ordinances may make such inspections as may be necessary to see to the
enforcement of such ordinances.
   (B)   Whenever such officer or employee shall have reason to believe that
there exists on or in any premises in the city any nuisance dangerous to public
health, any fire hazard, any structural defect likely to result in injury to
person or property or any electric wiring or equipment in such condition as to
present a fire hazard or danger to persons, he or she shall ask permission of
the occupant of such premises, or the owner or custodian thereof, if the
premises are unoccupied, to inspect the same.
   (C)   Each such occupant or owner shall permit such inspection at any
reasonable time. Any such owner or occupant who refuses to permit such
inspection shall be fined as set forth in §
10.99 for each offense.
(Ord. 75-16, passed 6-9-75)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 31.016 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year shall commence on May 1 and close on April 30 of each year.
(Ord. passed 3-5-06)
§ 31.017 EMPLOYEE NOT LIABLE.
   (A)   It is the public policy of the State of Illinois that members of
governmental bodies shall not be liable in damages for the exercise of
discretion in determining policies. This public policy is set forth in ILCS Ch.
745, Act 10, § 2-201, which provides:
      Except as otherwise provided by statute, a public employee serving in a
position involving the determination of policy or the exercise of discretion is
not liable for an injury resulting from his act or omission in determining
policy when acting in the exercise of such discretion even though abused.
   (B)   Therefore, if any claim or action not covered by insurance is
instituted against any member of the City Council, in connection with any act
or omission in determining policy, the city shall:
      (1)   Appear and defend the claim or action; and
      (2)   Pay or indemnify the member of the City Council for a judgment and
court costs based on such claim or actions; and
      (3)   Pay or indemnify the member of the City Council for a compromise or
settlement of such claim or action, providing the settlement is approved by the
City Council.
(Ord. 02-43, passed 12-9-02)
§ 31.018 EXPENSES - REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   Interpretation. This section shall be interpreted to be consistent
with the Local Government Travel Expense Control Act, 50 ILCS 150.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words are
defined as set forth herein:
      ENTERTAINMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
      TRAVEL EXPENSE. Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by
employees and officers of the city or direct payment to private agencies
providing transportation or related services.
   (C)   Official business requiring expenses. Travel, meal, and lodging
expenses will only be allowed for official business of the city which is
necessary to the functioning or improvement of the city. Official business
includes: education conferences related to the duties of the employee or
officer of the city; site visits to current or potential vendors of the city;
or out-of-town meetings related to the official duties of the employee or
officer of the city.
   (D)   Entertainment expenses. No entertainment expenses incurred by any
employee or official may be reimbursed.
   (E)   Maximum allowable reimbursement. Unless otherwise excepted herein, the
maximum allowable reimbursement for an employee or officer of the city shall be
those rates set by the Federal travel regulation and maintained by the United
States General Services Administration for travel per diem, meals, and
incidental expense in effect at the time the expense was incurred.
   (F)   Approval of expenses. The City Council must approve the following
reimbursements for travel expense, including meals, transportation and/or
lodging, by a roll call vote at an open meeting of the City Council:
         (a)   Any expense of any officer or employee that exceeds the maximum
permitted under the definition of division (E) above;
         (b)   Any expense of any member of the corporate authorities of the
city;
         (c)   The cost of travel including the allowable automobile expense
allowed by the IRS for business travel, rental car, airplane, ride share, cab,
private car, train and/or bus. In the event that there is a choice of class,
only coach or economy class or similar shall be approved. Any upgrades to the
equivalent of first and/or business class may only be done at the additional
expense of the traveler;
         (d)   The cost of lodging which shall be reasonable and customary for
the location and time of the area where the traveler is staying;
         (e)   The customary cost of conference fees, class fees, supplies,
books, software, and computer materials for educational purposes is allowed;
and
         (f)   The Mayor or his/her designee shall be authorized to approve
such travel.
   (G)   Documentation of Expenses. Before any reimbursement for travel, meals
or lodging may be approved pursuant to division (F) above, a standardized form
for submission of such expenses shall first be submitted to the City Council.
This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and title of the requestor, a
cost estimate of expenses not yet incurred or a receipt if expenses have been
incurred, and the date or dates and the nature of the official business wherein
the expenses were or will be incurred.
(Ord. 17-1, passed 1-10-17)
CITY COMPTROLLER
§ 31.025 CREATION OF OFFICE.
   There is created the office of City Comptroller, an executive office of the
city. The Comptroller shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice
and consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
§ 31.026 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the City Comptroller
shall execute and file with the Treasurer a bond in an amount and with such
sureties as may be required by the Council, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his or her duties.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
§ 31.027 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Comptroller shall have and perform all duties as required of
comptrollers under the statutes of the State of Illinois.
   (B)   The Comptroller shall have supervision over the work product of all
officers and employees of the city charged in any manner with the receipt,
collection or disbursement of the municipal revenue or with the collection and
return of the municipal revenue or with the collection and return of the
municipal revenue into the Treasury.
   (C)   All of the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5) relating to the powers and duties of a City Clerk in connection with the
finances, the Treasurer, the Collector and the receipt and disbursements of
money shall be exercised and performed by the Comptroller.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
§ 31.028 DOCUMENTS; CUSTODY.
   The Comptroller shall have custody and control of all municipal documents,
books and papers which he or she is required by statute or ordinance to keep.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
§ 31.029 ESTIMATE OF EXPENSES.
   (A)   Before the annual appropriation ordinance is prepared, the Comptroller
shall submit to the corporate authorities a report of estimate, as nearly as
may be, of the money necessary to defray the expenses of the city during the
current fiscal year. For the purpose of making this report, the Comptroller
shall require all officers of the city to submit statements of the condition
and expenses of their respective offices or departments, with any proposed
improvements and their estimated expense, a statement of all unperformed
contracts and the amount of all unexpended appropriations of the preceding
year.
   (B)   The report shall also:
      (1)   Classify the objects and purposes of the estimated expenditures and
the amounts required for each;
      (2)   Show the aggregate income of the preceding fiscal year from all
sources;
      (3)   Show the amount of liability on which interest is to be paid;
      (4)   Show the bonds and debts due and payable and the dates when they
are due and payable; and
      (5)   Give all other information regarding the financial situation of the
city so that the corporate authorities may fully understand the demands upon
the municipality for the current fiscal year.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
§ 31.030 EX OFFICIO CITY COLLECTOR.
   (A)   The City Comptroller shall be ex officio city collector and shall
perform the following duties:
      (1)   Preserve all warrants returned to him or her;
      (2)   Keep such books and accounts as the City Council may direct;
      (3)   Keep all warrants, books, vouchers and papers pertaining to the
office of collector open for the inspection of the Mayor or any member or
committee of the City Council;
      (4)   Once each week, or oftener, if required by the Council, the
Comptroller shall pay over to the City Treasurer all money collected as city
collector from any source whatever; and
      (5)   Make additional reports to the Council of the city’s financial
status as the Council may request or require by ordinance.
   (B)   At the close of the fiscal year the Comptroller shall place on file
with the City Council a statement of all money collected during the year, the
particular warrant or special assessment or account on which collected, the
balance of money uncollected on all warrants in his or her possession and the
balance remaining on all warrants during the preceding fiscal year and shall
cause that statement to be published by the Clerk as provided by statute.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
§ 31.031 WARRANTS.
   The City Comptroller shall keep a record of all warrants or orders filed
with or paid by him or her and all vouchers as is required by statute.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
§ 31.032 RECORDS OF OUTSTANDING BONDS.
   The City Comptroller shall keep in the office, in books used solely for that
purpose, a correct list of all the outstanding bonds of the city, showing the
number and amount of each and for whom and to whom the bonds were issued. The
books shall show the registered owner of each registered bond. The Comptroller
shall also show in those books when any city bonds are purchased, paid or
canceled. The Comptroller shall show, in the annual report, the bonds sold
during the year, the terms of sale and every item of expense incurred.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
§ 31.033 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The Comptroller shall keep all money received on any special assessment in a
separate fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the
assessment was made, and the money shall be used for no other purposes, except
to reimburse the city for money expended for the improvement.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
§ 31.034 ADDITIONAL DUTIES.
   (A)   The Comptroller shall perform all additional duties and have all
additional powers as the Council may by ordinance or resolution confer upon him
or her.
   (B)   The Comptroller shall have the following duties:
      (1)   The City Council shall approve or reject bills only after they have
been audited by the Comptroller. Audited bills may be submitted separately, or
a register of audited bills may be submitted to the City Council for approval
or rejection with the affidavit of the comptroller attached certifying as to
the accuracy of the demands and the availability of funds for payment;
      (2)   The Comptroller shall countersign city warrants. No warrant shall
be valid without the Comptroller’s signature;
      (3)   The Comptroller shall certify or approve attendance records of
other officers and employees of the city;
      (4)   The Comptroller is the accounting officer of the city and shall
maintain records readily reflecting the financial condition of the city;
      (5)   The Comptroller shall be responsible for city expenditures,
including the certification of the availability of funds to pay the
expenditures, the determination of whether funds are being expended according
to budget requirements and City Council directions and the quoting of
expenditures according to the budget provisions;
      (6)   The Comptroller shall exercise continuous scrutiny of the
expenditures and revenues in conformance with the approved budgetary
requirements and budget accounting and shall be in charge of transferring of
moneys within a fund to prevent over-expenditures of accounts and transferring
moneys from fund to fund where approved by the City Council; preparation of
monthly budget reports by fund, by character and object, classification for use
of city department heads and the City Council; and schedule and attend budget
hearings to assist the City Council and city department heads in budgetary
matters;
      (7)   The Comptroller shall administer the daily financial transactions
of the city; receive all revenue consisting of cash, checks and money orders;
issue cashier’s receipts for moneys received; determine proper revenue coding
classifications for all revenue in accordance with established chart of
accounts and daily record revenue in the subsidiary revenue ledger;
      (8)   The Comptroller shall receive all bills of the city, audit and
determine their validity; certify as to the availability of funds; determine
proper expenditure coding in accordance with the established charts of accounts
and budget requirements; supervise the preparation of warrant and warrant
registers and record in the subsidiary expenditure ledger;
      (9)   At the close of each month the Comptroller shall post revenue and
expenditures to the General Fund ledger and monthly and year to date totals.
The fund balances are to be verified with the City Treasurer’s fund balances
monthly and must agree;
      (10)   The Comptroller shall prepare monthly reports for management and
the City Council which include:
         (a)   Comparative state of estimated and actual revenues and
expenditures;
         (b)   Monthly report of appropriations, encumbrances, expenditures and
unencumbered balances; and
         (c)   Combined fund balance sheet;
      (11)   Supervise the preparation of the payroll and payroll registers;
prepare and certify all reports to other governmental agencies relating to
payroll activities; and prepare and certify all other monthly, quarterly and
annual reports to the state and other governmental agencies;
      (12)   Establish accounting records, establish a central purchasing
office and create and maintain active and inactive files for the transaction of
city business;
      (13)   The Comptroller shall be available to the City Council and its
individual members for consultation and advice at all reasonable times;
      (14)   Encourage the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing,
reporting, accounting and other fiscal management procedures in all aspects of
city government;
      (15)   Encourage the full use of computer capabilities in all matters
relating to the budget;
      (16)   Make spot checks and examinations on all financial books, records
and data stored in computers relating to city finance and relating to any money
collected, managed or held by the city;
      (17)   Obtain information necessary to carry out the duties of the office
from all city officers, employees, boards and commissions;
      (18)   Make estimates and recommendations concerning anticipated revenues
and anticipated expenditures;
      (19)   Establish procedures to monitor expenditures to make sure
expenditures stay within the budget;
      (20)   The Comptroller shall deposit and invest the funds of the city,
which investments shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the
Illinois Public Funds Deposit Act (ILCS Ch. 30, Act 225, §§ 0.01 et seq.), the
Illinois Public Funds Investment Act (ILCS Ch. 30, Act 235, §§ 0.01 et seq.)
and the ordinances and resolutions of this city.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
§ 31.035 APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL.
   In the adjustment of the accounts of the City Treasurer and the City
Comptroller, there shall be an appeal to the City Council, whose decision in
all matters of controversy shall be final.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
§ 31.036 OFFICE HOURS.
   The office of the City Comptroller shall be at the City Hall, and the City
Comptroller shall keep the office open for at least eight hours per day, Monday
through Friday, excepting therefrom holidays, the hours to be from 8:00 a.m. to
4:30 p.m.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-12-01)
CITY CLERK
§ 31.050 BOND.
   The City Clerk, before entering upon the duties of the office, shall execute
a bond, with security, to be approved by the corporate authorities, payable to
the city in the penal sum as may be required by the City Council, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office and the payment of
all money received by the City Clerk, according to law, and also the ordinances
of the city, and at the expiration of the City Clerk’s term of office, turning
over to the City Clerk’s successor all books, papers and other property
belonging to the city.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.051 ATTEND MEETINGS, KEEP JOURNAL, ISSUE NOTICES.
   The City Clerk shall attend all meetings of the City Council, shall attend
all meetings of committees of the City Council and shall attend all meetings of
all boards and committees appointed by the City Council, including, but not
limited to, the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals, but excluding
the Paxton Carnegie Library Board, and shall keep in a suitable book a full,
complete and faithful record of its proceedings. The City Clerk shall issue and
cause to be served upon all of the Aldermen notices of all special meetings of
the City Council.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.052 DELIVER PAPERS AND THE LIKE TO COMMITTEES.
   The City Clerk shall, without delay upon the adjournment of the City
Council, deliver to the several committees of that body and to the officers of
the corporation all petitions, communications, reports, resolutions, orders,
claims and other papers referred to such committees or officers by the City
Council. The City Clerk shall also, without delay, deliver to the Mayor all
ordinances or resolutions in the City Clerk's charge, which may require the
approval or be otherwise acted upon by the Mayor.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.053 SIGNATURES.
   The City Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the city and all
licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require this formality.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.054 MONEY COLLECTED.
   The Clerk shall turn over all money received by the City Clerk on behalf of
the city to the City Treasurer promptly upon receipt of the same, and with such
money the City Clerk shall give a statement as to the source thereof.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.055 ACCOUNTS.
   The Clerk shall keep accounts showing all money received by the City Clerk
and the source and disposition thereof and such other accounts as may be
required by statute or ordinance.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.056 SEAL.
   The Clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal and shall affix its
impression on documents whenever this is required.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.057 DOCUMENTS.
   The Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the city
which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.058 INDICES.
   The Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and
records kept by the City Clerk so that ready access thereto and use thereof may
be had.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.059 COMPUTERIZED RECORDS.
   The City Clerk may make use of any computer used by the city for storing
data and receiving data. The use of a computer shall not excuse the Clerk from
maintaining written copies of all ordinances, resolutions, minutes and other
documents required by law or ordinance to be kept permanently by the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.060 PREPARE LICENSES, COMMISSIONS AND THE LIKE.
   The City Clerk shall prepare all commissions, licenses, permits and other
official documents required to be issued by the City Clerk under the laws of
the State of Illinois or the ordinances of the city and shall attest the same
with the corporate seal, and the City Clerk shall, in like manner, attest all
deeds for the sale of real estate owned and conveyed by the city. The City
Clerk shall keep a record of each license or permit granted showing the date
and expiration, to whom and for permit granted showing the date and expiration,
to whom and for what purpose the same is granted, the fee paid for the same and
the location of the place of business for which such license or permit is
issued.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.061 RECORD ORDINANCES.
   The City Clerk shall record all ordinances passed by the City Council and at
the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded shall make a memorandum of
the date of passage of such ordinance and also of the publication of such
ordinance if it has been published.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.062 PRESERVE BOOKS, PAPERS AND THE LIKE.
   The City Clerk shall carefully preserve in the files of the city in the City
Building all books, records and papers belonging to the city and all bills upon
which money has been or may be paid by the city, as required by law.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.063 REPORT TO COUNCIL.
   The City Clerk shall make a report to the City Council at their first
regular meeting in each month of all business done by the City Clerk in the
Clerk’s official capacity during the preceding month.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.064 MAY APPOINT DEPUTIES.
   The City Clerk may, when necessary, and upon being authorized by the City
Council, appoint a deputy who, during the temporary absence or disability of
the Clerk, shall be empowered to perform all duties of the City Clerk;
provided, however, the City Clerk shall be liable and responsible for the acts
of such appointee.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.065 ADDITIONAL DUTIES.
   In addition to the foregoing duties, the City Clerk shall perform all duties
as required by the statutes of the State of Illinois and all such other or
further duties pertaining to the office of City Clerk and the ordinances of the
city.
(Ord. 2000-23, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.066 RESERVED.
§ 31.067 PAYMENT ON CERTAIN CLAIMS PRIOR TO CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   The City Clerk and the City Treasurer are authorized to pay upon receipt
thereof the following categories of claims prior to the examination and
approval of the claims at a regular meeting of the City Council:
   (A)   Premiums due on insurance contracts previously entered into by the
city;
   (B)   Postage fees; and
   (C)   Usual and customary utility expenses, including electric, gas and
telephone expenses.
(Res. 85-44, passed 10-14-85; Am. Ord. 17-1, passed 1-10-17)
CITY TREASURER
§ 31.080 APPOINTMENT.
   The office of City Treasurer shall be an office appointed by the Mayor with
the concurrence of the City Council.
(Ord. 2000-24, passed 9-25-00)
§ 31.081 DEPOSIT OF INTEREST EARNED.
   The City Treasurer be, and is, authorized and directed to deposit all
interest earned on all moneys of the city to the fund which earned the
interest; provided, however, that all interest earned for and on behalf of the
General Corporate Account of the city will be deposited into the Administration
Fund of the General Corporate Account.
(Res. 94-36, passed 10-24-94)
HANDICAPPED COORDINATOR
§ 31.095 APPOINTED.
   (A)   The Handicapped Coordinator be and is authorized and directed to
publish in the Paxton Daily Record any and all notices required under the laws
of the United States in regard to Federal Revenue Sharing Funds and the
regulations issued pursuant thereto advising of this appointment and providing
that the city does not discriminate on the basis of disability, in addition to
race, color, national origin, sex, age and religion in its hiring of city
employees and the use of Federal Revenue Sharing Funds.
   (B)   The office of the Handicapped Coordinator shall be maintained at the
City Hall, 145 South Market Street, Paxton, Illinois, telephone number 217-379-
4022.
(Res. 84-6, passed 5-14-84)
BUILDING ADMINISTRATOR
§ 31.105 OFFICE CREATED; DUTIES.
   (A)   There is created and established the office of Building Administrator.
   (B)   The Building Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
the approval and confirmation by the City Council.
   (C)   The duties of the Building Administrator shall include the
administration and enforcement of the subdivision ordinance or regulations of
the city and the zoning ordinance or regulations of the city and such other
duties as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by the City Council.
   (D)   The Building Administrator shall receive a salary as determined by the
City Council.
(Ord. 64-22, passed 9-25-64; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11; Am. Ord. 12-31,
passed 6-25-12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord. 15-08, passed 6-8-15;
Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15)
CITY ATTORNEY
§ 31.120 APPOINTMENT OF ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice
and consent of the City Council for the term of one year, unless sooner removed
for cause, and until a successor shall have been appointed and qualified. The
City Attorney shall have full charge of the lawful affairs of the city and
shall be known as the City Attorney and shall receive payment reasonable fees
at a rate approved by the City Council for services rendered.
(Ord. 15-31, passed 12-14-15)
§ 31.121 DUTIES.
   (A)   Prosecute for city. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend on
behalf of the city in all cases in which the interests of the corporation or
any officer thereof are involved; and the City Clerk shall furnish him or her
with certified copies of any ordinance, bond or paper in keeping necessary to
be filed or used in any suit or proceedings.
   (B)   Preparation of ordinances. The City Attorney shall, when requested,
advise the City Council or any officer in all matters of law in which the
interests of the corporation are involved, and shall draw such ordinances,
bonds, forms and contracts, or examine and pass upon the same, as may be
required by the Mayor, the City Council or any committee thereof.
   (C)   Judgments. The City Attorney shall direct executions to be issued upon
all judgments recovered in favor of the city and shall direct their prompt
service. The City Attorney shall examine all the bills of the officers of
courts, and of other officers of the law, and shall certify to the correctness
and the liability of the city therefor.
   (D)   Violations of ordinances. The City Attorney shall institute and
prosecute an action in every case of violation of a city ordinance when
instructed to do so by the Mayor or the City Council.
   (E)   Prosecution of suits. The City Attorney shall not be required to
prosecute any suit or action arising under the ordinances of the city when,
upon investigation of the same, the City Attorney shall become satisfied that
the complaint was instituted maliciously, vexatiously or without just cause and
shall dismiss or discontinue any such suit or proceeding upon such terms as he
or she may deem just or equitable.
   (F)   Collection of taxes. The City Attorney is hereby authorized and
instructed to enforce the collection of any and all taxes and special
assessments in the collection of which the city is interested and to attend all
sales or real or personal property made to enforce the collection of such taxes
or special assessments and to bid thereat on behalf of the city.
   (G)   Boards and Commissions. The City Attorney shall act as the legal
advisory for all boards and commissions previously and hereafter established by
the City Council. The City Attorney shall perform all legal services as may be
required for those boards and commissions.
   (H)   Counsel. From time to time the City Attorney may consult with and/or
recommend for hire outside legal counsel with particular legal expertise to be
approved by the Mayor and City Council. Such legal counsel shall be termed
"Special Counsel" and be authorized to serve on behalf of the city.
(Ord. 15-31, passed 12-14-15)
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
   
32.01   Public Works Department
   
32.02   Ford County Public Building Commission
   
32.03   Planning Commission
§ 32.01 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is created the Department of Public Works, an executive
department of the city. The Department of Public Works is hereby divided into
two divisions, namely:
      (1)   The Department of Streets; and
      (2)   The Department of Waterworks.
   (B)   The Department of Streets shall have charge of and supervision over
the construction, inspection, operation and maintenance of the city's streets,
street lighting systems, alleys, driveways, sidewalks, public ways, parks and
playgrounds, storm drains, landfill, airport and all public buildings of the
city. In addition the Department of Streets shall perform such other duties as
may be assigned to it by the Mayor and City Council, by city ordinances or
state statutes.
   (C)   The Department of Waterworks shall have charge of and supervision over
the construction, inspection, operation and maintenance of the City's water
supply facilities, water distribution facilities, all intakes, wells,
reservoirs, water mains, water hydrants, sewers, sewer mains and sewage
treatment plants and other appurtenances thereto. In addition the Department of
Waterworks shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to it by the
Mayor and City Council, by city ordinances or state statutes.
   (D)   There is hereby created the Office of Superintendent of Streets, an
executive office of the city. The Superintendent of Streets shall be appointed
by the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (E)   The Superintendent of Streets shall be the head of the Department of
Streets and all officers and employees assigned thereto. All such officers and
employees shall perform their duties subject to the supervision and direction
of the Superintendent of Streets.
   (F)   The Superintendent of Streets shall be the custodian of all tools,
equipment and other personal property belonging to the Department of Streets
and all tools, equipment and other personal property belonging to the city and
not assigned to the care of any other public officer.
   (G)   There is hereby created the Office of Superintendent of Waterworks, an
executive office of the city. The Superintendent of Waterworks shall be
appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (H)   The Superintendent of Waterworks shall be the head of the Department
of Waterworks and all officers and employees assigned thereto. All such
officers and employees shall perform their duties subject to the supervision
and direction of the Superintendent of Waterworks.
   (I)   The Superintendent of Waterworks shall be the custodian of all tools,
equipment and other personal property belonging to the Department of
Waterworks.
   (J)   All employees of the Public Works Department, including the
Superintendent of Streets and the Superintendent of Waterworks, shall serve for
no set term.
   (K)   The Superintendent of Streets and the Superintendent of Waterworks
shall attend all meetings of the City Council and shall attend all meetings of
committees of the City Council when requested by the chairperson of the
committee.
(Ord. 94-43, passed 12-12-94; Am. Ord. 02-45, passed 12-9-02)
§ 32.02 FORD COUNTY PUBLIC BUILDING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The city joins in the organization of the Ford County Public Building
Commission, Ford County, Illinois.
   (B)   The Mayor shall, within 15 days after the date of adoption of the
resolution set forth in this section, transmit a copy of the resolution, duly
certified by the City Clerk to be true and correct, to the Chairperson of the
County Board of the County of Ford, Illinois.
(Res. 90-6, passed 4-9-90)
§ 32.03 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission shall hereinafter be referred to as the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Its establishment, authority, and duties shall be defined
and contained in §
151.157 of the City of Paxton Code of Ordinances. Wherever the within
ordinances refer to "Planning Commission," the term "Planning and Zoning
Commission" shall be substituted.
(Ord. passed 4-10-61; Am. Ord. 17-9, passed 4-11-17; Am. Ord. 21-19, passed 12-
14-21)
CHAPTER 33: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
   
33.00   Applicability of chapter
   
33.01   State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
   
33.02   Sick leave policy
   
33.022   Bereavement leave
   
33.03   Americans with Disabilities Act Grievance Procedure
   
33.04   Employee holidays
   
33.05   (Reserved)
   
33.06   Payroll deductions
   
33.07   Personnel rules for employees
   
33.08   Resident and telephone requirements
   
33.09   Jury duty
   
33.10   Miscellaneous salary provisions for Police Department
   
33.11   Miscellaneous salary and wage provisions
   
33.12   Special provisions for Director of Public Works and Assistant Director
of Public Works
   
33.13   Overtime pay of Chief of Police, Director of Public Works and Assistant
Director of Public Works and Comptroller
   
33.14   Longevity pay
   
33.15   Frequency of payment
   
33.16   Special payment provisions
   
33.17   Life insurance, disability insurance and health insurance
   
33.18   Overtime computation
   
33.19   Determination of part-time employees
   
33.20   Applicability of §§ 33.20 through 33.26
   
33.21   Purpose
   
33.22   Procedure
   
33.23   Form of grievances and settlements
   
33.24   Time limits
   
33.25   Right to assistance
   
33.26   Working time
   
33.27   Evaluation Plan adopted
   
33.28   Equal employment opportunity policy; sexual harassment policy;
substance abuse policy
   
33.29   Hiring standards for part-time police officers
   
33.30   Salaries
   
33.31   Compensation of Aldermen
   
33.32   City Attorney
   
33.33   Miscellaneous provisions
   
33.34   Compensatory time
   
33.35   Effective date
   
33.36   Conflicting provisions
   
33.37   Paid leave
§ 33.00 APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
   Whenever any provision contained in this chapter is in conflict with any
provision contained in any collective bargaining agreement entered into by the
city on or after September 14, 2009, the provisions in the collective
bargaining agreement shall prevail and the conflicting provisions contained in
this chapter shall not apply to any employee covered under a collective
bargaining agreement.
(Ord. 09-46, passed 10-12-09)
§ 33.01 STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   The regulations of ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 5-15 and ILCS Ch. 5, Act
430, §§ 10-10 through 10-40 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act,
ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "Act" in
this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the
officers and employees of the city to the extent required by ILCS Ch. 5, Act
430, § 70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the city, is hereby
prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the city under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the city, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms OFFICER and EMPLOYEE shall be
defined as set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5 for similar violations
of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers and
employees, except Ordinance No. 99-13, passed and adopted June 14, 1999, which
Ordinance No. 99-13 is repealed in it entirety. To the extent that any such
existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this section,
however, the provisions of this section shall prevail in accordance with the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the city.
   (I)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the city if the Act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the city.
(Ord. 04-17, passed 5-10-04)
§ 33.02 SICK LEAVE POLICY.
   (A)   The purpose of sick leave is to permit an employee to take time off
for an actual illness or injury, or a medical emergency. The purpose of sick
leave is not to provide paid holidays, and it is not the policy of the city to
permit sick leave to be taken unless one of the conditions required for sick
leave as described in this section actually exists.
   (B)   The city will allow all full-time employees sick leave with pay,
computed as hereinafter set forth, to accumulate at the rate of one working day
per month. There shall be no minimum days that an employee may accumulate. The
use of sick leave is subject to the following limitations and conditions:
      (1)   Accumulated sick leave may be used, not to exceed 15 working days
per calendar year, except that the entire amount of accumulated sick leave may
be used at one time should the employee undergo a major operation or a
protracted illness, or for disability coming under the Workmen's Compensation
Act.
      (2)   Accumulated sick leave with pay not to exceed 15 working days may
be used by female employees for pregnancy or complications arising out of
pregnancy, regardless whether or not such employee returns to work; provided,
such female employee shall have been continuously employed for a period of at
least one year.
      (3)   In granting sick leave with pay, the city reserves the right to
require a physician's certificate if the employee is off work for more than
three working days. A doctor's or other medical professional's statement may be
required upon return to work.
      (4)   Sick leave may be granted for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   Non-duty related illness, disability or injury of the employee
making it impossible or inadvisable for the employee to attend work.
         (b)   Illness of the employee's spouse, son, daughter, father or
mother, father-in-law or mother-in-law. The maximum leave that may be taken for
this purpose is three days.
         (c)   In the event of serious illness, disability, injury or death of
a member of the employee's immediate family. The maximum leave that may be
taken for this purpose is three days.
         (d)   An employee shall be eligible for sick leave for any appointment
made on the employee's own behalf, with any person licensed by the state to
perform any healing art, including any physician or dentist, optometrist or
other licensed practitioner, concerning the employee's physical health or
mental health in any way. Sick leave shall be granted whether the appointment
is for an examination, for prevention or for treatment.
         (e)   Sick leave shall be available to any employee hospitalized for
mental or emotional health problems, to the extent that accumulated sick leave
days are available, and sick leave shall also be for office appointments for
mental health and emotional health needs.
      (5)   In case of an injury making it impossible for an employee to
perform the employee's work, every effort will be made to assign the employee
to work that can be done within the limitations caused by the injury. If the
injury prevents the employee from doing any work at all for the city, the
employee shall be eligible for sick leave. If it feasible for an injured
employee to do work at home, work shall be provided for the injured employee to
do at home.
      (6)   (a)   Should the employer have cause to believe that an employee is
not fit-for-duty, the employer may request the employee to obtain from the
employee's medical provider a written statement certifying that the employee is
fit-for-duty. In the event the employee's medical provider's written statement
certifies that the employee is fit for light duty work only, then, in that
event, the written statement must also set forth the limitations on the
employee's duties.
         (b)   Should the employer have cause to believe that an employee is
not fit-for-duty, the employer may require that the employee have an
examination by a qualified and licensed medical professional selected by the
employer in order to determine the employee's fitness for duty. Any such
examination, and such related tests, shall be at the employer's expense. The
employee shall be notified in writing as to the objective facts leading the
city to require the examination. All time spent by the employee associated with
the examination shall be considered hours worked. The physician shall render an
opinion as to whether the employee is fit or unfit for duty; including a
suggested treatment regimen where appropriate. An employee found unfit for duty
shall be placed into an appropriate status. All opinions and reports shall be
considered confidential and their release shall only be as required by law.
         (c)   When the city's medical professional's opinion disagrees with
the employee's medical professional's opinion regarding the employee's fitness
for duty, a third doctor's opinion shall be the deciding factor. The third
doctor shall be chosen by agreement between the city's medical professional and
the employee's medical professional. The cost associated with the third
doctor's examination, and any related tests, shall be at the employer's
expense.
      (7)   It is grounds for termination of employment with the city if, upon
investigation, it is found that an employee is abusing or violating the sick
leave policy of the city.
      (8)   On the first day of sickness, as soon as possible, the employee
must notify his or her immediate supervisor that he or she will be unable to
report to work. Failure to notify the supervisor may result in suspension of
sick leave privileges.
      (9)   Accurate records of each employee's accumulated sick leave, and the
amount of sick leave taken by each employee, shall be kept either in written
form in the employee's personnel file or in a computer memory in permanent
form. Any employee may receive a copy of the written record or a printout of
the computer information relating to that employee's sick leave, on request.
Any employee dissatisfied or having any questions about the employee's sick
leave, may have an appointment with the department head or, at the option of
the Mayor, with the Mayor, to discuss the matter.
      (10)   All paid employees and appointed paid officers are covered by this
section. Elected officials, volunteers and members of committees, boards and
commissions are not covered.
      (11)   Sick leave shall be available to any employee hospitalized for
mental or emotional health problems, to the extent that accumulated sick leave
days are available, and sick leave shall also be for office appointments for
mental health and emotional health needs.
      (12)   Except as hereinafter provided in this subsection, upon
termination of employment, for any reason, all accumulated sick leave shall be
immediately canceled and forfeited. If termination of employment is due to the
retirement of the employee and if the employee shall apply to the Illinois
Municipal Retirement Fund for retirement benefits, the employee shall be
entitled to report to the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund as accumulated,
unused and unpaid sick days all actual accumulated, unused and unpaid sick days
at the rate of one working day per month commencing with the date of employment
and terminating with the date of retirement.
      (13)   The amount of sick leave pay to be allowed hereunder shall be the
employee's regular wage or salary, less any payments received by the employee
as a result of such layoff from the following sources:
         (a)   Accident and health insurance disability benefits attributable
to premiums paid by the city.
         (b)   Payments received from Workmen's Compensation insurance for
temporary total or temporary partial disability.
   (C)   This policy shall become effective upon the adoption of this section
by the City Council, and any provisions of any policy contrary to that set
forth herein is hereby revoked.
(Ord. 99-9, passed 5-10-99; Am. Res. 02-08, passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord. 09-55,
passed 12-14-09)
§ 33.022 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.
   Employees shall be granted three work days per fiscal year without loss of
pay, known as bereavement leave, which shall be non-cumulative past each fiscal
year. Bereavement leave days may be applied to leave resulting from a death in
an employee's family including, and limited to, an employee's parents, spouse,
children, grandparents or grandchildren. Employees may be granted sick leave,
not to exceed three consecutive work days, as a result of a death in the
employee's family, including, and limited to, siblings, aunts, uncles and legal
spouse's parents, siblings, children, grandchildren and grandparents. If an
employee is called upon to be a pallbearer or participate in a funeral service,
employee shall be excused but shall be required to take either vacation leave,
comp time, or unpaid leave for the day of said funeral service.
(Ord. 09-55, passed 12-14-09)
§ 33.03 AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
   The city adopts, as an official policy of the city the Americans With
Disabilities Act Grievance Procedure.
(Ord. 93-30, passed 7-12-93)
§ 33.04 EMPLOYEE HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   (1)   Non-salaried employees. Employees of the city, except for
salaried employees and employees governed by a separate collective bargaining
agreement, shall not be required to work on the following holidays, except as
required in emergencies: New Year’s Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day and the day
thereafter, and Christmas Day. Employees of the city shall be paid their
straight-time rate for these designated holidays.
      (2)   Whenever a holiday designated in subsection (A)(1) falls on a
Sunday, the department’s offices, except for the Police Department, will be
closed on the following Monday and that day granted as a holiday for all
employees.
      (3)   Whenever a holiday designated in subsection (A)(1) falls on a
Saturday, the department’s offices, except for the Police Department, will be
closed on the preceding Friday and that day granted as a holiday for all
employees.
(Res. 87-14, passed 7-13-87)
      (4)   Non-salaried employees shall receive holiday recognition pay in the
amount of eight hours straight time pay. An employee who works on one of the
above holidays shall be paid, in addition to said recognition pay, at the rate
of one and one-half times their normal rate of pay (computed on an hourly
basis, 40 hours per week) for all hours worked on that day.
      (5)   In the event the employee has terminated employment with the city
and at the time of termination the employee was in good standing with the city,
then the employee will be entitled to any holiday leave left on the books at
the time the final salary is paid by the city to the employee.
   (B)   (1)   Salaried employees. Any salaried employee who works on a holiday
as designated above in division (A) may take off an equal amount of time, hour
for hour, as the employee worked on the holiday.
      (2)   The time off must be taken within 30 days of the holiday or the
employee forfeits the additional time off.
(Res. 85-19, passed 4-8-85; Am. Ord. 15-27, passed 11-9-15)
§ 33.05 (RESERVED).
§ 33.06 PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of written instructions from an employee of the city, the
City Clerk and the City Treasurer are authorized and directed to deduct from
the employee’s wages sums necessary to pay premiums for insurance policies of
the employees with American Family Life Assurance Company.
   (B)   The sums deducted from the employees salary shall be remitted by the
City Clerk and the City Treasurer directly to American Family Life Assurance
Company for payment of premiums authorized by the employees.
   (C)   It is understood that by this action the City Council shall not be
determined to have in any way recommended any insurance program of the American
Family Life Assurance Company and that all employees of the city who contract
with American Family Life Assurance Company do so of their own free will and
accord and that any policy contracted for by an employee of the city is not to
be considered in any manner sponsored by or approved by the city.
(Ord. 84-26, passed 9-10-84)
§ 33.07 PERSONNEL RULES FOR EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DEPARTMENT HEAD or SUPERINTENDENT. Any elected or appointed person who
has direct supervision and responsibility for personnel, records, funds,
maintenance and service to be performed by a municipal department.
      PART-TIME EMPLOYEES. Any person who works less than 40 hours per week or
less than 600 per year.
   (B)   Applicability. The provisions of this section will not apply to
employees who are covered under a collective bargaining agreement.
   (C)   Physical examination. Applicants seeking appointment or employment
shall complete a standard application form as provided by the city and shall
pass a complete physical examination to be given by a duly licensed physician
before starting work. A report of the physician’s findings shall be on a
standard form provided by the city. This provision stall apply to part-time or
seasonal employees as well as full-time employees. The physician’s examination
fee shall be paid for by the city. This provision shall not apply to those
employees hired in an emergency and for a period of less than ten working days.
   (D)   Probationary period. The first 12 months service of an employee is a
probationary period during which there shall be no responsibility on the part
of the city for the continued employment of the new employee. Termination of
employment during this probationary period shall not be subject to challenge by
employee. When the probationary period is completed, seniority will date back
12 months from the date of completion of the probationary period.
   (E)   Accidents. Personnel involved in, or having any knowledge of, any
accident whereby any person employed by the city or any property or equipment
owned or operated by the city involved shall immediately report the accident
and pertinent information to the department supervisor who shall forward such
information to the office of the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall record the
information on three copies of the applicable accident form, one copy to be
forwarded to the insurance carrier, one copy to the City Attorney and one copy
retained on file in the City Clerk's office.
   (F)   Dismissal.
      (1)   Employees generally. The department head or the Mayor may dismiss
an employee at any time for just cause with the consent of appropriate
committee of the City Council. An employee who is dismissed shall be given
written notice of the reasons for the action, copies of which notice shall be
forwarded to the Mayor and City Clerk.
      (2)   Appointed officials. The Mayor shall have power to remove any
appointed official, on any formal charge, whenever he or she shall be of the
opinion that the interests of the city demand such a removal. He or she shall
report the reasons for such removal to the City Council at the next regularly
scheduled meeting thereof. If the Mayor shall fail or refuse to file with the
City Clerk a statement of the reasons for the removal, or if the Council by
two-thirds vote of all its members authorized by law, disapproves the removal,
the official shall thereupon become restored to the office from which he or she
was removed. No official shall be removed a second time for the same incident.
   (G)   Outside employment. No municipal employee shall engage in any outside
employment which will impair the performance of his or her duties or be
detrimental to the municipal service.
   (H)   Grievance. (Editor's note: For grievance procedures see §§
33.20 through
33.26.)
   (I)   Right to strike. Because the public health, safety and welfare may be
adversely affected thereby, no employee shall have the right to engage in or
encourage any form of sit down, slow down or in fact any form of work stoppage
or strike for any reason against the city. A refusal by an employee to perform
an assignment injurious to his or her health or physical safety shall not be
considered a violation of this section.
   (J)   Leave of absence. Leave of absence without pay may be granted for a
period not to exceed 60 days when the granting of such leave is in the mutual
interests of the city and employee. The leave shall require approval of the
department supervisor and the Mayor. A leave of absence without pay and not to
exceed 5 working days shall be granted by the department supervisor or the
Mayor in the event of a death in the immediate family of an employee. The
employee shall not accrue employee benefits while on leave without pay, except
as provided in division (S) of this section.
   (K)   Absence without leave. No employee may absent himself or herself from
duty without permission of his or her department head. Absence without leave
shall be sufficient cause for forfeiture of all rights and privileges earned
while employed. An employee absent for three consecutive working days without
notice and without sufficient reason shall be considered to have resigned.
   (L)   Special leave. Employees or officials on special leave for official
city business, special education or training, upon authorization by the
Council, shall receive a regular pay during the period of the leave. It is
further provided that the Council may authorize that all necessary expenses be
paid by the city.
   (M)   Retirement.
      (1)   Personnel shall retire from municipal duty at the age of 65 and the
day of such retirement shall be at the end of the municipal fiscal year in
which their sixty-fifth birthday is attained. Provided, however, that the
Council may waive this provision when any of the following conditions exists:
         (a)   Extension of duties for each municipal year may be granted upon
a determination by a duly licensed physician that an employee or official is
physically able to perform his or her normal duties;
         (b)   That a qualified replacement is unavailable;
         (c)   And that such an extension is for the best interests of city.
      (2)   It is further provided, that seasonal or part-time employees over
the age of 65, upon determination by a duly licensed physician that the
personnel are physically able to perform the normal duties each municipal
fiscal year may be employed by the department supervisors and Mayor without
approval from the Council to perform the duties as directed by the department
supervisors.
   (N)   Resignation. To resign in good standing, appointed personnel shall
submit resignations in writing one calendar month in advance of the effective
date of their resignation. Employed personnel shall submit resignations in
writing two weeks in advance of the effective date of their resignation.
   (O)   Pension. The pension of municipal officials and employees shall be
according to the laws of the state and of the United States. A summary of the
Municipal Retirement Pension Plan shall be made available to employees upon
request.
   (P)   Work days and work week. Unless otherwise agreed upon or provided for
and except in case of emergency as determined by the department supervisor or
Mayor, the municipal work week shall be 40 hours per week. There shall be
provided at least 8 hours rest in each 24-hour period. Department supervisors
shall establish a normal work day specifically designating the starting time,
the quitting time and the lunch period, which time shall be strictly adhered to
by the municipal employees. Employees shall be at their places of work
according to these departmental regulations. All departments shall maintain a
daily attendance record of employees and file a daily absentee report and/or a
termination report with the City Clerk and shall furnish periodic reports to
the Mayor and Council. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
department heads or officials.
   (Q)   Seniority. A seniority list for each department indicating the length
of service of each employee with the city shall be brought up to date by the
City Clerk each year during the first month of the municipal fiscal year and a
copy be provided to each department head. Such seniority list shall also be
posted on a bulletin board in each department. Earned seniority shall not be
lost due to illness, authorized leave of absence, military service or temporary
layoff. The seniority of a part-time or seasonal employee that may be greater
than a full-time employee shall not entitle the part-time employee to seniority
rights over the full-time employee and the seniority list shall indicate by
designation the part-time or seasonal employee. All seniority rights shall be
lost by resignation or dismissal. Seniority and qualifications shall govern all
promotions.
   (R)   Layoff and recall. Department heads shall lay off employees when
necessary due to changes in duties or lack of work or funds. Seniority and
qualifications shall govern all layoffs and recalls.
   (S)   Vacation.  
      (1)   Permanent or full-time employees or appointed officials shall be
entitled to vacation leave with pay as follows: one week after the anniversary
date of 1 year of employment; two weeks after the anniversary date of 2 years
of employment; two weeks and one day after the anniversary date of 6 years of
employment; two weeks and two days after the anniversary date of 7 years of
employment; two weeks and three days after the anniversary date of 8 years of
employment; two weeks and four days after the anniversary date of 9 years of
employment; three weeks after the anniversary date of 10 years of employment;
and four weeks after the anniversary date of 15 years of employment. Vacation
leave shall not be cumulative and personnel shall take earned vacation within
one year following the anniversary date of the earned vacation, except that the
department supervisor or Mayor at his or her discretion may allow earned
vacation time to accumulate when it is for the best interests of the city.
Personnel desiring vacation leave shall submit request for leave to the
department supervisor 30 days in advance, except such personnel desiring
vacation leave during the months of June, July, August and September, who shall
submit their request prior to May 1 of each year. Department supervisors shall
schedule vacations, giving due consideration to seniority rights, the needs of
the service and the remaining staff to perform the necessary duties of the
department. A vacation schedule shall be posted, at each department
headquarters, on or before May 15 of each year if so requested.
      (2)   Vacation time cannot be taken in increments of less than one hour.
An employee may carry up to the number of vacation days earned in the previous
year past his anniversary date. Any excess time shall be forfeited, unless an
emergency occurs. Once during each fiscal year, an employee may request and
shall be paid cash payment in lieu of taking vacation time which exceeds the
first week earned, but not to exceed two weeks.
   (T)   Terminal pay. Employees who leave the service of the city for any
reason shall receive all pay which may be due them with the following
qualifications:
      (1)   Employees shall be paid for all unused accrued vacation provided
that the department supervisor is notified by the employee of his or her
leaving two weeks in advance or sufficient reason is given in the absence of
such notice;
      (2)   An employee who owes any money to the city at the time of his or
her separation shall have his or her final pay applied against the account of
whatever amount may be needed to satisfy it and shall be given a receipt for
the amount credited. Partial settlement of an account by application of final
pay shall not release an employee from any balance remaining due;
      (3)   In case of death of an employee, his or her estate shall be paid
for accrued vacation and regular pay then accrued.
   (U)   Allowance for use of personally owned automobile on city business.
Whenever a person in the classified city service uses his or her private
automobile in the conduct of official city business, the person shall be
compensated for such use at the standard mileage rate as set by the Internal
Revenue Service, provided that such use is authorized by the department head
and approved by the city Mayor.
   (V)   Insurance benefits after retirement. Personnel who shall retire from
municipal duty who, prior to their retirement, have participated in health
insurance programs and life insurance programs of the city shall have, at their
option, the right to continue to participate in the health insurance programs
and life insurance programs of the city, in accordance with the terms of these
programs in effect at that time. Any premiums charged by the insurance company
for these programs shall be paid in full by the retired person.
   (W)   Call back. A call back is defined as an official assignment of work
that does not continuously precede or continuously follow an employee’s
regularly scheduled working hours. Employees reporting back for work pursuant
to the request of a supervisor, or, in the case of the Night Captain of Police
who, in connection with his or her other duties, is required to appear in any
court or before any regulatory or administrative agency at any time other than
during his or her regularly scheduled work period, shall be compensated, as
follows:
      (1)   All employees, except for the Night Captain of Police, shall be
compensated for two hours or shall be compensated for the actual time worked,
whichever is greater;
      (2)   The Night Captain of Police who is reporting back for work pursuant
to the request of a supervisor shall be compensated for two hours or shall be
compensated for the actual time worked, whichever is greater.
   (X)   Training travel time. In computing the time for which any employee is
to be paid for attending an educational or training session, which attendance
is required by the city, the travel time from City Hall to the location of the
session and returning to City Hall shall be included.
   (Y)   Work related clothing reimbursement. Each employee employed on a full-
time, permanent year-round basis, of the Waterworks Department and Street
Department including the Utility Billing Clerk, and including the City
Comptroller shall receive a work related clothing allowance not to exceed $300
per fiscal year of the city. The work related clothing allowance shall be paid
in the same manner as any other claim against the city. The employee shall
deliver a paid receipt for the purchased work related clothing to the City
Comptroller within 30 days of the purchase of the work related clothing, but
not later than April 25 of any fiscal year for purchases during March and April
of said fiscal year. Failure to so deliver the receipt shall result in
forfeiture by the employee of the right to reimbursement.
   (Z)   Cellular telephone and landline allowance. The Mayor shall receive a
cellular telephone provided by the city, or, if he chooses to use his personal
cell phone, he shall receive reimbursement for the city's cost of providing him
a cellular phone. At the option of the City Comptroller said allowance may be
included in payment of the recipient's salary from the city.
   (AA)   Part-time Police Department employees. Part-time employees of the
Police Department are those who are on-call, work when needed, or employed for
a one-time assignment. The total hours worked cannot exceed 999 in any 12-month
period. Part-time employees of the Police Department are not entitled to, nor
eligible for, benefits provided by the city to its full-time employees, nor are
they entitled to, nor eligible for, benefits provided under the terms of any
collective bargaining agreement, except for mandated State of Illinois and
federal benefits.
(Ord. 75-17, passed 6-9-75; Am. Ord. 79-21, passed 7-9-79; Am. Ord. 78-42,
passed 12-11-78; Am. Ord. 83-41, passed 12-12-83; Am. Ord. 05-16, passed 6-13-
05; Am. Ord. 05-17, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 06-14, passed 4-27-06; Am. Ord.
06-16, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 06-20, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord. 07-09, passed 5-
14-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 07-28, passed 9-20-07; Am. Ord.
08-12, passed 4-14-08; Am. Ord. 08-20, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 09-48, passed
10-12-09; Am. Ord. 09-55, passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. 10-20, passed 6-14-10; Am.
Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11; Am. Ord. 12-31, passed 6-25-12; Am. Ord. 12-33,
passed 7-9-12; Am. Ord. 12-39, passed 8-13-12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13;
Am. Ord. 13-34, passed 11-12-13; Am. Ord. 14-10, passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord. 15-
08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 17-1, passed 1-10-
17)
§ 33.08 RESIDENT AND TELEPHONE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police for the city must be a bona fide resident of the
city except at the time of employment or appointment when he or she need not be
a resident of the city, but shall establish residence in the city within six
months and shall maintain an up-to-date record of residence address with the
City Clerk.
   (B)   There shall be no residency requirement for the City Comptroller and
any administrative support staff.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, full-time employees who
are not covered by a collective bargaining agreement shall abide by the
residency requirements provided for the collective bargaining agreements which
apply to their particular city department.
   (D)   All full-time personnel employed by the city shall maintain and
provide the City Clerk with a mobile telephone number to provide the city with
reasonably convenient telephone access.
   (E)   Full-time personnel employed by the city who are not covered by a
collective bargaining agreement shall receive either a city-owned and paid
mobile phone and service plan, or a telephone allowance of $30 per month which,
at the City Comptroller's option, may be included in the payment of the
employee's regular paycheck.
(Ord. 03-05, passed 2-10-03; Am. Ord. 06-30, passed 7-10-06; Am. Ord. 08-11,
passed 4-14-08; Am. Ord. 09-55, passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. 21-20, passed 12-14-
21)
§ 33.09 JURY DUTY.
   (A)   This section applies to all jury duty, in any court of any kind,
including the Circuit Court of a county or a federal court.
   (B)   A full-time city officer or full-time city employee is a person who is
at least 21 years of age and who is employed to work a minimum of 40 hours per
week and whose employment is contemplated to extend for ten or more months. A
part-time city officer or a part-time city employee is a person who is under
the age of 21 years or a person who is employed to work less than 40 hours per
week or a person who is employed to work a minimum of 40 hours per week, but
whose employment will terminate in ten months or less.
   (C)   Any full-time city officer or any full-time city employee being
summoned for jury duty shall automatically be entitled to leave during the time
of the jury duty. Leave shall be granted for all the time the individual is
required to report to the court, including days on which the person reports but
no jury assignment is made.
   (D)   During jury service, each full-time city officer or full-time city
employee shall continue to receive all of the city officer's or city employee's
fringe benefits and all payments to pension plans. The full-time city officer
or the full-time city employee shall continue to receive the officer's or
employee's salary, less any amount received for jury service. In determining
the amount received for jury service, any amount paid for travel costs shall
not be included.
   (E)   Any city officer who is not employed by the city on a full-time basis
or any city employee who is not employed on a full-time basis, who is summoned
for jury duty, shall automatically be entitled to leave during the time of the
jury duty. Leave shall be granted for all the time the individual is required
to report to the Court, including days on which the person reports but no jury
assignment is made. During jury service, no compensation shall be paid by the
city to said city officer or city employee who is not employed on a full-time
basis.
   (F)   Any employee who is permanently excused from jury duty and permitted
to return home shall report the matter to his or her supervisor immediately.
Any person excused for the day before 12:00 o'clock noon shall report to the
city for work during the afternoon by 1:00 p.m. Any person excused for the
remainder of the jury time, and told not to report back to the court, shall
report for work for the city as soon as possible.
(Ord. 99-7, passed 4-12-99)
§ 33.10 MISCELLANEOUS SALARY PROVISIONS FOR POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Police Captain overtime pay. The Captain of Police is employed on the
basis of 80 hours in a 14-day period, Sunday through Saturday, and working a
shift not to exceed 12 hours per shift. If the Captain of Police renders more
than 80 hours in a 14-day period, Sunday through Saturday, or 12 hours per
shift when the Captain has been assigned to a 12-hour shift, in services for
the City of Paxton, he or she shall be paid at an hourly wage equal to one and
one-half times his or her usual and customary hourly wage, based upon the wages
set forth in §
33.30(B). In the event that the Captain renders more than eight hours per shift
in services for the City of Paxton, during a period when the Captain has been
assigned to an eight hour per day shift, he or she shall be paid at an hourly
wage equal to one and one-half times his or her usual and customary hourly
wage, based upon the wages set forth in §
33.30(B). Benefit salary shall not be included in the overtime pay
compensation.
   (B)   Break time. The Chief of Police and the Captain of Police are entitled
to either (i) a 30-minute lunch break and two 15-minute breaks, or (ii) a 45-
minute lunch break and one 15-minute break each eight hour work shift. During
the break time, they are required to respond to all police calls received.
   (C)   Compensatory time. The Captain of Police may receive compensatory time
off or overtime pay. Compensatory time is earned at a rate of one and one-half
hours for each hour of overtime worked. Compensatory time may be accrued up to
a total of 40 hours only. He/she must be paid cash for overtime worked after
they have accrued 40 hours of compensatory time. Compensatory time may be used
by the Captain only after requesting and scheduling the same at least 48 hours
in advance with the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall consider the
manpower needs of the Police Department in determining whether or not to grant
the use of the compensatory time as requested. Benefit salary shall not be
included in the compensatory time compensation.
   (D)   Equipment allowance. At the beginning of each fiscal year, the city
shall provide the Chief of Police and the Captain an annual equipment allowance
in the amount of $400 for the purchase, replacement, repair, cleaning and
maintenance of required or authorized footwear and equipment. Such allowance
shall be in the form of a line-item cash voucher system in the name of the
Captain/Chief of Police. They shall not be entitled to any accumulated
equipment allowance upon their termination of employment with the city. A paid
receipt for the purchased footwear or equipment shall be delivered to the City
Comptroller within 30 days of the purchase of the item(s), but not later than
April 25 of any fiscal year for purchases during March and April of said fiscal
year. Failure to so deliver the receipt shall result in forfeiture of the right
to reimbursement. Any amount remaining in that person’s line item at the end of
the fiscal year shall be forfeited.
   (E)   Evidence officer. The Captain is responsible for receiving, storing
and logging all evidence related to crimes in the city and shall receive an
additional $0.60 per hour in addition to the base salary above set forth.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 06-32,
passed 7-31-06; Am. Ord. 07-09, passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, passed 6-11-07;
Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 7-23-07;Am. Ord. 08-20, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 09-48,
passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. 10-20, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11;
Am. Ord. 12-31, passed 6-25-12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord. 14-10,
passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord. 15-08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15;
Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 6-28-16; Am. Ord. 21-20, passed 12-14-21; Am. Ord. 22-
17, passed 10-11-22)
§ 33.11 MISCELLANEOUS SALARY AND WAGE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Park Custodian. Any person employed by the city as Park Custodian
shall receive a wage of $10 per hour.
   (B)   City recycling center. Any person employed by the city as City
Recycling Center Custodian shall receive a wage equal to the minimum wage
established by the Statutes of the State of Illinois for the first 12 months of
their employment. Any person employed by the city as City Recycling Center
Custodian for more than 12 months shall receive a wage of $10 per hour worked.
   (C)   Animal Control Officer. The Animal Control Officer shall receive an
annual salary of $6,000 in the performance of duties as required by the
ordinances of the city. The city shall furnish to the Animal Control Officer a
motor vehicle to assist in the performance of the duties of the office and
shall pay all expenses incurred in the operation and maintenance of the motor
vehicle.
   (D)   Miscellaneous wages. Any employee of the city whose salary has not
been determined by any other section of this chapter or any other ordinance of
the City of Paxton or determined under a Collective Bargaining Agreement, shall
receive a salary determined as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (2) below, any employee who is
employed to work a minimum of 40 hours per week, but whose employment will
terminate in ten months or less shall receive a wage equal to the minimum wage
established by the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
      (2)   Any employee who is employed to work a minimum of 40 hours per
week, but whose employment will terminate in ten months or less and who
possesses a commercial driver’s license shall receive a wage equal to the
minimum wage established by the Statutes of the State of Illinois, plus the sum
of $0.25 per hour.
      (3)   Any employee who is employed to work only during any part or all of
the months of May, June, July and August, and who is a full-time student during
the remaining months of the year shall receive an increase in compensation of
$0.25 per hour to the hourly wage being previously paid to the employee each
time the employee shall complete 12 weeks of employment with the city.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to include employees of
the Paxton Carnegie Library.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 07-09,
passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 7-23-07;
Am. Ord. 08-20, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 09-48, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 10-
20, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11; Am. Ord. 12-26, passed 6-11-
12; Am. Ord. 12-31, passed 6-25-12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord.
14-10, passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord. 15-08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-
10-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 6-28-16)
§ 33.12 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR
OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)    Job descriptions.
      (1)   Director of Public Works. To plan, direct, manage and oversee the
activities, projects and operations of the Public Works Department including
street maintenance and construction, central maintenance, building maintenance,
waste water services, potable water services, airport maintenance; to
coordinate activities within the street, water, and wastewater departments and
outside agencies; and to provide highly responsible and complex administrative
support to the Mayor.
      (2)   Assistant Director of Public Works. Provide direct support to the
Director of Public Works with a primary focus on the management and day to day
operations of the Water and Wastewater departments.
   (B)   In the event that the Director of Public Works or Assistant Director
of Public Works shall receive from the Environmental Protection Agency of the
State of Illinois a Class 1 (activated sludge over 1 million gallons per day),
or a Class 2 (activated sludge under 1 million gallons per day), or a Class 3
(fixed film), or a Class 4 (distribution) Wastewater Treatment Operator’s
License issued by said Environmental Protection Agency under their rules and
regulations for certification of operators of sewage treatment works the
Superintendent of the Waterworks Department shall receive an additional salary
of $19.20 bi-weekly, for each license payable at the end of each two-week
period; provided, however, that not more than one additional increase in
additional salary shall be payable each 12-month consecutive period.
   (C)   In the event that the Director of Public Works or Assistant Director
of Public Works shall receive from the Environmental Protection Agency of the
State of Illinois a Class A (lime softening and surface supplies), or a Class B
(filtration), or a Class C (chemical feed), or a Class D (water distribution)
Water Treatment Operator’s License issued by said Environmental Protection
Agency under their rules and regulations for certification of operators of
water treatment works the Superintendent of the Waterworks Department shall
receive an additional salary of $19.20 bi-weekly, for each license payable at
the end of each two-week period; provided, however, that not more than one
additional increase in additional salary shall be payable each 12-month
consecutive period.
   (D)   In the event that the Director of Public Works or Assistant Director
of Public Works shall receive from the Department of Agriculture of the State
of Illinois a Category 3 Turf Pest Control License, or a Category 6 Right of
Way Pest Control License, or a Category 8 Mosquito Pest Control License, or a
Category 12 Sewer Line Root Control License issued by said Department of
Agriculture under their rules and regulations for certification under the
Illinois Pesticide Act, then, in that event, he shall receive an additional
salary of $0.08 per hour, per license received.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 07-09,
passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 7-23-07;
Am. Ord. 08-20, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 09-48, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 10-
20, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11; Am. Ord. 12-31, passed 6-25-
12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord. 14-10, passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord.
15-08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 6-
28-16; Am. Ord. 21-20, passed 12-14-21)
§ 33.13 OVERTIME PAY OF CHIEF OF POLICE, DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS, ASSISTANT
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AND COMPTROLLER.
   The Chief of Police, the Night Captain, the Director of Public Works, the
Assistant Director of Public Works, and the Comptroller are employed as
supervisory personnel and under applicable statutes are not entitled to
overtime pay. The City Council hereby states that it is the general policy of
the city to pay to the Night Captain, Assistant Director of Public Works and
the Comptroller overtime pay for services rendered to the city which are in
excess of 40 hours per week or the usual and customary hours per shift when
such overtime services are deemed necessary and appropriate by the Mayor. This
policy does not include the Director of Public Works and the Chief of Police.
Thus, subject to the consent of and approval by the Mayor, the Night Captain,
the Assistant Director of Public Works and the Comptroller shall be paid for
overtime hours after the approval of the same by the Mayor. The rate of
overtime pay shall be an hourly wage equal to one and one-half times the
person’s usual and customary hourly wage, based upon the wages set forth in
this chapter, except benefit salary shall not be included in the overtime pay
compensation.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 07-09,
passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 7-23-07;
Am. Ord. 08-20, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 09-48, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 10-
20, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11; Am. Ord. 12-31, passed 6-25-
12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord. 14-10, passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord.
15-08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 6-
28-16)
§ 33.14 LONGEVITY PAY.
   (A)   The provisions of this section are not applicable to employees of the
city who are covered under a collective bargaining agreement.
   (B)   Those persons whose base salaries are determined by §
33.30(A), (B) and (D) of this chapter, plus the Comptroller, are entitled to
have the base salary as set forth in said sections and the base salary of the
Comptroller increased in the percentage as set forth in the following table
based upon the number of years of continuous service to the city, to-wit:
      0 to 2 years continuous service         None
      2 yrs. 1 day to 4 yrs. continuous service      1%
      4 yrs. 1 day to 6 yrs. continuous service      2%
      6 yrs. 1 day to 8 yrs. continuous service      3%
      8 yrs. 1 day to 10 yrs. continuous service      4%
      10 yrs. 1 day to 12 yrs. continuous service      5%
      12 yrs. 1 day to 14 yrs. continuous service      6%
      14 yrs. 1 day to 16 yrs. continuous service      7%
      16 yrs. 1 day to 18 yrs. continuous service      8%
      18 yrs. 1 day to 20 yrs. continuous service      9%
      20 yrs. 1 day to 22 yrs. continuous service      10%
      22 yrs. 1 day to 24 yrs. continuous service      11%
      24 yrs. 1 day to 26 yrs. continuous service      12%
      26 yrs. 1 day to 28 yrs. continuous service      13%
      28 yrs. 1 day to 30 yrs. continuous service      14%
      30 yrs. 1 day to 32 yrs. continuous service      15%
      32 yrs. 1 day to 34 yrs. continuous service      16%
      34 yrs. 1 day to 36 yrs. continuous service      17%
      36 yrs. 1 day to 38 yrs. continuous service      18%
      38 yrs. 1 day to 40 yrs. continuous service      19%
      40 yrs. 1 day to 42 yrs. continuous service      20%
      42 yrs. 1 day to 44 yrs. continuous service      21%
      44 yrs. 1 day to 46 yrs. continuous service      22%
      46 yrs. 1 day to 48 yrs. continuous service      23%
      48 yrs. 1 day to 50 yrs. continuous service      24%
      50 yrs. 1 day to 52 yrs. continuous service      25%
      52 yrs. 1 day to 54 yrs. continuous service      26%
   (C)   In determining eligibility for the foregoing longevity pay no
employment with the city prior to May 1, 1962, shall be taken into effect.
Benefit salary as herein set forth is not to be increased by the percentages as
above set forth.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 07-09,
passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 7-23-07;
Am. Ord. 08-20, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 09-48, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 10-
20, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11; Am. Ord. 12-31, passed 6-25-
12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord. 14-10, passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord.
15-08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 6-
28-16)
§ 33.15 FREQUENCY OF PAYMENT.
   The salaries and fees of the city officials and employees shall be paid as
follows:
   (A)   Mayor: monthly;
   (B)   Aldermen: monthly;
   (C)   City Clerk: monthly;
   (D)   City Attorney: monthly;
   (E)   City Treasurer: monthly;
   (F)   Employees of Police Department: bi-weekly;
   (G)   Employees of Street Department: bi-weekly;
   (H)   Employees of the Waterworks Department: bi-weekly;
   (I)   Emergency Response Director: monthly;
   (J)   Building Administrator and ADA Coordinator: bi-weekly;
   (K)   Comptroller: bi-weekly;
   (L)   Animal Control Officer: monthly; and
   (M)   Any and all other employees: bi-weekly.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 07-09,
passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 7-23-07;
Am. Ord. 08-20, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 09-48, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 10-
20, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11; Am. Ord. 12-31, passed 6-25-
12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord. 14-10, passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord.
15-08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 6-
28-16)
§ 33.16 SPECIAL PAYMENT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The salary of the City Clerk shall all be paid out of the City
Officers Salary Fund.
   (B)   The City Treasurer/Comptroller shall be paid one-half out of the City
Officers Salary Fund and one-half out of the Combined Waterworks and Sewage
Operation Maintenance Account.
   (C)   The Utility Billing Clerk shall be paid one-half out of the Water
Department Fund and one-half out of the Sewer Department Fund.
   (D)   Employees of the Street Department shall be paid from the Street
Department Fund.
   (E)   Employees of the Waterworks Department shall be paid one-half out of
the Water Department Fund and one-half out of the Sewer Department Fund.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 07-09,
passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 7-23-07;
Am. Ord. 08-20, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 09-48, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 10-
20, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11; Am. Ord. 6-25-12; Am. Ord.
12-39, passed 8-13-12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord. 14-10, passed
5-12-14; Am. Ord. 15-08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15; Am.
Ord. 16-15, passed 6-28-16)
§ 33.17 LIFE INSURANCE, DISABILITY INSURANCE AND HEALTH INSURANCE.
   (A)   The provisions of this section are not applicable to employees of the
city who are covered under a collective bargaining agreement.
   (B)   All full-time employees of the city, employed on a permanent year-
round basis, shall be entitled to receive life insurance benefits and
disability insurance benefits as provided to said employees from time to time
by the city.
   (C)   The city shall make available to employees covered by this section a
health care insurance program. The health care insurance program shall consist
of health care insurance (for doctor and hospital expenses), dental care
insurance and vision care insurance. An employee may not enroll in one
insurance program to the exclusion of another insurance program.
   (D)   (1)   If the city offers to the employees covered by this section a
high deductible health plan coupled with a health savings account, then, in
that event, the plan being offered shall be subject to all of the applicable
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the rules and
regulations issued pursuant thereto; including, the provisions of Section 223.
In the event that one or more of the provisions of this section are contrary to
the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the rules
and regulations issued pursuant thereto, then, in that event, those provisions
of this section shall be declared null and void but the invalid part shall not
in any manner affect or nullify any remaining provisions of this chapter and
they shall continue in full force and effect.
      (2)   Each employee covered by this section shall establish a Qualified
Health Savings Account (HSA). In the case of employees of the city that are
covered by this section as of January 1, 2015, said HSA shall be established
within two weeks of January 1, 2015. Each employee covered by this section who
is employed by the city after January 1, 2015, shall establish an HSA within
the first two weeks of employment.
      (3)   For each employee covered by this section who was employed by the
city on January 1, 2015, and who is employed by the city on January 1, 2015,
the city shall within 30 days of January 1, 2015, and January 1 of each year
thereafter, provided the person continues to be employed by the city, deposit
into each employee’s HSA the sum of $3,000.
      (4)   For each employee covered by this section who is employed by the
city on or after January 2, 2015, the city shall deposit into said employee’s
HSA the sum of $3,000 within the first 30 days of employment.
      (5)   Notwithstanding anything heretofore to the contrary, the total
contribution by the city to the HSA account of each employee shall not exceed
the sum of $3,000 in any one calendar year.
      (6)   No deposit shall be made by the city into any HSA account of any
person that is not an employee of the city on January 1 for employees who were
employed by the city on January 1, 2015.
   (E)   The city shall make available to employees covered by this section an
employee only health care insurance program. The city shall pay all of the
premium charge for the employee’s coverage.
   (F)   The city may make available to employees covered by this section an
employee plus spouse health care insurance program. The city shall pay all of
the premium charge for the employee. In the event that the spouse of the
employee is an employee of an employer with 50 or more employees or is an
employee of an employer with less than 50 employees that offers health
insurance coverage to their employees, then, in that event, the city will not
pay any of the premium charge for the coverage of the spouse. In the event that
the spouse of the employee is not employed by an employer with 50 or more
employees or is employed by an employer with less than 50 employees that does
not offer health insurance coverage to their employees, the city shall pay a
percentage of the additional premium charge for the coverage of spouse as
follows:
   For the period commencing July 1, 2013 - 75%
   (G)   The city may make available to employees covered by this section an
employee plus child or children health care insurance program. The city shall
pay all of the premium charge for the employee. The city shall pay a percentage
of the additional premium charge for the coverage of the child or children as
follows:
   For the period commencing July 1, 2013 - 75%
   (H)   The city may make available to employees covered by this section a
family health care insurance program. The city shall pay all of the premium
charge for the employee. In the event that the spouse of the employee is an
employee of an employer with 50 or more employees or is an employee of an
employer with less than 50 employees that offers health insurance coverage to
their employees, then, in that event, the city will not pay any of the premium
charge for the coverage of the spouse. In the event that the spouse of the
employee is not employed by an employer with 50 or more employees or is
employed by an employer with less than 50 employees that does not offer health
insurance coverage to their employees, the city shall pay a percentage of the
additional premium charge for the coverage of the spouse as follows:
   For the period commencing July 1, 2013 - 75%
   The City shall pay a percentage of the additional premium charge for the
coverage of the family (after deducting the premium charge of the employee and
the spouse of the employee) as follows:
   For the period commencing July 1, 2013 - 75%
   (I)   In the event that any full-time employee of the city, employed on a
permanent year-round basis, who was employed the city prior to May 8, 2000, as
a full-time, permanent year-around employee, shall elect not to receive health
insurance benefits for employee’s spouse or spouse and dependents, then, in
that event, said full-time employee making said election shall receive an
additional sum in lieu of said health insurance benefits, which sum shall be
$104.31, bi-weekly, payable at the end of each two-week period. This additional
sum of $ 104.31 is known as “Benefit Salary” in this chapter.
   (J)   All full-time employees of the city that elect to enroll qualifying
adult dependent children to their health insurance benefits pursuant to any
State or Federal Statute will be responsible for any premium coverage increases
related to the addition of adult dependent children and the premium increases
shall be deducted from the employee’s salary.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 07-09,
passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 7-23-07;
Am. Ord. 08-20, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 09-11, passed 4-13-09; Am. Ord. 09-48,
passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 10-20, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11;
Am. Ord. 12-31, passed 6-25-12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord. 14-10,
passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord. 15-08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15;
Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 6-28-16)
§ 33.18 OVERTIME COMPUTATION.
   The provisions of this section are not applicable to employees of the city
who are covered under a collective bargaining agreement. The additional sum as
set forth in §
33.17 is to reimburse, in part, for health insurance benefits and is not to be
included as compensation for determination of the amount of overtime
compensation or vacation compensation due any employee.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 07-09,
passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 7-23-07;
Am. Ord. 08-20, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 09-48, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 10-
20, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11; Am. Ord. 12-31, passed 6-25-
12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord. 14-10, passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord.
15-08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 6-
28-16)
§ 33.19 DETERMINATION OF PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The Mayor is not deemed to be a full-time employee of the city.
   (B)   The Aldermen are not deemed to be full-time employees of the city.
   (C)   The City Attorney is not deemed to be a full-time employee of the
city.
   (D)   The City Treasurer is not deemed to be a full-time employee of the
city.
   (E)   The Emergency Response Director is not deemed to be a full-time
employee of the city.
   (F)   The Building Administrator and ADA Coordinator is not deemed to be a
full-time employee of the city.
   (G)   The City Clerk is not deemed to be a full-time employee of the city.
   (H)   The Park Custodian is not deemed to be a full-time employee of the
city.
   (I)   The City Recycling Center Custodian is not deemed to be a full-time
employee of the city.
   (J)   The Animal Control Officer is not deemed to be a full-time employee of
the city.
   (K)   Part-time employees of the Police Department are not deemed to be
full-time employees of the city.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 6-13-05; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 07-09,
passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 07-18, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 7-23-07;
Am. Ord. 08-20, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 09-48, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 10-
20, passed 6-14-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-9-11; Am. Ord. 12-31, passed 6-25-
12; Am. Ord. 13-20, passed 6-10-13; Am. Ord. 14-10, passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord.
15-08, passed 6-8-15; Am. Ord. 15-18, passed 8-10-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 6-
28-16)
§ 33.20 APPLICABILITY OF §§ 33.20 THROUGH 33.26.
   (A)   The provisions of §§
33.20 through
33.26 shall apply to any grievance by any employee of the city, except a
probationary employee. No probationary employee and no employee during an
original 12 month probationary period shall have any right to file any
grievance under §§
33.20 through
33.26.
   (B)   A grievance is hereby defined as any dispute or difference between the
city, as employer, and an employee with respect to the meaning, interpretation,
or application of any of the terms of employment, working conditions, or
application of local, state and federal statutes, rules and regulations to be
observed by the city and the employee.
   (C)   Grievances arising after June 12, 2006 shall be raised, discussed, and
taken up in accordance with the provisions of §§
33.20 through
33.26.
(Ord. 06-20, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord. 08-13, passed 4-14-08)
§ 33.21 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of the city to maintain effective employer-employee
relations and to give any employee an opportunity to present and discuss any
grievance. The grievance procedure set forth in §§
33.20 through
33.26 are designed to resolve any problem informally when it arises while
recognizing that there may be grievances which can be resolved only after
formal appeal and review.
(Ord. 06-20, passed 6-12-06)
§ 33.22 PROCEDURE.
   Before initiating a formal written grievance under §§
33.20 through
33.26, any employee shall within five working days of the incident giving rise
to the grievance, orally raise the grievance with his or her immediate
supervisor or department head through free and informal discussion in order to
resolve as many matters as possible. The supervisor or department head shall
have three working days in which to respond to the grievance. In the event that
any such grievance cannot be satisfactorily settled or resolved through this
informal means, or an answer is not given within the time specified, such
grievance shall be processed in the following manner:
   Step 1. Any affected employee shall present such grievance in writing on a
standard grievance form provided by the city for such purpose stating the facts
of the complaint to his or her department head within 12 working days after the
first occurrence of the event giving rise to the grievance or 12 working days
after such affected employee through the use of reasonable diligence should
have known of the first occurrence of the event giving rise to such grievance.
The department head shall then attempt to adjust such grievance and shall
render a written response to the grievant within five working days after such
grievance is presented; except that a meeting may be held at the request of
either party to review the grievance at this step and said meeting shall be
within ten calendar days after such grievance is presented. The department head
shall have five working days from the date of the meeting to respond in writing
to the grievance in the event a meeting is held.
   Step 2. If such grievance is not satisfactorily settled under Step 1 or an
answer is not given in the time specified and the grievant desires to appeal
such grievance to Step 2, the grievant shall present such grievance in writing
to the committee chairperson of the appropriate committee of the City Council
within five working days after receipt of the department head's response in
Step 1, or within five working days of the time when such response would have
been due. The committee chairperson shall investigate such grievance and, in
the course of such investigation may, within ten calendar days from receipt of
such grievance at Step 2, offer to discuss such grievance at a meeting with the
grievant. The grievant may, in writing, request a meeting with the committee
chairperson, and if requested the meeting shall be held within ten calendar
days from the receipt of the request by the committee chairperson. If no
settlement of such grievance is reached, the committee chairperson shall
provide a written response to the grievant within ten calendar days following
the receipt of the grievance or following the date of the meeting with the
grievant, whichever is later.
   Step 3. If such grievance is not satisfactorily settled under Step 2 or an
answer is not given in the time specified and the grievant desires to appeal
such grievance to Step 3, the grievant shall present such grievance in writing
to the Mayor within five working days after receipt of the committee
chairperson's response in Step 2, or within five working days of the time when
such response would have been due. The Mayor shall investigate such grievance
and, in the course of such investigation may, within ten calendar days from
receipt of such grievance at Step 3, offer to discuss such grievance at a
meeting with the grievant. The grievant may, in writing, request a meeting with
the Mayor, and if requested the meeting shall be held within ten calendar days
from the receipt of the request by the Mayor. If no settlement of such
grievance is reached, the Mayor shall provide a written response to the
grievant within ten calendar days following the receipt of the grievance or
following the date of the meeting with the grievant, whichever is later.
   Step 4. If such grievance is not settled under Step 3 and the grievant
desires to appeal such grievance to Step 4, the grievant shall present such
grievance in writing to the City Clerk of the City Council within seven
calendar days after the receipt of the Mayor's response in Step 3 or within
seven calendar days of the time when such response would have been due.
Thereafter, the members of the City Council, the Mayor and the department head
shall meet with the grievant to discuss such grievance. The meeting date and
time shall be set and announced at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the
City Council after receipt of the grievance, which date shall be within 15 days
of the date of said regularly scheduled City Council meeting. The City Council
shall provide a written decision to the grievant within ten calendar days
following the date of the meeting with the grievant. The written decision of
the City Council shall be final. Only a quorum of the members of the City
Council shall be required in order to proceed with the meeting provided in this
Step 4.
(Ord. 06-20, passed 6-12-06)
§ 33.23 FORM OF GRIEVANCES AND SETTLEMENTS.
   (A)   Form of grievance. In reducing a grievance to writing, the writing
should specifically state that the matter is a grievance under §§
33.20 through
33.26 and should specifically include the following information:
      (1)   A complete statement of the facts, including the exact date and
nature of the act or omission giving rise to such grievance;
      (2)   The identity of the grievant, of the party or parties alleged to
have committed the act or omission giving rise to such grievance and of any
witness to such act or omission;
      (3)   The specific provisions of the applicable chapter or of any
applicable procedure, order, rule, regulation or policy developed or made by
the city or any such employee's department head that are alleged to have been
violated; and
      (4)   The remedy or relief requested.
   (B)   Form of settlement. The settlement of any grievance under §§
33.20 through
33.26 shall be reduced to writing and signed by both the city and the grievant.
(Ord. 06-20, passed 6-12-06)
§ 33.24 TIME LIMITS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise agreed by the city in writing, any grievance not
presented by any grievant within the applicable time limit set above shall be
considered waived and shall not be further pursued. If any grievance is not
appealed to the next step within the specified time limit or any agreed
extension thereof, it shall be considered settled on the basis of the city's
last response. If the city does not respond to any timely filed grievance or
any timely filed appeal thereof within the specified time limits for any such
response, the grievance shall be considered denied at that step and immediately
appealed to the next.
   (B)   Grievances may be withdrawn at any step of the grievance procedure
without prejudice.
   (C)   Grievances concerning suspension of 30 days or less of an employee may
be initiated at Step 2 of this grievance procedure.
   (D)   Grievances concerning suspension of more than 30 days and/or discharge
of an employee shall be initiated at Step 3 of this grievance procedure.
(Ord. 06-20, passed 6-12-06)
§ 33.25 RIGHT TO ASSISTANCE.
   Any employee covered by §§
33.20 through
33.26 may, at his or her own expense, retain a representative of his or her
choosing to represent or assist any such employee in processing any grievance
under §§
33.20 through
33.26.
(Ord. 06-20, passed 6-12-06)
§ 33.26 WORKING TIME.
   Any grievant shall receive time to participate in any Step 2 or 3 grievance
meeting with the city if any such grievance meeting is conducted during any
such grievant's working time. Attendance at any such meeting shall not
interfere with any required duty time, and attendance, if during duty time,
shall be permitted only upon the prior approval of any such grievant's
department head. No other time spent on any grievance matter under this chapter
shall be considered.
(Ord. 06-20, passed 6-12-06)
§ 33.27 EVALUATION PLAN ADOPTED.
   (A)   The City of Paxton Evaluation Plan and the City of Paxton Employee
Evaluation Form, a copy of which is attached to Res. No. 08-34, passed 10-13-
08, and by this reference made a part hereof, and the same hereby are approved.
   (B)   A copy of the Evaluation Plan and the Employee Evaluation Form shall
be given to all current employees of the city for informational purposes.
   (C)   The supervisors of each department of the city shall initiate a
program to implement the Evaluation Plan and conduct employee interviews within
four months of October 13, 2008.
(Res. 08-34, passed 10-13-08)
§ 33.28 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY; SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY;
SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY.
   (A)   The city adopts, as an official policy of the city, an Equal
Opportunity Policy, a copy of said policy being attached to the ordinance set
forth in this section and made a part hereof.
   (B)   The city adopts, as an official policy of the city, a Sexual
Harassment Policy, a copy of the policy being attached to the ordinance set
forth in this section and made a part hereof.
   (C)   The city adopts, as an official policy of the city, a Substance Abuse
Policy, a copy of the policy being attached to the ordinance set forth in this
section and made a part hereof.
(Ord. 09-46, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 17-49, passed 12-12-17; Am. Ord. 18-30,
passed 12-11-18)
§ 33.29 HIRING STANDARDS FOR PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Employment. The city may employ part-time police officers from time to
time as it deems necessary.
   (B)   Duties. A part-time police officer shall have all the responsibilities
of a full-time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the
general orders of the Police Department, but the number of hours a part-time
officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part-time police
officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full-time police
officers. Part-time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the
Illinois Police Training Act (ILCS Ch. 50, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.) and the rules
and requirements of the Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board.
   (C)   Hiring standards. Any person employed as a part-time police officer
must meet the following standards:
      (1)   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      (2)   Be at least 21 years of age.
      (3)   Pass a medical examination.
      (4)   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      (5)   Possess a valid State of Illinois driver’s license.
      (6)   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      (7)   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
   (D)   Discipline. Part-time officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the Chief of Police. Part-time police officers serve at the
discretion of the city authorities, shall not have any property rights in said
employment, and may be removed by the city authorities at any time. Part-time
police officers shall comply with all applicable rules and general orders
issued by the Police Department.
(Ord. 11-01, passed 1-10-11; Am. Ord. 12-21, passed 5-14-12)
§ 33.30 SALARIES.
   (A)   The salaries of the Administrative Personnel shall be as follows:
Administration Annual Base Salary
Administration                             Annual Base Salary
Mayor (Including Liquor Commissioner)      $ 7,200.00
City Clerk                                 $ 3,000.00
City Treasurer                             None
Emergency Response Director                $ 4,950.00
Building Administrator and ADA Coordinator $ 6,000.00
Comptroller                                $ 51,608.54
FOIA Officer                               $ 1,000.00
 
   That commencing May 1, 2001, the Annual Base Salary of the City Clerk shall
be $3,000.00 per year (as above stated), plus the sum of $25.00 for each
meeting attended in the capacity of City Clerk. In the event a deputy clerk
shall attend a meeting in lieu of the City Clerk, then said sum of $25.00 for
each meeting attended shall be paid to the Deputy City Clerk that attends the
meeting.
   (B)   The salaries of the following employees of the Police Department shall
be as follows:
 
Police Department Bi-Weekly Base Salary
Chief of Police   $ 2,219.16
Night Captain     $ 1,784.56
 
   (C)   The salary of part-time employees of the Police Department shall be
$17.79 per hour.
   (D)   The salaries of the following employees of the Public Works
Department, which encompasses the Street Department and Waterworks Department,
shall be as follows:
 
                                                      Bi-Weekly Base Salary
Director of Public Works                              $ 2,529.88
Assistant Director of Public Works                    $ 1,693.46
Utility Billing Clerk (after 12 months employment)    $1,246.56
Utility Billing Clerk (first 12 months of employment) $1,222.25
 
(Ord. 16-15, passed 6-28-16; Am. Ord. 17-15, passed 5-9-17; Am. Ord. 17-35,
passed 12-12-17)
§ 33.31 COMPENSATION OF ALDERMEN.
   The Aldermen of the city shall receive, for their services, if elected in
April of 1989 or later, the sum of $100 for each meeting of the City Council
actually attended by them, payable monthly; provided, however, that the amount
received by each of said Aldermen shall not exceed the sum of $200 per month
for those elected in April, 1989, or later; and provided, further, however,
that each of said Aldermen shall be allowed two absences in each year for which
compensation shall be paid, as aforesaid, and provided, further, however, that
any Alderman may miss more than two meetings per year and still receive
payment, as aforesaid, if such Alderman can show due cause for such additional
absences, such as illness of the Alderman, serious illness of a member of the
Alderman’s family, a death in the Alderman’s immediate family or other like
cause.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 6-28-16)
§ 33.32 CITY ATTORNEY.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions, the City Attorney shall be paid the
sum of $165 per hour commencing with his appointment as of November 16, 2015,
with any future adjustment subject to the approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 6-28-16)
§ 33.33 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section are not applicable to employees of the
city who are covered under a collective bargaining agreement.
   (B)   Call back. A call back is defined as an official assignment of work
that does not continuously precede or continuously follow an employee’s
regularly scheduled working hours. Employees reporting back for work pursuant
to the request of a supervisor, or, in the case of the Night Captain of Police
who, in connection with his other duties, is required to appear in any court or
before any regulatory or administrative agency at any time other than during
his or her regularly scheduled work period, shall be compensated, as follows:
      (1)   All employees, except for the Night Captain of Police, shall be
compensated for one hour at the overtime rate or for the actual time worked at
the overtime rate, whichever is greater;
      (2)   The Night Captain of Police who is reporting back for work pursuant
to the request of a supervisor or is required to appear in any court or before
any regulatory or administrative agency at any time other than during his or
her regularly scheduled work period, shall be compensated for two hours at the
overtime rate or for the actual time worked at the overtime rate whichever is
greater.
   (C)   Training travel time. In computing the time for which any employee is
to be paid for attending an educational or training session, which attendance
is required by the city, the travel time from the City Hall to the location of
the session and returning to the City Hall shall be included.
   (D)   Work related clothing reimbursement. Each employee employed on a full-
time, permanent year-round basis, of the Waterworks Department and Street
Department including the Utility Billing Clerk, and including the City
Comptroller shall receive a work related clothing allowance not to exceed $400
per fiscal year of the city. The work related clothing allowance shall be paid
in the same manner any other claim against the city. The employee shall deliver
a paid receipt for the purchased work related clothing to the City Comptroller
within 30 days of the purchase of the work related clothing, but not later than
April 25th of any fiscal year for purchases during March and April of said
fiscal year. Failure to so deliver the receipt shall result in forfeiture by
the employee of the right to reimbursement.
   (E)   Cellular telephone and landline allowance. The Mayor shall receive a
cellular telephone provided by the city or, if he chooses to use his personal
cell phone, he shall receive reimbursement for the city’s cost of providing him
a cellular phone. At the option of the City Comptroller said allowance may be
included in any check issued in payment of the recipient’s salary from the
city.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 6-28-16)
§ 33.34 COMPENSATORY TIME.
   Hourly full-time employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement
may receive compensatory time off or overtime pay. Compensatory time is earned
at a rate of one and one-half hours for each hour of overtime worked.
Compensatory time may be accrued up to a total of 40 hours only. Such an
employee shall be paid cash for overtime worked after they have accrued 40
hours of compensatory time. Compensatory time may be used by the employee only
after requesting and scheduling the same at least 48 hours in advance with his
or her supervisor. The supervisor shall consider the manpower needs of the city
in determining whether or not to grant the use of the compensatory time as
requested. Benefit salary shall not be included in the compensatory time
compensation.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 6-28-16)
§ 33.35 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The base salaries, as above set forth, shall become effective for each
employee of the city commencing May 1, 2016.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 6-28-16)
§ 33.36 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, and amendment to ordinances in
conflict with §§
33.10 through
33.19 and §§
33.30 through
33.35 are hereby repealed as of June 28, 2016.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 6-28-16)
§ 33.37 PAID LEAVE.
   Pursuant to Section 15(p) of the Act, the city hereby adopts its current
paid leave policy for all city employees as set forth in this code, the
Employee Handbook, the Annual Salary Ordinances, any collective bargaining
agreements to which the city is a party, and all other binding legislative
actions governing paid leave adopted by the City Council, as the same may be
amended from time to time. However, in no event shall the city, as an employer,
provide less than one day of paid leave per year to any city employee.
(Ord. 23-30, passed 12-12-23)
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES AGENCY
Section
   
34.01   Policy and procedures
   
34.02   Limitations
   
34.03   Definitions
   
34.04   Emergency Response Services Agency
   
34.05   Emergency services and disaster powers of the Mayor
   
34.06   Financing
   
34.07   Local disaster emergencies
   
34.08   Testing of civil defense and disaster warning devices
   
34.09   Mutual aid arrangements between political subdivisions
   
34.10   Communications
   
34.11   Immunity
   
34.12   Professions, trades and occupations
   
34.13   Appropriations and levy of tax for Agency and its operations
   
34.14   Authority to accept services, gifts, grants or loans
   
34.15   Orders, rules and regulations
   
34.16   Utilization of existing agency, facilities and personnel
   
34.17   No private liability
   
34.18   Compensation
   
34.19   Emergency termination or reduction of electrical service
   
34.20   Reimbursement for ERS volunteers
   
34.21   National Incident Management System (NIMS)
 
   
34.99   Penalty
§ 34.01 POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters resulting
from an explosion or from fire, flood, earthquake or other natural or man-made
causes, and in order to ensure that this municipality will be prepared to and
will adequately deal with any such disasters, preserve the lives and property
of the people of this municipality and protect the public peace, health and
safety in the event of such a disaster, it is found and declared to be
necessary:
      (1)   To create a Municipal Emergency Response Services Agency;
      (2)   To confer upon the Mayor the extraordinary power and authority set
forth under ILCS Ch.65, Act 5, § 11-1-6;
      (3)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities and
political subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of emergency response
services.
   (B)   Whenever the Mayor determines after an investigation that a dangerous
situation or a potentially dangerous situation exists which could cause death
to individuals or serious injury to property or the health and welfare of the
public, the Mayor may declare that a state of emergency exists. The
extraordinary powers may not be exercised until an ordinance shall have been
adopted which shall establish standards for the determination by the Mayor of
when the state of emergency exists and shall provide that the Mayor may not
exercise such extraordinary power and authority except after signing under oath
a statement finding that such standards have been met, setting forth facts to
substantiate such findings, describing the nature of the emergency and
declaring that a state of emergency exists. This statement shall be filed with
the Clerk of the municipality as practical. A state of emergency shall expire
not later than the adjournment of the first meeting of the corporate
authorities after the state of emergency is declared. A subsequent state of
emergency may be declared if necessary.
   (C)   It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the
policy of the municipality that all emergency management programs of this
municipality be coordinated to the maximum extent with the comparable functions
of the federal, state and county governments, including their various
departments and agencies of other municipalities and localities and private
agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use
may be made of the nation’s manpower, resources and facilities for dealing with
any disaster that may occur.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.02 LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
   (A)   Interfere with the course or conduct of a private labor dispute,
except that actions otherwise authorized by this chapter or other laws may be
taken when necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to
public health or safety;
   (B)   Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but
any communications facility or organization (including, but not limited to
radio and television stations, wire services and newspaper) may be requested to
transmit or print public services messages furnishing information or
instructions in connection with a disaster;
   (C)   Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces, fire
fighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States or of any
personnel thereof when on active duty; but state and local emergency operations
plans shall place reliance upon the forces available for performance of
functions related to disaster emergencies;
   (D)   Limit, modify or abridge the authority of the Mayor and the City
Council to exercise any other powers vested in them under the constitution,
statutes or common law of this state, independent of or in conjunction with any
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COORDINATOR. The staff assistant to the Mayor with the duty of carrying out
the requirements of this chapter.
   DISASTER. An occurrence or threat of damage, injury or loss of life or
property resulting from any natural or man-made cause, including but not
limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous materials spill or
other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage,
epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods of severe and inclement
weather, drought, infestation, explosion, critical shortages of essential fuels
and energy, riot or hostile military or paramilitary action. DISASTER includes,
but is not limited to, all occurrences and threats thereof which are
contemplated by the concept of emergency services and disaster operations.
   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN. The written plan of the city describing the
organization, mission and functions of the government and supporting services
for responding to and recovery from disasters.
   DISASTER OPERATIONS. The functions created in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter to be performed by the city in cooperation with other political
subdivisions to alleviate the effects of disaster and functions created in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter to be performed solely by the
city.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The efforts of this city to develop, plan, analyze,
conduct, implement and maintain programs for disaster mitigation. The
preparation for and the carrying out of such functions, other than functions
for which military forces are primarily responsible, as may be necessary or
proper to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury and damage resulting
from disasters caused by fire, flood, earthquake or other man-made or natural
causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services,
police services, emergency aviation services, medical and health services,
rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, chemical
and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas,
emergency assigned functions, of plant protection, temporary restoration of
public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection,
together with all other activities necessary or incidental to protecting life
and property.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Any county, city, village or incorporated town or
township, if the township is in a county having a population of more than
2,000,000.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.04 EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES AGENCY.
   (A)   There is created an Emergency Response Services Agency and a
Coordinator of the Emergency Management Agency, herein called the Coordinator,
who shall be the head thereof. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council. He or she shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
   (B)   The Emergency Response Services Agency shall obtain, with Council
approval, technical, clerical, stenographic and other administrative personnel
may make expenditures within their appropriation therefor as may be necessary
to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
   (C)   The Coordinator, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor,
shall be the executive head of the Emergency Response Services Agency and shall
be responsible under the direction of the Mayor for carrying out the program
for emergency services and disaster operations of this city and other
operations as delegated to the Agency by the Mayor or City Council. He or she
shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency services and
disaster operations within this city and shall maintain liaison and cooperate
with the Civil Defense and Emergency Management Agencies and Organization of
Ford County, other municipality and of the federal and state government. In the
event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve by the
Coordinator, the Mayor or any persons designated by him or her shall be and act
as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   The Emergency Response Services Agency shall take an integral part in
the development and revision of the local emergency operations plan.
   (E)   In the development of the emergency operations plan, the Emergency
Response Services Agency shall interrelate with business, labor, industry,
agriculture, civic and volunteer organizations and community leaders.
   (F)   The Emergency Response Services Agency shall:
      (1)   Determine the requirements of the city for food, clothing and other
necessities in event of an emergency;
      (2)   Develop an emergency operations plan and coordinate same with the
Ford County Emergency Management Agency;
      (3)   Biannually review and revise the local emergency operations plan;
      (4)   Establish a register of persons with types of training and skills
in emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery;
      (5)   Establish a register of government and private response resources
available for use in a disaster;
      (6)   Prepare, for issuance by the Mayor, ordinances, proclamations and
regulations as necessary or appropriate in coping with disasters;
      (7)   Cooperate with the federal, state and county government and any
public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this chapter and
in implementing programs for disaster prevention, preparation, response and
recovery;
      (8)   Initiate and coordinate planning for:
         (a)   The establishment of an emergency operations center;
         (b)   The implementation of a 911 system;
      (9)   Coordinate, prepare, operate and execute all actions which must be
taken to combat the effects of natural or man-made disasters for the purpose of
protecting the lives and property of the people and alleviating suffering and
damage caused by flood, fire, drought, tornado, earthquake, storms, explosions,
or any other catastrophe, natural or mad-made;
      (10)   Operate within the boundaries of the city and to operate outside
the boundaries of the city if the Agency has entered into mutual aid agreements
or when there is cause for concern for the life and safety of an individual;
      (11)   Aid and assist the Police Department in traffic control when
requested by the Police Department;
      (12)   Aid and assist the Paxton Fire Protection District when requested
by the Paxton Fire Protection District;
      (13)   Have the assistance of all personnel, equipment, supplies,
facilities and resources of other departments of the city when requested by the
Coordinator in order to carry out the functions created in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter;
      (14)   Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the
implementation of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.05 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER POWERS OF THE MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall have the general direction and control of the
Emergency Response Services Agency and shall be responsible for carrying out
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   In performing his or her duties under this chapter, the Mayor is
authorized to cooperate with county, state, and federal governments and with
other municipalities and political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to
emergency management and disaster operations defined in this chapter.
   (C)   In performing his or her duties under this chapter, the Mayor is
further authorized:
      (1)   To make, amend and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules and
regulations of the local disaster plan to carry out the provisions of this
chapter within the limits of the authority conferred upon him or her;
      (2)   To cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan and program for the
emergency management of this city which plan and program shall be integrated
into and coordinated with disaster plans of the Ford County, state, and federal
governments and of other political subdivisions and which plan and program may
include:
         (a)   Prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by
disaster;
         (b)   Prompt and effective response to disaster;
         (c)   Emergency relief;
         (d)   Identification of areas particularly vulnerable to disasters;
         (e)   Recommendations for zoning, building and other land use
controls, safety measures for securing permanent structures and other
preventive and preparedness measures designed to eliminate or reduce disasters
or their impact;
         (f)   Assistance to local officials in designing local emergency
action plans;
         (g)   Authorization and procedures for the erection or other
construction of temporary works designed to protect against or mitigate danger,
damage or loss from flood, conflagration or other disaster;
         (h)   Organization of municipal manpower and chains of command;
         (i)   Coordination of local emergency management activities;
         (j)   Other necessary matters.
      (3)   In accordance with such plan and program for the emergency
management of this city, and out of funds appropriated for such purpose, to
procure and preposition supplies, medicines, materials and equipment to
institute training programs and public information programs and to take all
other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of
emergency services and disaster organizations in advance of actual disaster to
insure the furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces for disaster
operations;
      (4)   Out of funds appropriate for such purposes to make such studies and
surveys of the industries, resources and facilities in this city as may be
necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the city of the emergency management
phases of preparedness, response and recovery and to plan for the most
efficient emergency use thereof;
      (5)   The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a municipal building
or elsewhere for the Emergency Response Services Agency as its office.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.06 FINANCING.
   (A)   It is the intent of the City Council and declared to be the policy of
the municipality that every effort shall be made to provide funds for the
Emergency Response Services Agency.
   (B)   It is the City Council's intent that the first recourse shall be to
funds regularly appropriated to the Agency. If the Mayor finds that the demands
placed upon these funds in coping with a particular disaster are unreasonably
great, and the Governor has proclaimed the municipality a disaster, he or she
may make application for funds from the State Disaster Relief Fund. If moneys
available from the fund are insufficient, and if the Mayor finds that other
sources of money to cope with the disaster are not available or are
insufficient, he or she shall issue a call for an immediate session of the City
Council for the purpose of enacting ordinances as the Council may deem
necessary to transfer and expend moneys appropriated for other purposes or
borrow moneys from the United State Government or other public or private
sources. If less than a quorum of the members of the Council is capable of
convening in session to enact such ordinances for the transfer, expenditure or
load of such moneys, the Mayor is authorized to carry out those decisions until
such time as a quorum of the Council can convene.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the
Mayor's authority to apply for, administer and expend grants, gifts, or
payments in aid of disaster prevention, preparedness, response or recovery.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.07 LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or City
Council. If declared by the Mayor, it shall not be continued for a period in
excess of seven days, except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any
order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster
emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed
promptly with the City Clerk.
   (B)   The effects of a declaration of a local disaster emergency is to
activate the response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable and local
emergency operations plan and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance
thereunder.
   (C)   during a local disaster emergency, the Mayor may suspend the
provisions of any municipal ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct of
municipal business or the orders, rules and regulations of any municipal
agency, if strict compliance with the provisions of any ordinance, rule or
regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping
with the emergency, as authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency
Act, ILCS Ch.20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq., provided that, if the City Council
meets at such time, he or she shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.08 TESTING OF CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER WARNING DEVICES.
   The testing of disaster warning devices, including outdoor warning sirens,
shall be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at 10:00 in the morning.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.09 MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The Coordinator of the Emergency Response Services Agency may, in
collaboration with other public agencies within his or her immediate vicinity,
develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements with other political
subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies politic within this state for
reciprocal response and recovery in case a situation is too great to be dealt
with unassisted. The mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless and
until approved by thereto, in the manner provided by law. In the event of
disaster as described in §
34.03, it shall be the duty each local aid department for emergency services
and disaster operations to render assistance in accordance with the provisions
of such mutual aid arrangements.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.10 COMMUNICATIONS.
   The Emergency Response Services Agency shall ascertain what means exist for
rapid and efficient communications in times of emergencies. The Agency shall
consider the desirability of supplementing these communications, resources or
of integrating them into a comprehensive system network. In studying the
character and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the Agency shall
evaluate the possibility of multi-purpose use thereof for general municipal and
governmental purpose. The Agency shall make recommendations to the Mayor as
appropriate.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.11 IMMUNITY.
   Neither the city, the Agency nor any member thereof nor any person acting at
their direction engaged in any emergency services and disaster operations or
disaster activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this
chapter or any rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, is
liable for the death of or any injury to person or damage to property as a
result of such activity. This section does not, however, affect the right of
any person to receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled
under this act, under the Worker's Compensation Act or the Worker's Occupations
Diseases Act or under any pension law, and this section does not affect the
right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act
of Congress.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.12 PROFESSIONS, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS.
   If such disaster as is described in §
34.03 occurs in this city and the services of persons who are competent to
practice any profession, trade or occupation are required in this city to cope
with the disaster situation and it appears that the number of persons licensed
or registered in this city to practice such profession, trade or occupation may
be insufficient for such purpose, then any persons who are licensed elsewhere
to practice any such profession, trade or occupation may, if a member of
another political subdivision rendering aid in this city, or if otherwise
requested so to do by the Mayor or the coordinator of this city, during the
time the disaster condition continues, practice such profession, trade or
occupation in this city without being licensed or registered in this city.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.13 APPROPRIATIONS AND LEVY OF TAX FOR AGENCY AND ITS OPERATIONS.
   The City Council may make appropriations for the Emergency Response Services
Agency in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for the ordinary
expenses of such political subdivision. The Council may also levy for emergency
services and disaster operations a tax as provided in the statutes of the State
of Illinois. The annual tax shall be in addition to and in excess of the amount
authorized to be levied for general corporate purposes.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.14 AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS.
   Whenever the federal or state government, or any agency or officer thereof,
or whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the municipality
services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift or grant for
purpose of emergency management, the city, acting through the Mayor or the
Council may authorize any officer of the municipality to receive such services,
equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the city.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.15 ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall file a copy of every rule, regulation or order and any
amendment thereof made by him or her pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
in the office of the City Clerk. No such rule, regulation or order, or any
amendment thereof, shall be effective until ten days after such filing;
provided, however, that upon the declaration of such a disaster emergency by
the Mayor is described in §
34.07, the provision relating to the effective date of any rule, regulation,
order or amendment issued pursuant to this chapter and during the state of such
disaster emergency is abrogated, and the rule, regulation, order or amendment
shall become effective immediately upon being filed with the City Clerk,
accompanied by a certificate stating the reason for the emergency.
   (B)   The Emergency Response Services Agency established pursuant to this
chapter, and the Director thereof, shall execute and enforce such orders, rules
and regulations as may be made by the Governor under authority of the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency Act or made by the Ford County ESDA Coordinator.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.16 UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITIES AND PERSONNEL.
   In carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Mayor and the
Coordinator of the Emergency Response Services Agency are directed to utilize
the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments,
offices and agencies of the municipality to the maximum extent practicable, and
the officers and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are
directed, upon request, to cooperate with and extend such services and
facilities to the Coordinator and the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.17 NO PRIVATE LIABILITY.
   (A)   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants a license or privilege, or
otherwise permits the designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of
such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an
actual or impending disaster, or a mock or practice disaster response activity
together with his or her successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly
liable for negligently causing the death of, or injury to, any person on or
about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other
permission or for negligently causing loss of or damage to the property of such
person.
   (B)   Any private person, firm or corporation and employees and agents of
such person, firm or corporation in the performance of a contract with, and
under the direction of, the city under the provisions of this chapter shall not
be civilly liable for causing the death of, or injury to, any person or damage
to any property except in the event of willful misconduct.
   (C)   Any private person, firm or corporation and any employee or agency of
such person, firm or corporation who renders assistance or advice at the
request of the city shall not be civilly liable for causing the death of, or
injury to, any person or damage to any property except in the event of willful
misconduct. The immunities provided for shall not apply to any private person,
firm or corporation or to any employee or agent of such person, firm or
corporation whose act or omission caused in whole or part such actual or
impending disaster and who would otherwise be liable therefore.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.18 COMPENSATION.
   The City Council, by its annual appropriations ordinance, may provide for
the payment of the salary of the Coordinator and such other office staff and
personnel as may be expressly provided for in this chapter. Nothing herein
contained shall prohibit any member of the Agency from receiving compensation
from the State of Illinois Emergency Management Agency under any provisions of
that Agency.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.19 EMERGENCY TERMINATION OR REDUCTION OF ELECTRICAL SERVICE.
   When in the judgement of the Mayor or Council, as provided in §
34.07(A), a local disaster emergency requires the termination or reduction of
electrical service, the Mayor or Council shall forthwith declare in writing the
existence of the emergency condition and order the termination or reduction.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.20 REIMBURSEMENT FOR ERS VOLUNTEERS.
   (A)   The Coordinator of Emergency Response Services Department shall
maintain a record of the amount of time each volunteer uses their own motor
vehicle while performing services for the Emergency Response Services
Department, which time shall be maintained in 15-minute increments.
   (B)   For each one-hour use of a personal motor vehicle a volunteer shall be
entitled to receive one gallon of fuel for the motor vehicle.
   (C)   Upon obtaining ten hours of motor vehicle use or at the end of the
fiscal year, whichever occurs first, a volunteer shall be entitled to receive
the fuel for their motor vehicle from fuel belonging to the city. Fuel shall be
dispensed only with the direct supervision and approval of the Coordinator of
the Emergency Response Services Department.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.21 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS).
   The City Council hereby establishes the National Incident Management System
(NIMS) as the standard for incident management.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation convicted of violating this
chapter or any order thereunder shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
$500.
(Ord. 20-21, passed 8-11-20)
CHAPTER 35: CITY POLICIES
Section
   
35.01   Investment policy
   
35.02   NSF charges
   
35.03   Signatories for banking purposes
   
35.04   Personal use of city motor vehicles policy
   
35.05   Compliance with the Illinois Freedom of Information Act
   
35.06   Prevailing wage adopted
   
35.07   Capitalization policy
§ 35.01 INVESTMENT POLICY.
   (A)   Policy. It is the policy of the city to invest public funds in a
manner which will provide the highest investment return with the maximum
security while meeting the daily cash flow demands of the city and conforming
to all state and local statutes governing the investment of public funds.
   (B)   Scope. This policy includes all funds governed by the City Council.
   (C)   Prudence.
      (1)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital, as well as the probable income to be derived.
      (2)   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall
be the prudent person standard and shall be applied in the context of managing
an overall portfolio.
   (D)   Objective.
      (1)   The primary objective, in order of priority, shall be:
         (a)   Legality - conformance with federal, state and other legal
requirements;
         (b)   Safety - preservation of capital and protection of investment
principal;
         (c)   Liquidity - maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet
operating requirements;
         (d)   Yield - attainment of market rates of return;
      (2)   The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its
effectiveness in meeting the city needs for safety, liquidity, rate of return,
diversification and its general performance.
   (E)   Delegation of authority. Management and administrative responsibility
for the investment program is delegated to the City Treasurer who, under the
delegation of the City Council, shall establish written procedures for the
operation of the investment program.
   (F)   Ethics and conflicts of interest. Officers and employees involved in
the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could
conflict with the proper execution and management of the investment program or
that could impair their ability to make impartial decisions.
   (G)   Authorized financial dealers and institutions. The City Treasurer will
maintain a list of financial institutions authorized to provide investment
services.
   (H)   Authorized and suitable investments.
      (1)   Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in
Illinois statutes regarding the investment of public funds.
      (2)   Investments shall be made that reflect the cash flow needs of the
fund type being invested.
   (I)   Collateralization. Funds on deposit (checking accounts, certificates
of deposit and the like) in excess of FDIC limits must be secured by some form
of collateral, witnessed by a written agreement and held at an independent
third party institution in the name of the city.
   (J)   Safekeeping and custody. All security transactions, including
collateral for repurchase agreements, entered into by the city shall be
conducted on a delivery-versus-payment (DVP) basis. Securities will be held by
an independent third party custodian designated by the City Treasurer and
evidenced by safekeeping receipts and a written custodial agreement.
   (K)   Diversification. The city shall diversify its investments to the best
of its ability based on the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of
those funds. Diversification can be by number of institutions invested in and
length of maturity.
   (L)   Maximum maturities.
      (1)   To the extent possible, the city shall attempt to match its
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a
specific cash flow, the city will not directly invest in securities maturing
more than two years from the date of purchase.
      (2)   Reserve funds may be invested in securities exceeding two years if
the maturity of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable
with the expected use of the funds.
   (M)   Internal control. The City Treasurer is responsible for establishing
and maintaining an internal control structure designed to insure that the
assets of the city are protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal
control structure shall be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these
objectives are met. The internal controls shall address the following points:
      (1)   Control of collusion;
      (2)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting;
      (3)   Custodial safekeeping;
      (4)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and
wire transfers.
   (N)   Performance standards. This investment portfolio will be managed in
accordance with the parameters specified within this policy. The portfolio
should be invested in interest bearing accounts at institutions approved in the
Investment Policy.
   (O)   Reporting. The City Treasurer shall prepare an Investment Report at
least monthly. The report should be provided to the City Council and available
on request. The report should be in a format suitable for review by the general
public. An annual report should also be provided to the City Council.
   (P)   Marking to market. A statement of the market value of the portfolio
shall be issued to the City Council quarterly.
   (Q)   Investment Policy adoption. The Investment Policy attached to the
ordinance set forth in this section and by this reference made a part hereof,
is adopted by the City Council. The Policy shall be reviewed on an annual basis
by the City Treasurer and any modifications made thereto must be approved by
the City Council.
(Ord. 99-32, passed 11-8-99)
§ 35.02 NSF CHARGES.
   (A)   Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation who issues a
check or other draft to the city that is not honored upon presentment because
the drawer does not have an account with the drawee, because the drawer does
not have sufficient funds in his or her account or because the drawer does not
have sufficient credit with the drawee, shall be liable to the city in the
amount of $25, and for all costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney
fees, incurred by the city in connection with the collection of the amount for
which the check or other draft was written and shall be liable for interest
upon the amount of the check or other draft at the rate provided in subsection
(1) of section 4 of the Interest Act of the State of Illinois (ILCS Ch. 815,
Act 205, § 4). Costs and expenses shall include reasonable costs and expenses
incurred in the nonlitigated collection of the check or other draft.
   (B)   Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation that issues
a second check or other draft to the city that is dishonored within one year of
the first dishonored check or draft shall be liable for all fines, costs and
expenses as set forth above and shall not be allowed to issue a check or other
draft to the city in the future.
(Ord. 94-11, passed 3-14-94; Am. Ord. 13-35, passed 12-9-13)
§ 35.03 SIGNATORIES FOR BANKING PURPOSES.
   (A)   Checks, drafts, or other withdrawal orders issued against the funds of
the city or deposit with said banks shall be signed by two individuals, as
hereafter provided.
   (B)   One signature on said checks, drafts, or other withdrawal order shall
be either the signature of the Mayor of the city or the signature of the Mayor
Pro Tem of the city.
   (C)   One signature on said checks, drafts, or other withdrawal order shall
be either the signature of the City Treasurer or the signature of the Utility
Billing Clerk.
   (D)   All resolutions, or parts of resolutions and amendments to resolutions
in conflict with this section are hereby repealed.
   (E)   The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to deliver a
certified copy of this section to the Farmers-Merchants National Bank and the
First National Bank.
(Res. 11-19, passed 7-11-11; Am. Ord. 12-39, passed 8-13-12)
§ 35.04 PERSONAL USE OF CITY MOTOR VEHICLES POLICY.
   (A)   Motor vehicles owned or leased by the city cannot be used for personal
use of an employee of the city except for commuting to or from work.
   (B)   Any employee of the city who commutes from work in a motor vehicle
owned or leased by the city, must commute to work in that motor vehicle the
next work day or deliver the motor vehicle to the city by the next work day in
order to provide the use of that motor vehicle to the city during the next work
day.
   (C)   Any employee of the city who shall use a motor vehicle owned or leased
by the city for personal use other than commuting to or from work shall be
subject to disciplinary action by the city and may be required to reimburse the
city for all costs incurred (including costs incurred by and to the Internal
Revenue Service) as a result of the personal use of the motor vehicle.
   (D)   This section shall not be applicable to any motor vehicle that is
exempted from both the recordkeeping and taxation requirements of the Internal
Revenue Service.
(Res. 86-1, passed 1-13-86)
§ 35.05 COMPLIANCE WITH THE ILLINOIS FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT.
   (A)   The Comptroller is designated as the person to whom all initial
requests for access to the records of the city are to be referred. The requests
are to be made at the offices of the city at City Hall, 145 South Market
Street, Paxton, Illinois, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday
through Friday. In the event that the Comptroller is not available during the
times described above, the Utility Billing Clerk is designated as the person to
whom such initial requests are to be made.
   (B)   Any records which are the subject of a request under the Freedom of
Information Act shall be retrieved from such place as they are stored by the
Comptroller or by an employee of the city acting under the direction of the
Comptroller. In no event shall records be retrieved by the party requesting
them or by any person who is not employed by the city.
   (C)   If copies of records are requested, the fees for such copies, whether
certified or not, shall be as determined from time to time by the Comptroller.
The Comptroller shall maintain a written schedule of current fees in the
Comptroller’s office. The fees so charged shall reflect the actual cost of
copying the records and the cost of certifying copies, if certification is
requested.
   (D)   In the event that a request to inspect city records is denied by the
Comptroller, the denial may be appealed to the Mayor. Such an appeal must be
made within 14 days after the requesting party receives the written notice
denying the request; or, in the event that the denial is not by letter, the
appeal must be made 14 days after the request is effectively denied. In the
absence of the Mayor, appeals from denials of requests for access shall be made
to the temporary Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem in the times set forth above.
   (E)   The Comptroller shall prepare:
      (1)   A City Information Directory;
      (2)   A block diagram of the functional subdivisions of the city;
      (3)   A City Records Directory; and
      (4)   A Records Catalogue, all of which shall be substantially in the
same form as the documents attached to the ordinance set forth in this section
and made a part hereof.
(Ord. 84-29, passed 10-8-84; Am. Ord. 12-39, passed 8-13-12)
§ 35.06 PREVAILING WAGE ADOPTED.
   (A)   Pursuant to Illinois law, the Prevailing Wage Act, ILCS Ch. 820, Act
130, all contractors engaged in providing services to the city and/or any
employers employed in any public works by state, county, city or any public
body or any public subdivision within the jurisdiction of the city shall pay
its employees the prevailing rate of wages consistent with the Prevailing Wage
Act and in such rates of pay as are established under Exhibit A attached to
Ord. 18-14 and by reference incorporated herein. The rates and pay set forth in
Exhibit A attached to Ord. 18-14 are hereby ascertained and determined to be
the prevailing rate of hourly wages for the within jurisdiction within the
meaning of the Prevailing Wage Act.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of this city, to the extent required by the aforesaid
Act.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by
any interested party in the main office of this city this determination of such
prevailing rate of wage.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any
employer, and to any association of employees who have filed their names and
addresses, requesting copies of any determination stating the particular rates
and the particular class of workers whose wages will be affected by such rates.
   (E)   Any agreement to provide an amount of $25,000 or greater of tax
increment funds or other public funds entered into by the city with a
redeveloper for the purpose of implementing a redevelopment plan or project
under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 74.4-1 et seq. shall include a provision, unless
otherwise approved by a majority vote of the City Council, requiring all
contracts for work to be performed within the redevelopment project area and
which is funded by public funds to comply with the Illinois Prevailing Wage
Law. Said provision shall read substantially as follows:
   “The redeveloper expressly agrees that any construction or rehabilitation
work performed within the Redevelopment area which is funded by tax increment
funds or other public funds shall be performed at a rate of employee pay
(whether the work is contracted or subcontracted to third parties) equal to and
consistent with the rates established under the Illinois prevailing wage law.
All contracts issued for such work shall expressly contain the requirements of
this provision.”
(Ord. 02-18, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 04-18, passed 6-14-04; Am. Ord. 13-27,
passed 5-13-13; Am. Ord. 18-14, passed 7-2-18)
§ 35.07 CAPITALIZATION POLICY.
   (A)   Capital assets purchased for use in governmental activities shall be
recorded as expenses in governmental funds at the time of purchase.
   (B)   Enterprise funds assets will be capitalized based on this policy.
   (C)   Governmental and enterprise capital assets shall be recorded in the
government-wide financial statements, offset by accumulated depreciation.
   (D)   Capital assets shall be valued at actual or estimated historical
costs, while donated capital assets shall be valued at their fair market value
on the date donated.
   (E)   Equipment valued at or above $10,000, buildings and improvements
valued at or above $20,000, land improvements and infrastructure valued at or
above $20,000, land of any value, and assets that appreciate in value valued at
or above $10,000 shall be capitalized.
   (F)   Depreciation shall be calculated on assets other than land using the
following estimated useful lives:
      (1)   Equipment:
         (a)   Furniture: 7 years;
         (b)   Major appliances: 7 years;
         (c)   Computers, office equipment: 5 years;
         (d)   Other equipment: 5 years;
         (e)   Vehicles: 5 years;
         (f)   Park and recreation features: 12 years; and
         (g)   Playground equipment: 12 years.
      (2)   Buildings:
         (a)   New construction: 40 years; and
         (b)   Improvements: 15 years.
      (3)   Land improvements: 15 years.
      (4)   Infrastructure:
         (a)   Roads, paved surfaces: 15 years; and
         (b)   Bridges: 50 years.
   (G)   Infrastructure will be accounted for on a prospective basis beginning
May 1, 2004.
   (H)   A group purchase of assets shall be treated under this policy at the
total cost.
   (I)   Carpeting will be expensed as installed or replaced.
   (J)   Roofing costs will be depreciated depending on whether the useful life
of the roof is extended by the roofing cost.
   (K)   Assets that appreciate in value, such as collectibles or art, will not
be depreciated.
   (L)   The straight line method shall be used over the estimated useful life
of assets.
   (M)   The applicable convention shall be the half-year convention.
(Ord. 05-33, passed 9-12-05)
CHAPTER 36: TAXATION AND FINANCE
Section
Rights and Responsibilities Related to Locally Imposed and Administered Taxes
   
36.01   Title
   
36.02   Scope
   
36.03   Definitions
   
36.04   Notices
   
36.05   Late payment
   
36.06   Payment
   
36.07   Certain credits and refunds
   
36.08   Audit procedure
   
36.09   Appeal
   
36.10   Hearing
   
36.11   Interest and penalties
   
36.12   Abatement
   
36.13   Installment contracts
   
36.14   Statute of limitations
   
36.15   Voluntary disclosure
   
36.16   Publication of tax ordinances
   
36.17   Review procedure
   
36.18   Application
City Taxes
   
36.30   Library maintenance tax
   
36.31   City automobile renting occupation tax
   
36.32   Automobile renting use tax
   
36.33   City use tax
   
36.34   Police protection tax
   
36.35   City service occupation tax
   
36.36   Hotel and motel tax
   
36.37   Municipal cannabis retailers’ occupation tax
RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES RELATED TO LOCALLY IMPOSED
AND ADMINISTERED TAXES
§ 36.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Locally Imposed
and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.02 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city’s procedures in
connection with all of the city’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act
45, §§ 1 et seq.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The city’s Mayor and City Council.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the city
that is collected or administered by the city not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The City’s Treasurer is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator’s stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
Act.
   CITY. The City of Paxton, Illinois.
   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
city.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.04 NOTICES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given,
the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days prior
to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of
the local tax administrator.
   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as follows:
      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the person’s last known address;
      (2)   Personal service or delivery.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.05 LATE PAYMENT.
   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
city pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:
   (A)   Physically received by the city on or before the due date; or
   (B)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the city, with adequate postage prepaid.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.06 PAYMENT.
   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order:
   (A)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;
   (B)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and
   (C)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.07 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the city.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any moneys to the city.
      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (3)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the
date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.08 AUDIT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered
tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The tax;
      (2)   The time period of the audit; and
      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (C)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
   (D)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than 7 days nor more than 30
days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax
administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer is
unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (E)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
   (F)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer fails to
provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local
tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax
administrator’s determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer’s tax
liability.
   (G)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
city's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (H)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.09 APPEAL.
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The reason for the assessment;
      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      (4)   The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall
given written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final
bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.10 HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under § 36.09, the local tax administrator
shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
   (C)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.11 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   General. In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due
and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid
within the time frame otherwise indicated.
   (B)   Interest. The city provides for the amount of interest to be assessed
on a late payment, underpayment or nonpayment of the tax to be 12% per annum,
based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
   (C)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return
shall be imposed and a late payment penalty of 50% of the tax due shall be
imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period
for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty
shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling
ordinance.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.12 ABATEMENT.
   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.13 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.14 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
   (B)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (C)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the city,
the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall
be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for the
applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was filed.
   (D)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return
was filed by the taxpayer.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.15 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the filing
of the application but not more than four years before the date of filing the
application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not
be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period before the
date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined
and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid
tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be
paid within 90 days after the final determination and the exhaustion of all
appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.16 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk’s office.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.17 REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the
lien shall remain in full force and effect.
   (B)   If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator
shall:
      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the city’s expense;
      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
§ 36.18 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement
all of the city’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this subchapter shall be
controlling.
(Ord. 2000-37, passed 12-11-00)
CITY TAXES
§ 36.30 LIBRARY MAINTENANCE TAX.
   It is determined that it is appropriate, necessary and for the best interest
of the city than an additional tax not to exceed .02% of the value of all
taxable property in the city, as equalized or assessed by the Department of
Government Affairs, be levied for the maintenance, repairs and alterations of
library buildings and equipment as provided in ILCS Ch. 75, Act 3, § 3-1.
(Res. 96-17, passed 7-8-96)
§ 36.31 CITY AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting
automobiles in this city at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such
rentals made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 8-11-7.
   (B)   Every person engaged in such business in the city shall file all
reports as required by ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120 § 3 to the State Department of
Revenue.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax imposed on account of the renting of
automobiles during the preceding month.
(Ord. 82-3, passed 1-11-82)
§ 36.32 AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX ACT.
   (A)   A tax is imposed upon the privilege of using in this city an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled
or registered with an agency of this state’s government in this city at the
rate of 1% of the rental price of such automobile while this section is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-8.
   (B)   The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the
persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as
being in this city.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois
Department of Revenue.
(Ord. 82-2, passed 1-11-82)
§ 36.33 CITY USE TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6, upon the privilege of using in
the city any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside
Illinois at retail from a retailer and which is titled or registered with an
agency of the Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of 1% of the
selling price or such tangible property with selling price to have the meaning
as defined in ILCS Ch. 35, Act 105, the Use Tax Act.
   (B)   The tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue for
all municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.
(Ord. 74-23, passed 10-14-74)
§ 36.34 POLICE PROTECTION TAX.
   A tax is imposed for the purpose of police protection in the city at the
rate of .05% of the value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of
Revenue of all the taxable property therein for the first year in which this
tax is levied and at a rate of .075% of the value as equalized or assessed by
the Department of Revenue for all taxable property therein, in all succeeding
years, all in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code,
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-3.
(Ord. 71-18, passed 9-13-71)
§ 36.35 CITY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in this city in the business
of making sales of service at the rate of 1% of the cost price of all tangible
personal property transferred by the service persons either in the form of
tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a
sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Municipal
Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5.
   (B)   Every supplier or serviceperson required to account for the municipal
service occupation tax for the benefit of the city shall file all reports as
required by ILCS Ch. 35, Act 115, § 9 to the State Department of Revenue.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax imposed.
(Ord. 69-24, passed 8-11-69)
§ 36.36 HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Paxton, an Illinois municipal corporation.
      CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Paxton, Illinois.
      HOTEL (includes a MOTEL). Operator, occupancy, room or rooms, permanent
resident, rent or rental, department, and person are hereby defined and shall
have the meanings provided under ILCS Ch. 35, Act 145, § 2, as may be
subsequently amended.
      RETURN. Any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this
section.
   (B)   Imposed; reimbursement; duty of operator to pay.
      (1)   Tax imposed. There is hereby levied and imposed a tax of 5% of the
gross rental receipts from the renting, leasing or letting a hotel or motel
room within the city for each 24-hour period or any portion thereof for which a
daily room charge is made; provided, however, that a tax shall not be levied or
imposed on any person who shall be a permanent resident. A PERMANENT RESIDENT
is hereby defined to be a person who rents a hotel or motel room in the same
establishment for more than 30 consecutive days or to a person who works and
lives in the same hotel or motel.
      (2)   Reimbursement. Persons subject to the tax hereby imposed may
reimburse themselves for their tax liability for such tax by separately stating
such tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination and
in a single amount with the state tax imposed under The Hotel Operators'
Occupation Tax Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 145, §§ 1 et seq.
      (3)   Duty of operator to pay. The tax herein levied and imposed shall be
paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty
of the operator to pay the amount of the tax to the Clerk under procedures
prescribed by the Clerk or as otherwise provided in this section.
   (C)   Records to be kept. Every operator shall keep records of every
occupancy and all rent paid, charged or due thereon and of the tax payable
thereon in such form as may be required by regulation prescribed by the Clerk
or as otherwise provided in this article. Such records shall be available for
inspection and examination for any proper purpose at any reasonable time upon
demand by the Clerk or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city and
shall be preserved for a period of three years unless the clerk shall prescribe
a shorter period of time. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent,
hinder or interfere with the Clerk or the duly authorized deputy or
representative of the Clerk in the discharge of the duties of the Clerk.
   (D)   Returns.
      (1)   Every operator shall file monthly with the Clerk a return of
occupancy and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon on forms prescribed by
the Clerk and consistent with the returns required under ILCS Ch. 35, Act 145,
§ 2. The return shall be due on or before the last day of the calendar month
succeeding the end of the month filing period. A separate return shall be filed
for each place of business within the city regardless of ownership.
      (2)   The first taxing period for the purpose of this section shall
commence on July 1, 2016, and the tax return and payment for such period shall
be due on or before August 31, 2016. Thereafter reporting periods and tax
payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. At the
time of filing such tax returns, the operator shall pay the full amount of all
tax due hereunder.
      (3)   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the
rate of 1% per 30-day period or portion thereof from the date of delinquency
shall be added and collected.
   (E)   Collection. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax due
hereunder or any penalty provided for herein, the Clerk shall cause to be
brought in the name of the city an action to enforce payment of the tax,
together with the costs of such collection, including the city's reasonable
attorney's fees.
   (F)   Proceeds of taxes. All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the
tax hereunder, including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the city
and shall be credited to and deposited in a separate fund of the city entitled
"Tourism Fund." All such proceeds shall be separately accounted for by the
Clerk and by the City Treasurer.
   (G)   Use of funds. All taxes and penalties received by the city shall be
utilized by the city to promote tourism, special events, beautification and
other programs and projects as approved by the City Council.
   (H)   Certificate of registration. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this section for any person to engage in the business of renting leasing or
letting rooms in a hotel within the city without a certificate of registration
from the Clerk. Such registration shall be issued by the Clerk on forms
consistent with those registrations issued by the department under the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 35, Act 145, § 5.
   (I)   Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50, nor more than $500, said
fine to be in addition to any and all other penalties provided herein. A
separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon each day in which
such violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 15-33, passed 12-14-15)
§ 36.37 MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   Tax imposed; rate.
      (1)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the city at the rate of 3% of
the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that business.
      (2)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-22.
   (B)   Collection of tax by retailers.
      (1)   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailers
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (“Department”). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which change may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
      (2)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 19-O-16, passed 8-13-19)
CHAPTER 37: PURCHASING; SALE OF CITY PROPERTY
Section
Purchasing
   
37.01   Definitions
   
37.02   Property rights
   
37.03   Open market procedures
   
37.04   Emergency procurement
   
37.05   Parties authorized
Sale of City Property
   
37.15   Acquisition of certain vehicles
   
37.16   Determination of sale
   
37.17   Sale
   
37.18   Transfer of title
PURCHASING
§ 37.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION. Building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing any
public structure or building, or making improvements of any kind to public real
property. CONSTRUCTION does not include the routine operation, routine repair,
or routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property.
   CONSTRUCTION-RELATED SERVICES. Those services involving construction design,
layout, inspection, support, feasibility or location study, research,
development, planning, or other investigation study undertaken by a
construction agency concerning construction or potential construction.
   NEGOTIATION. The process of selecting a contractor other than by competitive
sealed bids, multi- step sealed bidding, or competitive sealed proposals,
whereby the city can establish any and all terms and conditions of a
procurement contract by discussion with one or more prospective contractors.
   PERSON. Any business, public or private corporation, partnership,
individual, union, committee, club, unincorporated association or other
organization or group of individuals, or other legal entity.
   SUPPLIES. All personal property, including but not limited to equipment,
materials, printing, and insurance, and the financing of those supplies.
(Ord. 09-25, passed 7-13-09)
§ 37.02 PROPERTY RIGHTS.
   No person shall have any right to a specific contract with the city unless
that person has a contract that has been signed by an officer or employee of
the city with appropriate signature authority. The city shall be under no
obligation to issue an award or execute a contract.
(Ord 09-25, passed 7-13-09)
§ 37.03 OPEN MARKET PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Open market procedure. All work and purchases of supplies, materials,
services and construction of less than the estimated value of $10,000 may be
made in the open market, by negotiation, without newspaper advertisement in
such a manner so as to ensure the best interests of the public; but whenever
practical or advantageous, the city shall obtain quotes from at least two
suppliers or vendors.
   (B)   Division of procurement. No contract shall be divided as to constitute
a purchase of less than the estimated value set forth in division (A) above.
(Ord. 09-25, passed 7-13-09)
§ 37.04 EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, in the case of an
apparent emergency which threatens the public health, welfare, or safety
requiring the immediate purchase of a supply, service or construction, the
Mayor shall have the power to authorize the procurement of the necessary items
in the open market without competition up to the amount of $20,000.
   (B)   In no event shall the contract price exceed commercially reasonable
prices.
   (C)   A full written report of the circumstances of all emergency purchases
over $10,000 shall be made by the Mayor to the City Council. The report shall
be received by the City Council at a regular meeting.
(Ord. 09-25, passed 7-13-09)
§ 37.05 PARTIES AUTHORIZED.
   The Mayor, Chief of Police, Superintendent of the Street Department and
Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department, and City Comptroller be, and
they hereby are, authorized to make purchases pursuant to the provisions of §
37.03.
(Ord. 09-25, passed 7-13-09)
SALE OF CITY PROPERTY
§ 37.15 ACQUISITION OF CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   From time to time the city has become, and will become, the owner of certain
motor vehicles as a result of seizure pursuant to the Statutes of the State of
Illinois or by order of court or by an asset forfeiture or in lieu of payment
of a fine or in lieu of payment of an administrative fee and, in the opinion of
the City Council, it is not necessary or useful to or for the best interest of
the city to retain title to a motor vehicle acquired as set forth in this
section.
(Ord. 10-13, passed 5-10-10)
§ 37.16 DETERMINATION OF SALE.
   Pursuant to Section 11-76-4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 11-76-4), the City Council finds that the motor vehicles described in §
37.15 are no longer necessary or useful to the city and the best interest of
the city will be served by their sale.
(Ord. 10-13, passed 5-10-10)
§ 37.17 SALE.
   Pursuant to Section 11-76-4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 11-76-4), the Chief of Police of the city be, and he or she is hereby,
authorized and directed to sell at public or private sale any motor vehicle
acquired pursuant to §
37.15 for such sum and in any manner as he or she may deem best.
(Ord. 10-13, passed 5-10-10)
§ 37.18 TRANSFER OF TITLE.
   The Chief of Police of the city be, and he or she is hereby, authorized and
directed to execute and deliver the certificate of title to any motor vehicle
sold pursuant to this subchapter to the purchaser of the motor vehicle.
(Ord. 10-13, passed 5-10-10)
CHAPTER 38: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
Section
   
38.01   Adoption of certain provisions of Illinois Municipal Code
   
38.02   Establishment of Code Hearing Department
   
38.03   Definitions
   
38.04   Requirements of hearing officers
   
38.05   Instituting code hearing proceedings pertaining to Building Code
violations
   
38.06   Hearing; evidence
   
38.07   Subpoenas; defaults
   
38.08   Defenses to Building Code violations
   
38.09   Continuances; representation at code hearings
   
38.10   Findings, decision, and order
   
38.11   Review under administrative review law
   
38.12   Judgement on findings, decision, and order
   
38.13   Findings and sanctions to run with the property for Building Code
violations
   
38.14   Rights of occupants of the property
 
   
38.99   Penalty
§ 38.01 ADOPTION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE.
   The City of Paxton (the "city") hereby adopts Article XI, Division 31.1 of
the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS Ch. 5, Act 1, § 31.1-1 et seq., as may be
amended from time to time and as allowed by said divisions. In the event of a
conflict between this chapter and Article XI, Division 31.1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, then Article XI, Division 31.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code
shall prevail.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Department within the city, the function
of which is to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in
the manner set out in the division and this chapter. This Department shall be
called the Code Hearing Department (the "Code Hearing Department" or the
"Department").
   (B)   The Department shall consist of one or more hearing officers, as that
term is defined in this chapter, and such other agents or employees assigned to
assist the hearing officer by the city.
   (C)   The establishment of the Code Hearing Department does not preclude the
city from using other methods to enforce the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING CODE. Any municipal ordinance, law, housing or building code or
zoning ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical,
fire prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are
applicable to structures in a municipality or any municipal ordinance that
requires, after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and
debris, the removal of inoperable motor vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances
from private property.
   BUILDING CODE VIOLATION. The existence of facts which, if the hearing
officer determines said facts to be true, demonstrate that the status of a
property within the city does not comply with applicable provisions of the
Building Code.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. A city employee or agent whose duties include the
inspection or examination of structures or property in the city to determine if
Building Code violations exist.
   CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT. As defined in §
38.02(A).
   COMPLAINT. A formal written accusation against a person or entity which
accuses said person of causing or allowing to be caused, a Building Code
violation.
   FINAL ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER. As defined in §
38.10.
   HEARING OFFICER. An agent of the city, other than a Building Inspector or
law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
      (1)   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a Building Code violation exists;
      (2)   Hear testimony and accept evidence from the Building Inspector, the
building owner and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a
Building Code violation;
      (3)   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing
and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      (4)   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating
whether a Building Code violation exists.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The legal or beneficial owner of a parcel of real property
located within the corporate boundaries of the city, and/or any or all
structures thereon.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.04 REQUIREMENTS OF HEARING OFFICERS.
   Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings, administrative
hearing officers shall have successfully completed a formal training program
which includes the following:
   (A)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings
which they will conduct;
   (B)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will
adjudicate;
   (C)   Observation of administrative hearings;
   (D)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and
issuing final orders;
   (E)   Every administrative hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to
practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three years; and
   (F)   Certification that requirements of divisions (A) through (E) above
have been met, issued by the corporation counsel and the Mayor.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.05 INSTITUTING CODE HEARING PROCEEDINGS PERTAINING TO BUILDING CODE
VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   When a Building Inspector finds a Building Code violation while
inspecting a property, the Building Inspector shall note the Building Code
violation on a violation notice and report form, indicating the name and
address of the property owner, a citation to the specific Building Code
provision or provisions alleged to have been violated, a description of the
circumstances present that constitute the alleged Building Code violation, the
date and time the Building Code violation was observed, the names of witnesses
to the Building Code violation, and the address of the property where the
Building Code violation is observed.
   (B)   The violation report form shall be forwarded by the Building Inspector
to the Code Hearing Department, where a docket number shall be affixed on all
copies of the report, and a hearing date noted in the blank spaces provided for
that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 nor more
than 40 days after the Building Code violation is reported by the Building
Inspector.
   (C)   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files
of the Code Hearing Department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one
copy of the report form shall be returned to the Building Inspector so that he
or she may prepare evidence of the Building Code violation for presentation at
the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be
served by first-class mail on the property owner, along with a summons
commanding the property owner to appear at the hearing. If the name of the
property owner cannot be ascertained or if service on the property owner cannot
be made by mail, service may be made on the property owner by posting or
nailing a copy of the violation report form on the front door of the property
where the Building Code violation is found, not less than 20 days before the
hearing is scheduled.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.06 HEARING; EVIDENCE.
   At the hearing, the hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony
and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or non-existence of a
Building Code violation. The Illinois Rules of Evidence shall not be strictly
applied to any hearing authorized under this chapter.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.07 SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS.
   (A)   At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to
hear the case may, at the request of the city, or the property owner, issue
subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing.
   (B)   If on the date set for hearing the property owner or his or her
attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the property in default
and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of a Building Code violation.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.08 DEFENSES TO BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a defense to a Building Code violation charged under this
chapter if the property owner, his or her attorney, or any other agent or
representative proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction that:
   (A)   The Building Code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact
exist, or at the time of the hearing the Building Code violation has been
remedied or removed;
   (B)   The Building Code violation has been caused by the current occupants
of the property and that, in spite of reasonable attempts by the property owner
to maintain the dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants
continue to cause the Building Code violations; or
   (C)   An occupant or resident of the property has refused entry to the
property owner or his or her agent to all or a part of the property for the
purpose of correcting the Building Code violation.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.09 CONTINUANCES; REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS.
   No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings
under this chapter except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary
to protect the rights of the property owner. Lack of preparation shall never be
grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer
under this chapter shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the city may be
presented by an attorney designated by the city or by any other employee,
except that the case for the city shall not be presented by an employee or
agent of the Code Hearing Department. The case for the property owner may be
presented by the property owner, his or her attorney, or any other agent or
representative.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.10 FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER.
   (A)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination (the "final administrative decision") on the basis of the
evidence presented at the hearing, regarding whether or not a Building Code
violation exists. The final administrative decision shall be in writing and
shall be designated as findings, decision, and order. The final administrative
decision shall include the hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision
whether or not a Building Code violation exists based upon the findings of
fact, and an order, ordering the property owner to correct the Building Code
violation or dismissing the case, in the event a Building Code violation is not
proved. If a Building Code violation is proved, the order may also impose the
sanctions that are provided in this code for the Building Code violation
proved.
   (B)   A copy of the final administrative decision shall be served on the
parties within five days after they are issued. The final administrative
decision shall be served in the manner provided in §
38.05.
   (C)   Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall
be in the same manner as set forth in this code.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.11 REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW.
   The final administrative decision of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the Circuit Court of Ford County, Illinois. The provisions of the
Administrative Review Law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply
to and govern every action for the judicial review of the final administrative
decision of a hearing officer under this chapter.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.12 JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER.
   (A)   Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review
Law shall be a debt due and owing the city and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the
Building Code violation, the city may commence a proceeding in the Circuit
Court of Ford County, Illinois, for purpose of obtaining a judgment on the
final administrative decision. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city
from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a person in
such a proceeding.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.13 FINDINGS AND SANCTIONS TO RUN WITH THE PROPERTY FOR BUILDING CODE
VIOLATIONS.
   The order to correct a Building Code violation and the sanctions imposed by
the city as the result of a finding of a Building Code violation under this
chapter shall attach to the property as well as to the property owner, so that
a finding of a Building Code violation against one property owner cannot be
avoided by conveying or transferring the property to a different owner. Any
subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings,
decision and order of a hearing officer under this chapter.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.14 RIGHTS OF OCCUPANTS OF THE PROPERTY.
   The hearing officer shall not permit any action for eviction, abatement of a
nuisance, or other similar proceeding to be threatened or instituted against an
occupant of a property solely because such occupant agrees to testify or
testifies at a hearing.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
§ 38.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its
agencies, including without limitation, the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, to care for vacant residential real estate, shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct Building Code violations.
   (B)   A person who intentionally violates this section is guilty of a
business offense and shall be fined not less than $501 and not more than $1,000
per occurrence.
(Ord. 23-10, passed 3-14-23)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
      
52.   WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT
      
53.   GROUNDWATER RESTRICTIONS
      
54.   HIGHWAY AUTHORITY AGREEMENTS
      
55.   ELECTRIC AGGREGATION PLAN
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Recycling
   
50.03   Yard waste
   
50.04   Burning
Licensed Haulers
   
50.20   License required
   
50.21   License
   
50.22   Application
   
50.23   Fee; expiration
   
50.24   Construction of vehicles
   
50.25   Revocation
   
50.26   Additional services
   
50.27   Hours
   
50.28   Hazardous waste
   
50.29   Truck waste waters
   
50.30   Location of equipment
   
50.31   Removal of items from residential customers
   
50.32   License renewals
Regulations
   
50.45   Accumulation illegal
   
50.46   Removal required
   
50.47   Allowable storage
   
50.48   Uncovered garbage
   
50.49   Prevention of scattering
   
50.50   Deposits on streets
   
50.51   Unlawful transport
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPOST SITE. A site owned by the city and licensed to accept yard waste, as
defined by this section and landscape waste, as defined by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
   GARBAGE. All waste food and food products, all organic waste materials
resulting from the storage, transportation, processing, preparation, cooking or
consumption of food or food products, all horticultural waste and all other
similar organic materials. Leaves, lawn rakings and grass clippings, although
organic in nature, shall not be included in this definition of GARBAGE.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its
quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may
cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in
serious, irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise managed and which has
been identified by characteristics or listing as hazardous pursuant to Section
3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USC 6921), or
pursuant to regulations issued by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
or the Illinois Pollution Control Board.
   INDUSTRIAL REFUSE. Includes combustible building debris, wood or paper
cartons, wood scraps, sawdust, metal shavings and all other types of waste
resulting from manufacturing processes, except the materials or things that are
defined in garbage, undesirable refuse, refuse and special waste.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. This term means:
      (1)   Any unwaxed and uncoated corrugated cardboard and cardboard
packaging;
      (2)   Any glass bottles and jars. GLASS as used herein shall mean glass
bottles, jars and dishes made of clear, green and brown colored glass. Not
included are light bulbs, window glass and drinking glasses;
      (3)   Any aluminum containers and scrap in whatever form;
      (4)   Any newspapers, that is newsprint type paper received as an
ordinary newspaper, advertising circular or supplement. Magazines not printed
on newsprint type paper shall not be included;
      (5)   Any high density polyethylene (HDPE) plastic containers;
      (6)   Any polyethylene terphalate (PET) plastic containers;
      (7)   Any ferrous metal containers and ferrous metal scrap in whatever
form.
   REFUSE. All types of organic or inorganic rubbish and waste materials, such
as leaves, lawn rakings, grass clippings, paper, cardboard, tin cans, glass or
plastic bottles, ashes and all types of waste materials generated by an average
residential household. Excluded from this definition are those items described
in as garbage, industrial refuse, undesirable refuse and special waste.
   SPECIAL WASTE. Those materials that have been specified by the Illinois
Pollution Control Board or the Environmental Protection Agency as SPECIAL WASTE
and are required to be handled under special permits issued by them.
   UNDESIRABLE REFUSE. Includes, but shall not be limited to, broken concrete,
broken masonry, tree trunks and stumps, metal or plastic drums, inoperable
motor vehicles or parts thereof, tires, scrap metal, wire, household appliances
such as refrigerators, ranges, washers and dryers, household furniture and
furnishings and industrial machinery or equipment.
   YARD WASTE. Includes all leaves, grass, tree limbs, shrubs and all
accumulation of grass, leaves, chipped tree stumps, chipped tree limbs and
chipped or shredded shrubbery, which is also sometimes referred to as LANDSCAPE
WASTE.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
§ 50.02 RECYCLING.
   (A)   A resident of the city may chose to separate recyclable material from
the resident’s garbage and refuse and place the recyclable material in separate
containers at locations designated by the city. Recyclable material must be
prepared as follows:
      (1)   All food and beverage glass containers, whether clear, green or
brown, must be rinsed clean and have caps and lids removed. No window glass or
ceramics will be accepted;
      (2)   All food and beverage cans, whether aluminum or bi-metal, must be
rinsed clean and have labels removed. No aerosol cans, paint cans or scrap
metal will be accepted;
      (3)   All newspaper must be bundled and tied or placed in paper bags;
      (4)   All cardboard that is not white when torn will be acceptable. Such
cardboard must be bundled and tied or placed in brown paper bags;
      (5)   All acceptable plastic must be rinsed clean and free of caps and
lids. Which plastic is acceptable will be designated from time to time by the
city.
   (B)   Once placed at the collection site in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter, any recyclable materials shall become the property of the
city. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person not authorized by
the city to collect or pickup or cause to be collected or picked up any of such
recyclable materials.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit any material or item of any
kind or nature, except for recyclable material, to be deposited or left at any
location designated by the city as a location for the depositing of recyclable
material.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.03 YARD WASTE.
   (A)   Applicability of section. This section shall apply to all persons and
entities who, directly or through the services of the city or another third
party, dispose of or attempt to dispose of yard wastes at any city-owned
compost site and includes all persons, governmental operations and business,
commercial, retail and industrial enterprises however organized and of whatever
type.
   (B)   Prohibited yard waste disposal. No person shall:
      (1)   Mix or permit the mixing of yard waste with any other type of waste
for collection or place or permit the placing of yard waste out for garbage or
refuse collection;
      (2)   Deposit yard waste at any authorized yard waste or compost site
while the site is closed;
      (3)   Deposit yard waste in or upon any public street or grounds in the
city.
   (C)   Permitted yard waste disposal. It shall be lawful to:
      (1)   Deposit yard waste at any authorized city yard waste drop-off site
or any authorized compost site while such authorized site is open in accordance
with the rules and regulations approved by the City Council;
      (2)   Deposit yard waste at curb side to be collected by the city if such
property is eligible to be served by regular city yard waste collection in
accordance with the rules and regulations approved by the City Council;
      (3)   Compost yard waste on the lot where it originated in a manner not
creating a nuisance.
   (D)   Owner responsibility. Every owner of the real estate and tenant of the
real estate and manager of the real estate shall be responsible for maintaining
all property under his or her control in accordance with the requirements of
this section.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.04 BURNING.
   (A)   No person shall, at any time, burn any garbage, refuse, industrial
refuse, undesirable refuse, hazardous waste, special waste, yard waste or
recyclable materials other than the following: paper and cardboard which may be
burned in a device with a spark arrester sufficiently fine to prevent the
escape of ignited particles, dry leaves, dry grass clippings, dry untreated and
unpainted wood and wood scraps and charcoal or other fuels used for cooking.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire so close to any
building or other structure as to endanger such building, structure or on any
asphalt street or sidewalk pavement.
   (C)   Permitted burning shall be allowed only between the hours of sunrise
and sunset, unless the same is attended by a person 18 years old or older.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any solid waste
container any burning materials or materials sufficiently hot to create
combustion when the same come in contact with other solid waste.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92; Am. Ord. 01-34, passed 11-12-01)
Penalty, see § 50.99
LICENSED HAULERS
§ 50.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of collecting
and/or hauling garbage or industrial refuse or refuse or undesirable refuse
over and upon the streets of the city unless the person, firm or corporation
shall be licensed therefor by the city. No license shall be required in order
to collect and/or haul yard waste.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.21 LICENSE.
   No applicant shall be granted a license unless he or she shall have provided
himself or herself with the proper and necessary machinery and other appliances
for properly taking care of and disposing of the garbage or refuse in
conformity with this chapter and the health regulations of the state, the
County of Ford and the city. No license shall be granted to any applicant who
has been guilty of any wilful violation of any health or sanitary provision of
the city, the County of Ford or the State of Illinois or is in default on any
contract with the city, the County of Ford, State of Illinois or United States
Government. No license shall be issued to a person not of good moral character.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
§ 50.22 APPLICATION.
   (A)   All applications for license shall be made to the City Clerk on forms
provided by the city.
   (B)   The application shall include:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The trade or business name under which the applicant proposes to do
business;
      (3)   The address or location from which the applicant will conduct his
or her business and store his or her equipment;
      (4)   The specific area that the applicant intends to service;
      (5)   A statement as to whether the applicant will serve either
residential customers or commercial customers or both;
      (6)   The location at which the licensee will dispose of all garbage and
refuse collected;
      (7)   A certificate by the applicant that he or she will comply with the
laws, ordinances and orders of all governmental bodies in the operation of his
or her business, and that the applicant will not drop or store any garbage or
refuse in any place which would be in violation of any zoning ordinance, law,
code or other ordinances of any governmental body;
      (8)   Provide a bond in the amount of $5,000, with surety to be approved
by the City Council guaranteeing that the licensee will comply with all of the
terms and conditions of this chapter and all other city ordinances. The bond
shall not be cancellable without 30 days' prior written notice to the city;
      (9)   A certification of insurance from an insurance company licensed to
do business in the State of Illinois certifying that the licensee has the
following coverage:
 
Comprehensive General Liability
                                          $250,000 each occurrence; $250,000
Bodily injury                             aggregate
Property damage                           $50,000 each occurrence; $50,000
                                          aggregate
or
Combined single limit for bodily injury
and property damage                       $300,000
Comprehensive form to include: premises    
operations, product/completed operations,
contractual insurance, personal injury
 
Vehicle Liability
Comprehensive form: owned, hired, non-owned $250,000 each person; $250,000 each
Bodily injury                               accident
Property damages                            $50,000
Combined single limit for bodily injury and $300,000
property damage
 
Worker’s Compensation
Coverage A Statutory
           
Coverage B $100,000 each accident
 
         (a)   The certificate of insurance shall be submitted to the City
Clerk for approval prior to the issuance of each garbage hauler’s license. The
licensee shall provide satisfactory evidence to the Clerk that such insurance
is at all times in force and effect.
         (b)   The insurance company shall be obliged to give not less than ten
days' written notice to the City Clerk and to the insured before there is any
cancellation or termination of the policy prior to its expiration date. The
cancellation, nonrenewal or other termination of the licensee’s policy shall
automatically revoke the licenses issued for the garbage hauling business
covered, unless other insurance complies with the provisions of this subchapter
which will go into effect at the date of such cancellation or termination.
         (c)   The comprehensive general liability policy shall name as an
additional insured the city, its elected officials, officers and employees.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
§ 50.23 FEE; EXPIRATION.
   The license fee shall be $250 per year for each licensee. All licenses shall
expire on December 31 of each year regardless of when issued and there shall be
no proration of the license fee. The fee shall not be refundable under any
circumstances.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
§ 50.24 CONSTRUCTION OF VEHICLES.
   The beds of all vehicles used in the collection of all garbage or refuse or
yard waste shall conform to the following requirements:
   (A)   They shall at all times be kept in a neat, clean and sanitary
condition;
   (B)   They shall be kept thoroughly cleaned so that when empty they will
give off no offensive or obnoxious odors;
   (C)   They shall not be overloaded and no vehicle shall exceed a gross
vehicle weight of 65,000 pounds;
   (D)   They shall not be parked on the streets of the city in any one place
for a period longer than is necessary to load the garbage, refuse or yard waste
of the customer being immediately served;
   (E)   The vehicle hauling garbage, refuse or yard waste shall at all times
be kept neatly painted;
   (F)   The driver of any such vehicle must be a person of good moral
character, have a valid driver’s license issued by the State of Illinois and be
at least 18 years of age;
   (G)   Vehicles shall be equipped with a watertight bed and tightly fitted
with covers and be so constructed that no garbage, refuse, industrial refuse,
undesirable refuse, hazardous waste or special waste conveyed therein shall be
scattered or left in or upon any street, alley or sidewalk in the city.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
Cross-reference:
   Vehicles to be covered, see §
93.21
§ 50.25 REVOCATION.
   If during the period covered by the license granted the licensee shall
permit his or her equipment to fall into disrepair, fail to keep the same in a
sanitary condition when not in use or fail to keep the same up to standards
required by this chapter, fail to obey any of the provisions of this chapter or
to give adequate service, the license may be revoked after hearing by the City
Council.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
§ 50.26 ADDITIONAL SERVICES.
   Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to restrict customers and
licensed haulers from increasing the level of services provided by the hauler,
including, but not limited to, more frequent collections, back door
collections, special collections of bulky items and the like.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
§ 50.27 HOURS.
   All collections of garbage, refuse, industrial refuse, undesirable refuse,
hazardous waste, special waste and yard waste shall be made in residential
areas between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. All collections shall be
made as quietly as possible.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
§ 50.28 HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   No hazardous waste shall be collected within the city without the hauler
thereof being licensed to perform such hauling by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
§ 50.29 TRUCK WASTE WATERS.
   A garbage truck or other equipment shall not be washed on city streets or
public property and will not be washed where the waste waters will cause any
offensive odors to adjoining property owners.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
§ 50.30 LOCATION OF EQUIPMENT.
   A licensee shall designate the location on which his or her equipment will
be parked while not in use and the equipment shall not be parked within the
city limits unless the designated location shall not create, in the opinion of
the City Council, any nuisance for adjoining property owners.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
§ 50.31 REMOVAL OF ITEMS FROM RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS.
   Every licensee serving residential customers within the city limits shall,
at the request of the customer, remove from the customer’s premises any metal
or plastic drums, scrap metal, wire, household appliances such as
refrigerators, ranges, washers and dryers and household furniture and
furnishings. The fee to be charged for this service shall be as negotiated
between the licensee and the customer.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
§ 50.32 LICENSE RENEWALS.
   All garbage haulers licenses shall be renewed by January 1 of each year and
shall be valid for a period of one calendar year and shall expire on December
31 of each year. Licenses and the license fee are not pro-ratable. Any person
holding a valid garbage haulers license shall be entitled to a renewal thereof
upon the payment of the annual license fee, the posting of a valid bond with
surety and the filing of the insurance certificate.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
REGULATIONS
§ 50.45 ACCUMULATION ILLEGAL.
   Garbage, refuse, industrial refuse, undesirable refuse, hazardous waste and
special waste shall not be allowed to accumulate for more than seven days on
any premises or in any waste material receptacles in the city.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.46 REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   The owners and occupants of all premises in the city shall remove or cause
to be removed from their premises all garbage, refuse, industrial refuse,
undesirable refuse, hazardous waste and special waste at least once in every
seven days and shall keep their premises free of all garbage, refuse,
industrial refuse, undesirable refuse, hazardous waste and special waste. Any
garbage, refuse, industrial refuse, undesirable refuse, hazardous waste or
special waste remaining on any premises in the city after seven consecutive
days is declared illegal and is declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.47 ALLOWABLE STORAGE.
   It shall be unlawful to accumulate and store garbage, refuse, industrial
refuse, undesirable refuse, hazardous waste or special waste collected from any
place other than the premises where the material was generated or originated,
except that a truck used by a commercial hauler may accumulate and store the
material collected by it during the day but must empty the truck at the end of
each day that it is used.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.48 UNCOVERED GARBAGE.
   It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any
garbage or refuse, except in a tightly sealed metal or plastic container or
plastic bag.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.49 PREVENTION OF SCATTERING.
   Persons placing garbage, refuse, industrial refuse, undesirable refuse,
hazardous waste, or special waste in any receptacle shall do so in such a
manner as to prevent the garbage, refuse, industrial refuse, undesirable
refuse, hazardous waste, or special waste from being carried or deposited by
the elements or animals upon any public place or private premises.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92; Am. Ord. 02-39, passed 10-14-02)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.50 DEPOSITS ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any
garbage, refuse, industrial refuse, undesirable refuse, hazardous waste,
special waste or yard waste on any public street or alley in the city;
provided, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage,
refuse, industrial waste, undesirable refuse, hazardous waste, special waste or
yard waste in a container complying with the provisions of this chapter
preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner
provided herein or disposed of in a manner provided by State of Illinois or
federal laws and regulations.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.51 UNLAWFUL TRANSPORT.
   No person shall transport by any means garbage, refuse, industrial refuse,
undesirable refuse, hazardous waste or special waste from any dwelling,
residence, place of business, farm or other site to and deposit such material
in, around or on top of any trash barrels or other receptacles of another
person without the consent of the owner or other person in control of such
trash barrel or receptacle.
(Ord. 02-39, passed 10-14-02)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Prior to the filing in any court of competent jurisdiction of a
complaint for the alleged violation of §§
50.45,
50.46 or
50.47, the city must give written notice of the alleged violation, by United
States mail, to the person allegedly violating the section advising of the
alleged violation and granting a period of seven days within which to abate the
alleged violation. If the alleged violation is not abated within the period of
time then, in that event, the city may proceed to file a complaint for a
violation of this chapter in any court of competent jurisdiction. The notice
shall be deemed to be given when deposited in the United States mail at the
United States post office in Paxton, Illinois.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §§
50.45,
50.46 or
50.47 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense, and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §§
50.48 through
50.51 shall be fined as follows:
      (1)   Not less than $100 nor more than $150 for the first offense;
      (2)   Not less than $150 nor more than $200 for the second offense
committed within a consecutive 24 month period;
      (3)   Not less than $200 nor more than $300 for the third offense
committed within a consecutive 24 month period;
      (4)   Not less than $300 nor more than $750 for the fourth or additional
offenses committed within a consecutive 24 month period; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or while a violation occurs or
continues.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter, except for §
50.46 and further except for division (A) of §
50.02 shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense, and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (E)   Any person violating §
50.46 or §§
50.49 through
50.51 shall be required to pay the cost to the city for the removal and cleanup
of all garbage, refuse, industrial refuse, undesirable refuse, hazardous waste
and special waste in addition to any fine levied pursuant to the terms of this
section.
   (F)   Division (A) of §
50.02 is a voluntary provision and therefore there is no fine imposed thereon.
(Ord. 92-17, passed 6-8-92; Am. Ord. 02-39, passed 10-14-02)
CHAPTER 51: WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   New connection water and sewer permits
   
51.03   New connection storm sewer permit
   
51.04   Turning on existing service
   
51.05   Cross connections
   
51.06   Connection of sanitary or waste sewers to storm water drainage systems
and prohibition of storm water to sanitary sewer
   
51.07   Establishment of a combined waterworks and sewerage system
Connection Fees
   
51.20   Residential user water connection fee
   
51.21   Governmental user water connection fee
   
51.22   Commercial, industrial and institutional user water connection fee
   
51.23   Residential user sanitary sewer connection fee
   
51.24   Governmental user sanitary sewer connection fee
   
51.25   Commercial user, industrial user and institutional user sanitary sewer
connection fee
   
51.26   Special sanitary sewer connection fee
   
51.27   Kurtz Addition sanitary sewer connection fee
   
51.28   Storm sewer connection fee
   
51.29   Schuldt Second Subdivision and Third Subdivision sanitary sewer
connection fee
Service; Regulations
   
51.40   Extension of sanitary sewer mains, storm sewers and water mains
   
51.41   Installation
   
51.42   Main and pipes plans approved
   
51.43   Repairs
   
51.44   Place of installation
   
51.45   Tunneling
   
51.46   Abandoned connection
   
51.47   Title
   
51.48   Injury or damage
   
51.49   Unlawful connection
   
51.50   Shut-off boxes
   
51.51   Water meters
   
51.52   Water resale
   
51.53   Larceny
   
51.54   Access to premises
Waterworks and Sewerage System Rates
   
51.65   Definitions
   
51.66   Rates for service
   
51.67   Billing of charges
   
51.68   Special charges
   
51.69   Billing procedure
   
51.70   Effective date
   
51.71   Accounts
   
51.72   Annual rate increase
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any user of the waterworks and sewage facilities for such
purpose or use as involves the provision of services or sale of goods in
finished form.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any user of the waterworks and sewage facilities for such
purpose as involves the provision of services and supported principally by
taxes.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any user of the waterworks and sewage facilities for such
purpose as involving the making, manufacture, fabrication or assembly of goods.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any user of the waterworks and sewage facilities for
such purpose:
      (1)   As involves industrial users that do not discharge process waste;
or
      (2)   User classified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under
Division I - Services, Major Group 80.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. Any user of the waterworks and sewage facilities for such
purpose or use as involves habitation and living therein of individual persons.
   SANITARY SEWER MAINS. Those mains of the city used for the collection,
transmission and disposal of sanitary sewerage which are a part of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system of the city.
   SERVICE PIPES. Those pipes which transport sewage, storm water or potable
water of a single building into the common sanitary sewer main or storm sewer
or water main.
   SEWAGE SLUDGE. The solid, semi-solid, or liquid residue generated during the
treatment of domestic sewage in a treatment works. SEWAGE SLUDGE includes, but
is not limited to, domestic septage, scum, and solids removed during primary,
secondary, or advanced wastewater treatment processes. The definition of SEWAGE
SLUDGE also includes a material derived from sewage sludge (i.e., sewage sludge
whose quality is changed either through further treatment or through mixing
with other materials).
   STORM SEWERS. Sewer mains, pipes or outlets of the city used for the
discharge of storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, subsurface
drainage or other matter not commonly discharged into sewers used for sanitary
purposes, as established by Ordinance 63-7, passed and adopted on March 25,
1963.
   WATER MAINS.  Those mains of the city used for the collection, transmission,
distribution and sale of potable water for all purposes for which water may be
used and are a part of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city
as established by Ordinance 63-7, passed and adopted on March 25, 1963.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 08-39, passed 11-10-08)
§ 51.02 NEW CONNECTION WATER AND SEWER PERMITS.
   No new connection with a water main of the city and no new connection with a
sanitary sewer main of the city shall be made without a permit being issued and
24 hours' notice having been given to the Superintendent of Waterworks. All
such connections shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent of
Waterworks, and no connection shall be covered until the work has been
inspected by the Superintendent of Waterworks. Application for permits to make
such connections must be made in writing to the City Clerk and the appropriate
fee paid for the connection.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 51.03 NEW CONNECTION STORM SEWER PERMIT.
   No new connection with a storm sewer of the city shall be made without a
permit being issued and 24 hours' notice having been given to the
Superintendent of Waterworks. All such connections shall be made under the
supervision of the Superintendent of Waterworks, and no connection shall be
covered until the work has been inspected by the Superintendent of Waterworks.
Application for permits to make such connections must be made in writing to the
City Clerk and the appropriate fee paid for the connection.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 51.04 TURNING ON EXISTING SERVICE.
   No water from the city water supply shall be turned on for service into any
premises by any person but the Superintendent of Waterworks or some person
authorized by him or her to perform this service.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 51.05 CROSS CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   All plumbing installed within the city shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Waterworks, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent
of Waterworks will give notice to the water customer to install such an
approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his or her own
expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code and all applicable local regulations
and as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code and local regulations.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the city enters the supply or distribution system of the city,
unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
Superintendent of Waterworks and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Waterworks to cause
surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served
by the public water supply to determine whether the actual or potential hazards
to the public water supply may exist. The surveys and investigations shall be
made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two years
or as often as the Superintendent of Waterworks shall deem necessary. Records
of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at
least five years.
   (D)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the city for the purpose of
verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections and that the
Superintendent of Waterworks or his or her authorized agent shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the city for the purpose of
verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-
connection control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any
property so served shall furnish to the Superintendent of Waterworks any
information which he or she may request regarding the piping system or systems
or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded,
shall, within the discretion of the Superintendent of Waterworks, be deemed
evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this chapter.
   (E)   The Superintendent of Waterworks of the city is authorized and
directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this chapter is known to exist and to take such other
precautionary measures as he or she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger
of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service
to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been
eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
until a reconnection fee of $500 is paid to the city. Immediate disconnection
with verbal notice can be effected when the Superintendent of Waterworks is
assured that imminent danger or harmful contamination of the public water
supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of
the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party
can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of
the public water supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the
Superintendent of Waterworks or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or
pollution of the public water supply. Neither the public water supply, the
Superintendent or Water or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any
customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from
termination of the customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this
chapter, whether or not the termination was with or without notice.
   (F)   The consumer responsible for the back-siphoned material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device or a device which has been bypassed must bear the
cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.
(Ord. 88-21, passed 6-13-88; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 51.06 CONNECTION OF SANITARY OR WASTE SEWERS TO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
AND PROHIBITION OF STORM WATER TO SANITARY SEWER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or
institution, public or private, to connect or cause to be connected, any drain
carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool,
industrial waste or any fixture or device discharging polluting substances to
any open ditch, drain or drainage structure installed solely for street or
highway drainage purposes in the city.
   (B)   This section is intended to and shall be in addition to all other
ordinances, state statutes, rules and regulations concerning pollution and
shall not be construed as repealing or rescinding any other ordinance or part
of any ordinance unless in direct conflict herewith.
   (C)   No person shall discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit the
discharge of any storm water, ground water, run-off, sub-surface drainage, or
unpolluted industrial process water from private property to any public
sanitary sewer. Such connections may be disconnected by the city at a cost
charged to the property owner.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be fined
not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which a violation
continues or exists.
(Ord. 93-53, passed 12-13-93; Am. Ord. 18-06, passed 4-10-18) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   It is hereby found, determined and declared necessary for the best
interests of this city that the existing waterworks system of said city and the
sanitary sewerage system so to be constructed by said city be combined into,
and operated as, a single utility to be known and designated as the combined
waterworks and sewerage system of the city.
   (B)   All property, real, personal, and mixed, that comprises the existing
waterworks system and that will comprise said sanitary sewerage system so to be
constructed, as hereinabove in the preamble to this section more fully
described, be and the same is hereby determined and declared to constitute the
properties of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of said city.
   (C)   That from and after the effective date of this section said existing
waterworks system and said sanitary sewerage system so to be constructed shall
be owned and operated by this city as a combined utility, known as the combined
waterworks and sewerage system of said city, and all improvements and
extensions to said waterworks and sewerage system, either or both, shall be
considered as improvements and extensions to said combined utility; and all the
properties, assets, obligations and liabilities, of all kinds, of said
waterworks system and of said sanitary sewerage system, shall be held, used,
confessed and acknowledged as the properties, assets, obligations and
liabilities of said combined utility.
(Ord. 63-7, passed 3-25-63)
CONNECTION FEES
§ 51.20 RESIDENTIAL USER WATER CONNECTION FEE.
   The fee for new connection with water mains of the city by a residential
user shall be $350. For all new connections with water mains of the city by a
residential user, it shall be the duty of the city to tap the water mains,
furnish all materials and labor necessary to connect the game with the water
system of the city from the water mains to the outer property line of the
property for which the permit is issued; provided, however, that no water tap
made by the city for the above fee shall exceed 50 feet in length; and further
provided, however, that the city for the fee shall not be required to make any
such connection on private property. The service line from the water main to
the residence shall be a 3/4-inch (inside diameter) service with a 3/4-inch by
5/8-inch water meter. All materials necessary for said connection shall be
purchased by the city and the actual cost thereof to the city shall be
reimbursed to the city by the applicant.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)
§ 51.21 GOVERNMENTAL USER WATER CONNECTION FEE.
   The fee for new connection with water mains of the city by a governmental
user shall be none. The governmental user shall furnish all materials and labor
necessary to connect the same with the water system of the city from the water
mains.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.22 COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL USER WATER CONNECTION FEE.
   The fee for new connection with water mains of the city by a commercial user
or industrial user or institutional user shall be $450. For all new connections
with water mains of the city by a commercial user, industrial user or
institutional user, it shall be the duty of the city to tap the water mains,
furnish all materials and labor necessary to connect the same with the water
system of the city from the water mains to the outer property line of the
property for which the permit is issued; provided, however, that no water tap
made by the city for the above fee shall exceed 50 feet in length; and further
provided, however, that the city for the fee shall not be required to make any
such connection on private property. All materials necessary for said
connection shall be purchased by the city and actual cost thereof to the city
shall be reimbursed to the city by the applicant.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)
§ 51.23 RESIDENTIAL USER SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE.
   Except as provided in §§
51.26 and
51.27, the fee for new connection with sanitary sewer mains of the city by a
residential user shall be $350. For all new connections with sanitary sewer
mains of the city it shall be the duty of the applicant, not the city,
Illinois, to tap the sanitary sewer main and furnish all materials and labor
necessary to connect the same with the sanitary sewer system of the city.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)
§ 51.24 GOVERNMENTAL USER SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE.
   The fee for new connection with sanitary sewer mains of the city by a
governmental user shall be none. The governmental user shall furnish all
materials and labor necessary to connect the same with the sanitary sewer
system of the city.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.25 COMMERCIAL USER, INDUSTRIAL USER AND INSTITUTIONAL USER SANITARY SEWER
CONNECTION FEE.
   Except as provided in §§
51.26 and
51.27, the fee for new connection with sanitary sewer mains of the city by a
commercial user or industrial user or institutional user shall be $450. For all
new connections with sanitary sewer mains of the city it shall be the duty of
the applicant, not the city to tap the sanitary sewer main and furnish all
materials and labor necessary to connect the same with the sanitary sewer
system of the city.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 04-39, passed 11-8-04)
§ 51.26 SPECIAL SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE.
   (A)   There shall be no fee for the first four connections, from and after
the date of this chapter, with the sanitary sewer mains of the city from any
building located upon or constructed upon the following described real estate,
to-wit: the north 300 feet of even width of that part of the southeast quarter
of the northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 23 North, Range 9 East of the
Third Principal Meridian, lying south of the centerline of the right-of-way of
State Bond Issue Route 9, situated in Ford County, Illinois, except the east
600 feet thereof in Section 13.
   (B)   Since no fee is being charged, the city shall not be required to
furnish any materials nor any labor necessary to connect the same with the
sanitary sewer system of the city.
   (C)   These connections, at no charge, are allowed in consideration of the
fact that the owner of the above described property has heretofore installed,
at his or her increased expense, a ten-inch gravity feed sewer line across a
portion of the above described property, which sewer line has a capacity in
excess of his or her needs, which sewer line is now incorporated into the
sewage system of the city and shall be maintained by the city.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.27 KURTZ ADDITION SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE.
   (A)   (1)   The fee for new connection with the sanitary sewer mains of the
city from any of the following described real estate shall be $2,737, plus the
new connection fee set forth above of $250, for a total of $2,987: the west 40
feet of even width of Lot 10 and all of Lots 11, 12, 13 and 14 and the west
half of Lot 15 in Block 1; Lots 1 through 15, inclusive, in Block 2 all of Lots
1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 in Block 4, all of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 19 in Block 5; all
of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, except the west ten feet of even width of Lot
7, all in Block 7, all situated in Kurtz First Subdivision, being a part of the
east half of the southeast quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10
East of the Third Principal Meridian, as shown by plat thereof recorded in Book
157 of Miscellaneous Records, Page 457, and amended certificate of surveyor
recorded in Book 161 of Miscellaneous Records, Page 39, in the Recorder's
Office of Ford County, Illinois, situated in the County of Ford and State of
Illinois.
      (2)   The owners of the above described property had an opportunity to
participate in a special assessment proceeding which would have assessed their
land at $2,737 per building site, for the construction of the sewer mains
adjacent to the property. Their refusal to join in the special assessment
proceedings increased the cost to the city of approximately $2,737 per building
site.
   (B)   The fee for new connection to the sanitary sewer mains to the city
from all other real estate located in Blocks 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 in Kurtz First
Subdivision, excepting that property described in division (A) of this section
shall be $1. The property was included in a special assessment proceeding
established for the construction of new sewer mains through the property which
benefitted not only those properties included in the proceeding but also other
properties which may connect to the sewer system in the future.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.28 STORM SEWER CONNECTION FEE.
   There shall be no fee for a new connection with the storm sewers of the city
by any user.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.29 SCHULDT SECOND SUBDIVISION AND THIRD SUBDIVISION SANITARY SEWER
CONNECTION FEE.
   The fee for a new connection to the sanitary sewer of the city from any of
the following described real estate shall be $844.63, in addition to the
standard new connection fee as set forth by ordinance: Lots 8, 9, and 10, all
situated in Schuldt Second Subdivision and Lots 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9, all situated
in Schuldt Third Subdivision, situated in the County of Ford and State of
Illinois. Lots 8 and 9 of the Schuldt Third Subdivision shall only have to pay
one new connection fee because there is a single home that occupies Lots 8 and
9.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 10-14-13)
SERVICE; REGULATIONS
§ 51.40 EXTENSION OF SANITARY SEWER MAINS, STORM SEWERS AND WATER MAINS.
   Extension of sanitary sewer mains, storm sewers and water mains of the city
to serve any area which is not served by existing sanitary sewer mains, storm
sewers or water mains shall be at the sole expense of the applicant requesting
the extension; provided, however, that if planning requirements necessitate the
sizing of the main in excess of the specific needs of the particular
development of the applicant, the city shall pay the additional costs incurred
by the applicant in installing the mains that are so increased in size. When
practicable so to do, the city will assist the applicant in financing the cost
of extending the sanitary sewer mains, storm sewers and water mains of the city
through the use of a special assessment or special service area to generate
revenues to retire bonds issued to finance the extension of the sanitary sewer
mains, storm sewers or water mains. At the request of the applicant, the city
will also consider any other method of financing the capital costs, provided
the revenue to pay for the capital costs is charged to and paid by the person,
firm or corporation who receives the benefits from the extension of the
sanitary sewer mains, storm sewers or water mains.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.41 INSTALLATION.
   All service pipes from the existing sanitary sewer mains, storm sewers and
water mains of the city to the premises to be served, except as provided in §§
51.20 and 51.22, shall be installed by, and at the cost of, the owner of the
property to be served or the applicant for the service. All sanitary sewer
mains, storm sewers, water mains and service pipes shall be laid under the
supervision of the Superintendent of Waterworks of the city or such other duly
authorized agent of the city as the Mayor and City Council, from time to time,
shall designate.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 51.42 MAIN AND PIPES PLANS APPROVED.
   No sanitary sewer main, storm sewers, water mains and service pipes from the
existing sanitary sewer mains, storm sewers and water mains of the city shall
be installed unless it conforms to plans and specifications approved by the
City Council, a copy of which plans and specifications shall be kept on file by
the City Clerk and Superintendent of Waterworks.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 51.43 REPAIRS.
   (A)   Inside city limits. All repairs for water service pipes of buildings
within the city limits of the city, from the water main of the city to the
shut-off box of the building for which the water service pipe is installed
shall be made by and at the expense of the city; provided, however, that the
city shall not be required to make any such repairs on private property. All
repairs for water service pipes of buildings within the city limits of the
city, from the shut-off box of the building for which the water service pipe is
installed to the building being served shall be made by and at the expense of
the owners of the premises served. All repairs for sanitary sewer service pipes
of buildings within the city limits of the city, from the sanitary sewer main
of the city to the building for which the sanitary sewer service pipe is
installed shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises
served. All repairs for storm sewer service pipes of buildings within the city
limits of the city, from the storm sewer main of the city to the building for
which the storm sewer service pipe is installed shall be made by and at the
expense of the owners of the premises served.
   (B)   Outside city limits. All repairs for water service pipes of building
outside of the city limits of the city, from the water main of the city to the
building being served shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the
premises served. All repairs for sanitary sewer service pipes of buildings
outside the city limits of the city, from the sanitary sewer main of the city
to the building for which the sanitary sewer service pipe is installed shall be
made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises served. All repairs
for storm sewer service pipes of buildings outside of the city limits of the
city, from the storm sewer main of the city to the building for which the storm
sewer service pipe is installed shall be made by and at the expense of the
owners of the premises served.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 05-10, passed 4-11-05)
§ 51.44 PLACE OF INSTALLATION.
   All plants, works, mains, services, conduits, pipes, tanks and apparatus
erected, installed or placed for sanitary sewer mains, storm sewers and water
mains shall be located in parkways or alleys or public right-of-ways designated
for utilities whenever practicable so to do and shall be located, whether in
roads, streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, parkways or other public places, all
hereinafter referred to as public grounds, so as not to interfere unnecessarily
with the use of such public grounds. All sanitary sewer mains, storm sewers and
water mains installed under this chapter shall be located so as not to injure
or damage unnecessarily any of the public grounds, drains, storm sewers, catch
basins or other like improvements, but should any of the public grounds,
drains, storm sewers, catch basins or other like improvements be injured by
such location, the contractor installing the same shall forthwith repair the
damage caused and restore the public grounds, drains, storm sewers, catch
basins or other like improvements to as good condition as existed prior to
undertaking such work. In case the contractor refuses or neglects to repair any
of the public grounds, drains, storm sewers, catch basins or other like
improvements within a reasonable time after work is completed, and notice in
writing of such refusal or neglect shall have been given by the city to the
contractor, the City Council may direct the necessary repairs thereof to be
made at the expense of the contractor, and the contractor shall be responsible
for all damages sustained by any person or persons by reason of such refusal or
neglect on the part of the contractor.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.45 TUNNELING.
   Whenever a sanitary sewer main, storm sewer or water main is to be put under
any pavement without opening the pavement, the line shall be run through a
tunnel cased in accordance with specifications to be approved by the City
Engineer, adequate to support the pavement and to support the traffic on the
pavement.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.46 ABANDONED CONNECTION.
   Whenever any connection to the sewerage system, storm sewer system or
waterworks system of the city is abandoned, because the building to which the
connection is made has been abandoned, destroyed or removed, the Superintendent
of Waterworks, or someone working under his or her direction, may remove any
water meter and any pipe or connections in the public right-of-way or easement
and cap, plug or otherwise seal the pipe or main. Before taking any such steps,
the Superintendent of Waterworks shall notify the owner of the real estate, if
the owner’s name and address is known, and shall notify the person shown on the
real estate tax records as having paid taxes on the property the last time
taxes were paid. The notice shall be made by mail, at least 30 days before any
action is taken under this section. If the main or pipe is leaking, the
Superintendent of Waterworks shall take immediate action and send the notices
within three working days of the time action was taken.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 51.47 TITLE.
   Title to all sanitary sewer components, storm sewer components and water
utility components, wherever situated on public grounds or on easements for
public utility purposes, shall be in the city.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.48 INJURY OR DAMAGE.
   No person, firm or corporation shall injure or damage any part of the
sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system or waterworks system of the city.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.49 UNLAWFUL CONNECTION.
   No person, firm or corporation shall make any connection to or alteration of
the sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system or waterworks system of the city
without the express written consent of the city.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.50 SHUT-OFF BOXES.
   Shut-off boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every water service line
and shall be located between the curb line and sidewalk line where this is
practicable. The boxes shall so be located that they are easily accessible and
shall be protected from frost.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.51 WATER METERS.
   (A)   Meters required.
      (1)   All premises using the city water supply must be equipped with a
radio read register water meter furnished by the city but paid by the customer;
provided, however, that such water service may be supplied by the city at a
flat rate of charge until such meter may be installed.
      (2)   Before any premises are occupied, a radio read register water meter
shall be installed therein as herein required or application made for such
water service at the flat rate of charge until the meter can be installed or no
water shall be furnished to such premises.
   (B)   Location. Water meters shall be installed in a location that will be
easy to access and permits the sending of electronic data to the receiver of
the city.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the requirement set forth in division (A)(1) of this
section that the customer shall pay for the water meter, commencing on July 1,
2011, and continuing through, and including, June 30, 2012, the city will
replace in each premises each water meter existing therein as of July 1, 2011,
with a radio read register water meter at the sole cost and expense of the
city. The replacement radio read register water meter will be furnished by and
installed by the city during this period of time.
   (D)   In the event the owner of a premises denies the city access to the
premises in order to install a radio read register water meter, the water
supply shall be shut off from any premises for which a radio read register
water meter remains uninstalled for a period of ten days after notice to
install a radio read register water meter is posted on the premises or given to
the owner of the premises. When shut off, water shall not be turned on except
upon the installation of a radio read register water meter and upon payment of
the usual fee for turning on water.
   (E)   All water meters are the property of the owner of the premises,
however, any and all repairs to water meters shall be made by the city. If a
meter is damaged by the carelessness or negligence of the consumer, occupant or
owner of the premises, the city will repair the meter, and the cost of repairs
shall be charged to the owner and against the property.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 11-20, passed 7-11-11)
§ 51.52 WATER RESALE.
   No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the
city waterworks system to any premises other than that for which application
has been made and the meter installed, except in cast of emergency.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.53 LARCENY.
   Nothing in this chapter nor any ordinance of the city shall be interpreted
as prohibiting institution of larceny charges against any person, firm or
corporation stealing water from the city by bypassing a meter, tampering with a
meter or by any other means.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94)
§ 51.54 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   (A)   The Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department of the city and
other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter, at proper hours of the day, all
private properties and shall have free access to all parts of a building or
premises to which water service is provided for the purpose of, but not limited
to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, installation, repair and
maintenance of the water meters within the private property, building or
premises.
   (B)   If any person refuses to permit the Superintendent of the Water and
Sewer Department of the city, or other duly authorized employees of the city,
to enter any premises for the purpose authorized in division (A) of this
section in addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city may seek a
search warrant or other appropriate court order to gain entry to the premises.
(Ord. 11-20, passed 7-11-11)
WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM RATES
§ 51.65 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this subchapter shall be as follows:
   BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any user of the waterworks and sewerage facilities for such
purpose or use as involves the provision of services or sale of goods in
finished form.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the
cost of any bond debt to be paid by revenue generated from the operation of the
treatment works.
   DEPRECIATION. The decrease in the monetary value of an asset with time.
   GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any user of the waterworks and sewerage facilities for
such purpose as involves the provision of services and supported principally by
taxes.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any user of the waterworks and sewerage facilities for such
purpose as involves the making, manufacture, fabrication or assembly of goods.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater discharges from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from their employees' domestic wastes
and wastes from sanitary conveniences.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any user of the waterworks and sewerage facilities for
such purpose;
      (1)   As involves industrial users that do not discharge process waste;
or
      (2)   User classified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
1972, office of management and budget as amended and supplemented, under
Division I - Services, Major Group 80.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the wastes;
      (3)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under Section 307(a) of the Act;
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the
waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination industries,
on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment
works.
   MAY.  Permissive.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has
replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Those actions, materials and services necessary
for the proper functioning of treatment and collection facilities over their
useful life.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   QUANTITY BRACKET.  User class, as defined below.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
works are designated and constructed. The term operation and maintenance
includes replacement.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. Any user of the waterworks and sewerage facilities for
such purpose or use as involves habitation and living therein of individual
persons.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface,
and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
   SEWER. A conduit to carry off liquids.
   SEWERAGE. The removal and disposal of sewage by sewers.
   SEWER RATE. A charge for the use of and services supplied by the sewage
works of the city.
   SHALL. Mandatory.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   USER CHARGE.  A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance including replacement.
   USER CLASS.  The type of user either residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional or governmental.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be present.
   WATER RATE. A charge for the use of and services supplied by the waterworks
of the city.
(Ord. 85-23, passed 6-10-85)
§ 51.66 RATES FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   The following rates are hereby established for charges for the use and
service of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city, applicable
to each premise located within the corporate limits of said city which receives
water from said system, either directly or indirectly, or which discharges
sewage or other domestic or industrial waste or septic tank effluent, either
directly or indirectly, into any public sewer, drain, tile, ditch, or stream
located in said city, which charges shall be computed by the application of
such rates to the quantity of water used or consumed on such premise during
each constructive two month period, as evidenced by water meter readings or as
determined as hereinafter provided. For the purposes of determining charges for
the use of and service supplied by the waterworks and sewerage system of the
city, users of the system shall be divided into the following user classes:
      (1)   User Class I - Residential Users;
      (2)   User Class II - Commercial Users;
      (3)   User Class III - Governmental Users;
      (4)   User Class IV - Institutional Users; and
      (5)   User Class V - Industrial Users.
   (B)   The current base user charge subject to future adjustment for all
classes shall be $7.80 per 1,000 gallons of water used; provided, however,
there shall be a flat rate debt service charge of $34.75 for each premise for
each two-month period. This flat rate debt service charge shall be in addition
to the base user charge and shall be the amount to be paid each billing period
for payment of interest, principal and coverage of bonds outstanding (issued in
2017).
   (C)   Where water service to a premise has been temporarily turned off by
closing the curb stop valve servicing the premises in a manner that prevents
water from flowing through the valve, the flat rate debt service charge shall
continue and shall be charged and billed to the premises for a period of five
consecutive years from the date the water service was closed. After the period
of five consecutive years expires the flat rate debt service charge shall be
discontinued and shall not be charged nor billed to the premises until water
service is restored to the premises.
   (D)   Where water service to a premises had been permanently turned off by
either (i) closing the corporation valve at the water main in a manner that
prevents water from flowing through the valve, or (ii) by the complete removal
of all buildings receiving water service at the premises and termination of all
water service to the premises, the flat rate debt service charge shall be
discontinued and shall not be charged and billed to the premises until water
service is restored to the premises.
(Ord. 85-23, passed 6-10-85; Am. Ord. 93-32, passed 9-14-93; Am. Ord. 97-24,
passed 11-10-97; Am. Ord. 03-34, passed 8-11-03; Am. Ord. 05-28, passed 8-16-
05; Am. Ord. 06-01, passed 1-9-06; Am. Ord. 07-28, passed 9-20-07; Am. Ord. 11-
05, passed 2-14-11; Am. Ord. 11-14, passed 6-13-11; Am. Ord. 17-18, passed 5-9-
17)
§ 51.67 BILLING OF CHARGES.
   (A)   For the purpose of billing charges for service of said combined
waterworks and sewerage system, the territory served by said system shall be
divided into two sections, with all such territory located east of the center
line of the Illinois central railroad right-of-way as it extends through said
city being designated the east section, and all such territory located west of
said center line being designated the west section.
   (B)   Each premise served by said system located in the east section shall
be billed on May 1, 1964, for the service in the preceding month, and
thereafter on the first day of each succeeding second calendar month for
service in the preceding bi-monthly period.
   (C)   Each premise served by said system located in the west section shall
be billed on June 1, 1964, for the service in the preceding two months, and
thereafter on the first day of each succeeding second calendar month for
service in the preceding bi-monthly period.
   (D)   All charges for service shall be due and payable on rendition of bill,
and if not paid on or before the tenth day of the month in which billed, the
sum of 10% of the amount of such bill shall be added thereto and be due and
payable, except that when the tenth day of the month shall be a Sunday or legal
holiday, then such bill may be paid on the next succeeding secular day without
such additional charge. If charges are not paid within 15 days from date
billed, water service shall be promptly shut off and all other service to the
premises discontinued until such time as all charges have been paid in full.
   (E)   In the event charges for any of the services of said system are not
paid within 30 days after bill rendered, such charges shall be deemed and are
hereby declared to be delinquent and thereafter shall constitute a lien upon
the real estate upon or for which service shall have been supplied. For said
delinquent charges, the following remedies shall be available to the city:
      (1)   A sworn statement shall be filed in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Ford County, Illinois, by the City Clerk, setting out a description of
such real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the amount due for such
service, and the date when such amount became delinquent, which shall be deemed
notice of the lien for payment of such service. The failure of the City Clerk
to record such lien shall not affect the right to foreclose the same.
      (2)   Property subject to such lien shall be sold for non-payment of the
same and the proceeds applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs. Such
foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the city, and the City
Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings, in
the name of the city, in any court having jurisdiction.
      (3)   The city may also sue the occupant or user of the real estate in a
civil action to recover the money due for delinquent charges, plus a reasonable
attorney's fee, to be fixed by the court.
         (a)   Whenever a judgment is entered in such a civil action the
foregoing provisions in this section with respect to filing sworn statements of
such delinquencies in the office of the Recorder and creating a lien against
the real estate shall not be effective thereafter as to charges sued upon and
no lien shall exist thereafter against the real estate for the delinquency.
         (b)   Judgment in such a civil action operates as a release and waiver
of the lien for the amount of the judgment.
      (4)   To the extent allowed by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1, the city may
retain attorneys and private collection agents for the purpose of collecting
any delinquent charges.
   (F)   No person, other than the owner of the premises for which service is
supplied, shall be furnished or supplied with water service until such person
shall have deposited with the City Clerk, of the city, the sum of $25, as
security for the payment of all water used by or water service furnished to
such person upon such premises. When such service is discontinued, said
deposit, less any amount then due the city for water service, shall be
refunded, without interest. No such deposit shall be required if the owner of
such premises shall, in writing, assume full responsibility for the payment of
all water used upon such premises.
   (G)   There shall be no bulk discounts given by the city for water used to
fill swimming pools. No person, firm or corporation, including the Fire
Protection District, shall use water from a fire hydrant for the purpose of
filling a swimming pool. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section
by illegally filling a swimming pool shall be fined according to §
51.99, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day
during which a violation continues or exists.
(Ord. 85-23, passed 6-10-85; Am. Ord. 06-01, passed 1-9-06; Am. Ord. 12-18,
passed 4-25-12; Am. Ord. 2025-01-01, passed 1-14-25)
§ 51.68 SPECIAL CHARGES.
   Notwithstanding the rates and charges hereinabove provided, the following
special charges are hereby established:
   (A)   In the case of any premise obtaining water, in whole or in part, from
a source or sources other than the combined waterworks and sewerage system of
the city, the base user charge for service shall be determined by applying a
rate of $3.15 per 1,000 gallons for each class, as set out in §
51.66, above, to the total quantity of water used or consumed on such premise
as a sewerage charge, and adding to the sum thus determined a base user charge
of $3.10 per 1,000 gallons for water service to the quantity of water received
from the city's system, if any. For the purpose of determining the total
quantity of water used or consumed on such premise, the owner or occupant may
install, at his or her own expense and subject to the approval of the
Superintendent of Waterworks of the city, a separate meter to measure the
quantities of water obtained from such private source. If no such meter is
installed, or if the Superintendent shall not approve the method of
installation or adequacy of such metering, then such Superintendent shall
estimate the total quantity of water used or consumed on such premise in each
bi-monthly period and charges shall be based on such estimated quantity of
water consumed or used.
   (B)   In the case of any premise on which some of the water used or consumed
thereon is not contaminated by human or industrial waste and is not returned or
discharged into the sanitary sewers of said city the owner or occupant of such
premise shall have the option of paying charges as hereinabove provided or to
install, at his or her own expense, a suitable meter or meters to measure water
used on such premise which is not so contaminated nor returned to the sanitary
sewers. If the Superintendent of the city's Water and Sewer Department is
satisfied that such method of metering accurately measures the quantity of
water not returned to the sanitary sewers and that such water is not so
contaminated, the base user charge for service to said premise shall be
computed by applying a rate of $3.10 per 1,000 gallons for each user class, as
set out in §
51.66, above, to the total quantity of water received from the city's system,
as a charge for water, and adding thereto, as a base user charge for sewerage,
a rate of $3.15 per 1,000 gallons, to the total quantity of water used on such
premise less the amount ascertained not to have been returned to the sanitary
sewers.
   (C)   In the case of any premise which receives water from the city's system
but which does not discharge sewage, waste, or septic tank effluent of any
nature into any public sewer, drain, tile, ditch, or stream located within the
city, and which premise is located more than 200 feet distant, measured along
public ways from the nearest point of land of such premise, from the location
of an existing sanitary sewer, the base user charge for water used or consumed
on such premise obtained from the city's system shall be a rate of $3.10 per
1,000 gallons for each user class, as set out in §
51.66, above.
   (D)   In any case where more than one premise receives water through a
single meter, charges for water and/or sewerage service for each billing period
shall be determined, as hereinabove provided in §§
51.66 or
51.70, whichever may be applicable, and each premise so served shall be billed
an equal share of the resulting total charge, but not less than the flat rate
debt service charge provided for herein.
   (E)   The flat rate debt service charge for any bi-monthly period for any
premises as to which any of the foregoing provisions of this section may be
applicable shall be $34.75 provided, however, in the case of any premise for
which no charge for water service is applicable or for which no charge for
sewerage is applicable, such flat rate debt service charge shall be $34.75.
   (F)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, for each premise
located outside the corporate limits of the city which receives water from said
system, either directly or indirectly, or which discharges sewage or other
domestic or industrial waste or septic tank effluent into any sewer, drain, or
tile installed and maintained by the city, whether located within or outside
the corporate limits of said city, or into any public stream or ditch located
within such corporate limits, the charge for such service shall be 200% of the
charge determined under the preceding provisions of this section.
   (G)   For all purposes of this section, the term "premise" is hereby defined
to include each tract or parcel of land or house, apartment, room, building, or
other structure or part thereof used or occupied, or suitable to be used or
occupied, by a single family, housekeeping unit, business, or industry, and
where more than one family, housekeeping unit, business, or industry uses or
occupies a single tract or parcel of land, building, or other structure, such
part used or occupied by each shall be regarded as a separate premise.
   (H)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, an overstrength waste
surcharge will be levied to all users whose wastewaters exceed the normal
concentrations for BOD5 (225 mg/l) and SS (265 mg/l). The surcharge will be
based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all
wastes which exceed the 225 mg/l and 265 mg/l concentration for BOD5 and SS
respectively. This overstrength waste surcharge will be $14.10 per 100 pounds
of five day bio-chemical oxygen demand (BOD5) and $12.14 per 100 pounds of
suspended solids (SS), and will be in addition to all other charges determined.
   (I)   In each case where the owner or occupant of a premises shall request
that water service to a premises be turned off, either temporarily or
permanently, no charge shall be made for turning off the water service. In each
case where the owner or occupant of a premises shall request that water service
to a premises be resumed after having been previously discontinued, a charge,
in the amount hereinafter set forth, shall be made, payable by the person
making such request, in advance of the turning on of such service.
      (1)   The first time when the owner or occupant of a premises shall
request water service to a premises be resumed within five years after having
been previously discontinued, a charge of $25 shall be made.
      (2)   In the event that water service to a premises is turned off two or
more times within five consecutive years and the owner or occupant shall
request that water service be resumed for a second or greater time within five
years, a charge of $50 shall be made.
      (3)   In the case where the owner or occupant of a premise shall request
water service to a premises be resumed, and water service to said premises has
been turned off for more than five consecutive years, a charge of $350 shall be
made.
(Ord. 85-23, passed 6-10-85; Am. Ord. 93-32, passed 9-14-93; Am. Ord. 97-24,
passed 11-10-97; Am. Ord. 03-34, passed 8-11-03; Am. Ord. 05-20, passed 6-20-
05; Am. Ord. 05-28, passed 8-16-05; Am. Ord. 06-01, passed 1-9-06; Am. Ord. 07-
28, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 11-14, passed 6-13-11; Am. Ord. 17-18, passed 5-9-
17)
§ 51.69 BILLING PROCEDURE.
   In computing the amounts due under the terms of this subchapter based upon
the water meter readings, it is hereby determined that the number of gallons
used shall be rounded to the nearest 100 gallons and that the number of gallons
so determined divided by 1,000 shall then be multiplied by the rate per 1,000
gallons of water used as determined under either §
51.66 or §
51.68.
(Ord. 85-23, passed 6-10-85)
§ 51.70 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The rates and charges heretofore established by Ordinance No. 85-23, as
amended, shall apply to all statements issued to users of service provided by
said system on or before May 31, 2017. The rates and charges herein established
shall apply to all statements issued to users of service provided by said
system on and after June 1, 2017. All other provisions of this subchapter shall
become effective on June 1, 2017.
(Ord. 85-23, passed 6-10-85; Am. Ord. 93-32, passed 9-14-93; Am. Ord. 97-24,
passed 11-10-97; Am. Ord. 03-34, passed 8-11-03; Am. Ord. 05-28, passed 8-16-
05; Am. Ord. 07-28, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 11-14, passed 6-13-11; Am. Ord.
17-18, passed 5-9-17)
§ 51.71 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep necessary books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the waterworks and
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be
made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the waterworks and sewerage system.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be
relations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant
for the current fiscal year.
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      (4)   Number of users connected to the system.
      (5)   Number of non-metered users.
      (6)   A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes and volume of waste
discharged.
(Ord. 85-23, passed 6-10-85)
§ 51.72 ANNUAL RATE INCREASE.
   Effective September 1, 2019, and on the first day of September of each
calendar year thereafter, the base user charge (but not the flat rate debt
service charge) as established and referenced anywhere in §§
51.66 or
51.70 shall be increased to reflect a total increase of 3% in the amount of the
base user charge over and above the amount of the base user charge in effect on
the first day of August of that calendar year.
(Ord. 05-28, passed 8-16-05; Am. Ord. 19-10, passed 7-9-19)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
in which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   In addition to any other remedy provided by law, any person violating
any of the provisions of §
51.51 shall become liable to the city for any expenses, loss or damage
occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 94-39, passed 11-14-94; Am. Ord. 11-20, passed 7-11-11)
CHAPTER 52: WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Purpose and policy
   
52.002   Administration
   
52.003   Definitions
   
52.004   Abbreviations
   
52.005   Confidential information
   
52.006   Pretreatment charges and fees
Sewer Use Requirements
   
52.020   Prohibited discharge standards
   
52.021   Federal categorical pretreatment standards
   
52.022   State requirements
   
52.023   Specific pollutant limitations
   
52.024   City’s right of revision
   
52.025   Special agreement
   
52.026   Dilution
Pretreatment of Wastewater
   
52.040   Pretreatment facilities
   
52.041   Additional pretreatment measures
   
52.042   Accidental discharge; slug control plans
   
52.043   Tenant responsibility
   
52.044   Hauled wastewater
   
52.045   Vandalism
Wastewater Discharge Permit Eligibility
   
52.055   Wastewater survey
   
52.056   Permit requirement
   
52.057   Permitting existing connections
   
52.058   Permitting new connections
   
52.059   Permitting extra-jurisdictional industrial users
   
52.060   Permit application contents
   
52.061   Application signatories and certification
   
52.062   Permit decisions
Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
   
52.075   Permit duration
   
52.076   Permit contents
   
52.077   Permit appeals
   
52.078   Permit modification
   
52.079   Permit transfer
   
52.080   Permit revocation
   
52.081   Permit reissuance
Reporting Requirements
   
52.095   Baseline monitoring reports
   
52.096   Compliance schedule progress report
   
52.097   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
   
52.098   Periodic compliance reports
   
52.099   Report of changed conditions
   
52.100   Reports of potential problems
   
52.101   Reports from nonsignificant industrial users
   
52.102   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting
   
52.103   Notification of discharge of hazardous waste
   
52.104   Analytical requirements
   
52.105   Sample collection
   
52.106   Determination of noncompliance
   
52.107   Timing
   
52.108   Record keeping
Compliance Monitoring
   
52.120   Inspection and sampling
   
52.121   Search warrants
   
52.122   Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance
Administration and Enforcement
   
52.135   Notification of violation
   
52.136   Consent orders
   
52.137   Emergency suspensions
   
52.138   Termination of discharge
   
52.139   Water supply severance
   
52.140   Public nuisance
   
52.141   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
wastewater collection and publicly owned treatment works (hereinafter referred
to as “POTW”) for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable
state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and
the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this
chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with the operation of the POTW;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise
be incompatible with the POTW;
      (3)   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge
is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations;
      (4)   To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public;
      (5)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the POTW;
      (6)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and
      (7)   To enable the city to comply with its NPDES permit conditions,
sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to
which the POTW is subject.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all industrial users of the POTW. The
ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes
monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and provides for the
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.002 ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent of Waterworks of the
city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be
delegated by the Superintendent to other city personnel.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 52.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Environmental Protection Agency of the State of
Illinois so long as the State of Illinois is designated an NPDES state with an
approved state pretreatment program, otherwise, the Regional Administrator of
the U.S. EPA or his or her designee.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative
shall mean:
         (a)   The President, Secretary, Treasurer or a Vice-President of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation;
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25 million (in second-quarter 1980 dollars),
if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures;
      (2)   If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an
authorized representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor,
respectively;
      (3)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or local governmental
facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
the activities of the government facility or his or her designee;
      (4)   The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) above may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the
written authorization is submitted to the city.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five days at 20°C expressed in terms of mass and concentration (milligrams per
liter (mg/l)).
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance
with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific
category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter
N, Parts 405-471.
   CITY. The City of Paxton, Illinois.
   COLOR. The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption,
relative to distilled water. One hundred percent transmittance is equivalent to
zero optical density.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The sample resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized
official of the agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter
promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis
without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of
time.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of (nondomestic)
pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section
307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act (33 USC 1317).
   INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. A source of indirect discharge.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum concentration
(or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of
the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources:
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
      (2)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of the city’s NPDES permit or
of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of
the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder (or
more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act;
the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the
Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory
wastes and dialysis wastes.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307 (c)
of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located; or
         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this subsection.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the U.S. in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
the city’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation).
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state or local governmental
entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial
wastes and the characteristics of the wastewater (including, pH, temperature,
TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), toxicity and odor).
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, by process changes or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment
standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Prohibitive discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in §
52.020.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A treatment works as defined by
Section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the state or
municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant. The term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the
industrial users and responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the
treatment works.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations and the like).
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Shall apply to:
      (1)   Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and
      (2)   Any other industrial user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater;
         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant;
or
         (c)   Is designated as significant by the city on the basis that the
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   SLUG LOAD. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
52.020 or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not
limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE. A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Public Works of the city who is the
person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW and who is
charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter or his or her
duly authorized representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid and which is removable by
laboratory filtering.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. One of 126 pollutants, or a combination of those
pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the
provision of Section 307 (33 USC 1317) of the Act.
   TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT. Any discharge of pollutants from the POTW into
waters of the State of Illinois.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW
designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 52.004 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
   BOD   -   Biochemical Oxygen Demand
   CFR   -   Code of Federal Regulations
   COD   -   Chemical Oxygen Demand
   EPA   -   United States Environmental Protection Agency
   Gpd   -   Gallons Per Day
   l   -   Liter
   mg    -   Milligrams
   mg/l   -   Milligrams per liter
   NPDES   -   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
   O&M   -   Operation and Maintenance
   POTW   -   Publicly Owned Treatment Works
   RCRA   -   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
   SIC   -   Standard Industrial Classifications
   SWDA   -   Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.)
   TSS   -   Total Suspended Solids
   USC   -   United States Code
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.005 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and
monitoring programs and from city inspection and sampling activities shall be
available to the public without restriction, unless the industrial user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes
or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under
applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user
furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to
the NPDES program or pretreatment program and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be
recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.006 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   (A)   The city may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of
costs of setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment program which may
include:
      (1)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the
cost of processing such applications;
      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures,
including the cost of collection and analyzing an industrial user’s discharge
and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users;
      (3)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;
      (4)   Fees for filing appeals;
      (5)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
   (B)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and
are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the city.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.020 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   No industrial user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference.
These general prohibitions apply to all industrial users of the POTW, whether
or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state or local pretreatment standard or requirement. Furthermore, no
industrial user may contribute the following substances to the POTW:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the municipal
wastewater collection and POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams
with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      (2)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.5, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment or
endangering city personnel;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids
greater than 1 inch or 2.54 centimeters in any dimension;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW or any wastewater
treatment or sludge process or which will constitute a hazard to humans or
animals;
      (5)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 157°F (65°C) or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the city in accordance with §
52.044;
      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life or to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair;
      (10)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s
effluent thereby violating the city’s NPDES permit. Color (in combination with
turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of
the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than 10% from the
seasonably established norm for aquatic life;
      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except as specifically approved by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (12)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Superintendent;
      (13)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (14)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit;
      (15)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a
toxicity test;
      (16)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      (17)   Any discharge of fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable
origin is limited to 100 mg/l.
   (B)   Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in
such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains
located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial
user’s pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.021 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405–471 are incorporated.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.022 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State pretreatment standards when adopted are incorporated.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.023 SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in
excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits:
      0.10 mg/l    arsenic
      1.0 mg/l    cadmium
      1.0 mg/l    chromium, total
      1.0 mg/l    copper
      0.50 mg/l    cyanide
      0.10 mg/l    lead
      0.50 mg/l    nickel
      0.25 mg/l    silver
      1.0 mg/l    zinc
   (B)   Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
“total” metal unless indicated otherwise. At his or her discretion, the
Superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the
concentration based limitations above.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99; Am. Ord. 2000-1, passed 1-10-00)
§ 52.024 CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
52.001 or the general and specific prohibitions in §
52.020.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.025 SPECIAL AGREEMENT.
   The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with industrial
users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In
no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard
or requirement. However, the industrial user may request a net gross adjustment
to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also
request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the EPA.
Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user can prove that
factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors
considered by EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial
user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the
procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.026 DILUTION.
   No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
Superintendent may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
§ 52.040 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in §
52.020 within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state or the
Superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to
pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided,
operated and maintained at the industrial user’s expense. Detailed plans
showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city before construction
of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no
way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.041 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES. 
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require industrial
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial
waste streams and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW
and determine the industrial user’s compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Each person discharging into the POTW greater than 25,000 gallons per
day or greater than 5% of the average daily flow in the POTW, whichever is
lesser, shall install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or her
expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to insure equalization of
flow over a 24-hour period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least
100% of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a rate
of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by the
Superintendent. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.
   (C)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand, except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be
so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the owner at his or her expense.
   (D)   Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances
may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
   (E)   At no time shall two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the
point of discharge into the POTW or at any point in the POTW be more than 5%
nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the
meter.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.042 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE; SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   The Superintendent may require any industrial user to develop and
implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two
years the Superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant industrial
user needs such a plan.
   (B)   Any industrial user required to develop and implement an accidental
discharge/control slug plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which
would violate any of the prohibited discharges in §
52.020;
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.043 TENANT RESPONSIBILITY.
   Where an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a tenant
under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an
industrial user, either or both may be held responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.044 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Septic tank waste may be accepted into the POTW at a designated
receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at such times as are
established by the Superintendent, provided such wastes do not violate §§
52.020 et seq. or any other requirements established or adopted by the city.
Wastewater discharge permits for individual vehicles to use such facilities
shall be issued by the Superintendent.
   (B)   The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as industrial septage
requires prior approval and a wastewater discharge permit from the city. The
Superintendent shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of such wastes, if
such disposal would interfere with the treatment plant operation. Waste haulers
are subject to all other sections of this chapter.
   (C)   Fees for dumping septage will be established as part of the industrial
user fee system as authorized in §
52.006.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.045 VANDALISM.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure,
appurtenance or equipment or other part of the POTW. Any person found in
violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in §§
52.135 et seq. and §
52.999.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ELIGIBILITY
§ 52.055 WASTEWATER SURVEY.
   When requested by the Superintendent all industrial users must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing
a wastewater survey prior to commencing their discharge. The Superintendent is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require
industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be
reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be
considered a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.056 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge
wastewater into the city’s POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge
permit from the Superintendent. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in §§
52.135 et seq. and §
52.999. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of
its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law.
   (B)   The Superintendent may require other industrial users, including
liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.057 PERMITTING EXISTING CONNECTIONS.
   Any significant industrial user which discharges industrial waste into the
POTW prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue
such discharges in the future, shall, within 180 days after the date, apply to
the city for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with §
52.060 and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after
180 days of the effective date of this chapter, except in accordance with a
wastewater discharge permit issued by the Superintendent.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.058 PERMITTING NEW CONNECTIONS.
   Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging
industrial wastes into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior
to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this
wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 14 days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.059 PERMITTING EXTRA-JURISDICTIONAL INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   (A)   Any existing significant industrial user located beyond the city
limits shall submit a wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance
with § 52.060, within 180 days of the effective date of this chapter. New
significant industrial users located beyond the city limits shall submit such
applications to the Superintendent 14 days prior to any proposed discharge into
the POTW.
   (B)   Alternately, the Superintendent may enter into an agreement with the
neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant industrial user is located to
provide for the implementation and enforcement of pretreatment program
requirements against the industrial user.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.060 PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.
   (A)   In order to be considered for a wastewater discharge permit, all
industrial users required to have a wastewater discharge permit must submit the
information required by §
52.095(B). The Superintendent shall approve a form to be used as a permit
application. In addition, the following information may be requested:
      (1)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to
the POTW;
      (2)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or
actual hours of operation of the POTW;
      (3)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production;
      (4)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
      (5)   The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation and all points of discharge;
      (6)   Time and duration of the discharge;
      (7)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
   (B)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will
be returned to the industrial user for revision.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.061 APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.
   All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user reports
must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user:
   “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.062 PERMIT DECISIONS.
   The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user
and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the Superintendent will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. If no determination is
made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. The
Superintendent may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS
§ 52.075 PERMIT DURATION.
   Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five years, at the discretion of the Superintendent. Each
wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will
expire.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.076 PERMIT CONTENTS.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are
reasonably deemed necessary by the Superintendent to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, protect ambient air quality and protect against damage
to the POTW.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:
      (1)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years;
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to and approval from the city and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater
discharge permit;
      (3)   Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable
standards in federal, state and local law;
      (4)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample
type based on federal, state and local law;
      (5)   Statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law.
   (C)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (2)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties;
      (3)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices designed
to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      (4)   Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental, unanticipated or routine discharges;
      (5)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (6)   The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees for
the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (7)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
      (8)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;
      (9)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent to
ensure compliance with this chapter and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.077 PERMIT APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the city to
reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its
issuance.
   (B)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   (C)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge
permit.
   (D)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
   (E)   If the city fails to act within 45 days, a request for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit or not to modify a
wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative action for
purposes of judicial review.
   (F)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Circuit Court of Ford County, Illinois, within 35 days.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.078 PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   (A)   The Superintendent may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user’s operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the city’s POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters;
      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      (7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit;
      (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to
a new owner/operator.
   (B)   The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge
permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.079 PERMIT TRANSFER.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new
owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance
notice to the Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the wastewater
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Superintendent must include a
written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility’s operations and processes;
      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
   (B)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.080 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed
condition pursuant to §
52.099;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises
and records;
      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (8)   Failure to pay fines;
      (9)   Failure to pay water and/or sewer charges;
      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility;
      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms
of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon non-use, cessation
of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge
permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.081 PERMIT REISSUANCE.
   A significant industrial user shall apply for wastewater discharge permit
reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit application in
accordance with § 52.060 a minimum of 30 days prior to the expiration of the
industrial user’s existing wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.095 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards
and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be
required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed
in division (B) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of
their discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall be
required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed
in division (B) of this section. A new source shall also be required to report
the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment
standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants discharged.
   (B)   The industrial user shall submit the information required by this
section including the following.
      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owners.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental control
wastewater discharge permits held by or for the facility.
      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the
POTW from the regulated processes.
      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to
each regulated process.
         (b)   Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum and long term average concentrations (or mass,
where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
52.104.
         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
52.105.
      (6)   Certification. A statement reviewed by the industrial user’s
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in §
52.060.
      (8)   Baseline reports. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with §
52.061.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.096 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORT.
   The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by §
52.095(B)(7). The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting
routine operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay and the steps being taken by
the industrial user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall
more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the
Superintendent.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.097 REPORT ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the city a report containing the information described in §
52.095(B)(4) through (6). For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial
user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the industrial user's actual production during the appropriate
sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with §
52.061.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.098 PERIOD COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (A)   Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard
shall, at a frequency determined by the Superintendent but in no case less than
twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature
and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such
pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with §
52.061.
   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that
sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
   (C)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and of
this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW,
using the procedures prescribed in §
52.105, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.099 REPORT OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Each industrial user is required to notify the Superintendent of any
planned significant changes to the industrial user’s operations or system which
might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days
before the change.
   (B)   The Superintendent may require the industrial user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
52.060.
   (C)   The Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
52.062 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
52.078.
   (D)   No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s)
until and unless the Superintendent has responded to the industrial user's
notice.
   (E)   For purposes of this requirement flow increases of 10% or greater, and
the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed
significant.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.100 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge or a slug load which may cause potential problems for
the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
52.020), it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately
telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include
the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known,
and corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall,
unless waived by the Superintendent, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or
any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be
imposed by this chapter.
   (C)   Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be
deemed a separate violation of this chapter.
   (D)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of
a discharge described in division (A) of this section. Employers shall ensure
that all employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.101 REPORTS FROM NONSIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and
not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate
reports to the city as the Superintendent may require.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.102 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the
industrial user must notify the Control Authority within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Control Authority
within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is
not required to resample if the POTW performs monitoring at the industrial
user’s at least once a month, or if the POTW performs sampling between the
industrial user’s initial sampling and when the industrial user receives the
results of this sampling.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.103 NOTIFICATION OF DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (A)   (1)   Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous
waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into
the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR 261.
      (2)   The notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more
than ten kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharged during that calendar month and an estimation of the mass
of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the
following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days
after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications
of changed discharges must be submitted under §
52.099. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of §§
52.095,
52.097 and
52.098.
   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A) of this
section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CPR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e)
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial
user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the
POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days
of the effective date of such regulations.
   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.104 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136
does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
approved by the EPA.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.105 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Except as indicated in division (B) of this section, the industrial
user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite
collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible,
the Superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or
through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this
will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
discharge limits.
   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
toxicity, sulfides and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.106 DETERMINATION OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The Superintendent may use a grab sample(s) to determine noncompliance with
pretreatment standards.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.107 TIMING.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.108 RECORD KEEPING.
   Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection and
copying, all records and information required to be retained under this
chapter. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three
years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning compliance with this chapter or where the industrial user
has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the
Superintendent.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
§ 52.120 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any
industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter, and any
permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the industrial user
is complying with all requirements thereof. Industrial users shall allow the
Superintendent or his or her representatives ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying and the performance of any additional duties.
   (B)   Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city,
state and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.
   (C)   The city, state and EPA shall have the right to set up on the
industrial user's property or require installation of such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
   (D)   The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
industrial user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow
and quality shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their accuracy.
   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the Superintendent and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
industrial user.
   (F)   Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the
industrial user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.121 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure or
property or any part thereof, and if the Superintendent has demonstrated
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or that
there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then upon application by the City Attorney, the Judge of the Circuit
Court shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the
specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if
anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property described. Such warrant
shall be served at reasonable hours by the Superintendent in the company of a
uniformed police officer of the city. In the event of an emergency affecting
public health and safety, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a
warrant.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.122 PUBLICATION OF INDUSTRIAL USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper
published in the city where the POTW is located, a list of the industrial users
which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (B)   The term SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE shall mean:
      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
      (3)   Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through
(including endangering the health of city personnel or the general public);
      (4)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment or has resulted in the city’s exercise of
its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final
compliance;
      (6)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
      (8)   Any other violation(s) which the city determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 52.135 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Superintendent finds that any user has violated or is violating
this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any
other pretreatment requirement, the Superintendent or his or her agent may
serve upon the user a written notice of violation. Within five days of the
receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Superintendent. Submission of
this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section
shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency
actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of
violation.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.136 CONSENT ORDERS.
   The Superintendent is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
any user responsible for noncompliance. The orders will include specific action
to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.137 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.
   (A)   The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user’s discharge (after
informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary in order to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or
cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons. The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge
(after notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the
operation of the POTW or which presents or may present an endangerment to the
environment.
      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent
shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings set forth in §
52.138 are initiated against the user.
      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence to the Superintendent, prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under this section and §
52.138
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.138 TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.
   In addition to those provisions in §
52.080, any user that violates the following conditions of this chapter,
wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder is subject to discharge
termination:
   (A)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
   (B)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   (C)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
   (D)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring or sampling;
   (E)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§
52.020 et seq.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.139 WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.
   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
chapter, orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water service
to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user’s
expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.140 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any violation of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued
hereunder is declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as
directed by the Superintendent or his or her designee. Any person(s) creating a
public nuisance shall be required to reimburse the city for all costs,
including attorney fees and court costs, incurred in removing, abating or
remedying the nuisance.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.141 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upset.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or
improper operation.
      (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of subsection (3) are met.
      (3)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs or other relevant evidence that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause
(s) of the upset;
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures;
         (c)   The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the POTW and treatment plant operator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
upset; provided, however, that if this information is provided orally, a
written submission must be provided within five days:
            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue;
            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
      (5)   Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
      (6)   The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to
the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the
facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   (B)   General/specific prohibitions. An industrial user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in §
52.020 if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its
discharge, along or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would
cause pass through or interference and that either:
      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
industrial user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and
during, the pass through or interference; or
      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when
the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
   (C)   Bypass.
      (1) (a) BYPASS means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
         (b)   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      (2)   An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses
are not subject to the provision of subsections (3) and (4) of this section.
      (3)   (a)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least ten days before the
date of the bypass if possible.
         (b)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware
of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected
to continue and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-
case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
      (4)   (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement
action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage;
            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
            3.   The industrial user submitted notices as required under
subsection (3) of this section.
         (b)   The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in subsection (4)(a) of this section.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any user which has violated or continues to violate this chapter,
any order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall be liable to the Superintendent for a maximum
civil penalty of $750 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other
long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during
the period of the violation.
      (2)   The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual damages incurred by
the city.
      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the
user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice
requires.
      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for
taking any other action against a user.
   (B)   Criminal prosecution.
      (1)   Any user that willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this chapter, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder or
any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $750 per violation per day
or imprisonment for not more than six months or both.
      (2)   Any user that willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least
$250 and/or be subject to imprisonment for not more than six months. This
penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury
or property damage available under state law.
      (3)   Any user that knowingly makes any false statements, representations
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
documentation filed or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter,
wastewater discharge permit or order or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than
$750 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six months or
both.
      (4)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $750 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more
than six months or both.
   (C)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment
standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter,
wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment requirement, the Superintendent may petition the Circuit Court of
Ford County, Illinois, through the City Attorney for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the industrial user. Such
other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be
sought by the city. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a
prerequisite to taking any other action against a user.
   (D)   Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions in §
52.122, §§
52.135 et seq. and this section are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves
the right to take any, all or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city
reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. 99-26, passed 9-13-99)
CHAPTER 53: GROUNDWATER RESTRICTIONS
Section
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Use of groundwater as a potable water supply prohibited
   
53.03   Memorandum of understanding
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
   POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption, including,
but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes,
or preparing foods.
(Ord. 10-32, passed 10-11-10)
§ 53.02 USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except for such uses or methods in existence before the effective date
of the ordinance codified herein, the use or attempt to use as a potable water
supply groundwater from within the corporate limits of the City of Paxton,
Illinois, as a potable water supply, by the installation or drilling of wells
or by any other method is hereby prohibited. This prohibition does not include
the City of Paxton, Illinois.
   (B)   The Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department will notify the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Bureau of Land, of any proposed
ordinance changes or requests for variance at least 30 days prior to the date
the city is scheduled to take action on the proposed changes or request.
   (C)   The Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department of the City of
Paxton, Illinois, will maintain a registry of all sites within its corporate
limits that have received "No Further Remediation" determinations from the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   (D)   The Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department will review the
registry of sites established under this section prior to siting public potable
water supply wells within the area covered by this section.
   (E)   The Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department will determine
whether the potential source of potable water has been or may by affected by
contamination left in place at the sites tracked and reviewed under this
section.
   (F)   The Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Department will take action
as necessary to ensure that the potential source of potable water is protected
from contamination or treated before it is used as a potable water supply.
(Ord. 10-32, passed 10-11-10)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.03 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING.
   The Mayor of the City of Paxton, Illinois, is hereby authorized and directed
to enter into a memorandum of understanding with the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency ("Illinois EPA") in which the City of Paxton, Illinois,
assumes responsibility for tracking all sites that have received no further
remediation determinations from the Illinois EPA, notifying the Illinois EPA of
changes to this chapter, and taking certain precautions when siting public
potable water supply wells. That the Memorandum of Understanding with the
Illinois EPA, in substantially the form as attached to the ordinance codified
herein and incorporated by reference therein as "Exhibit A", is hereby
approved, and the Mayor is authorized hereby to execute and deliver the same.
(Ord. 10-32, passed 10-11-10)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating §
53.02(A) shall be subject to a fine of up to $750 for each violation.
(Ord. 10-32, passed 10-11-10)
CHAPTER 54: HIGHWAY AUTHORITY AGREEMENTS
Section
   
54.01   Definitions
   
54.02   Application for highway authority agreement
   
54.03   Review of application for highway authority agreement; hiring a
consultant
   
54.04   Criteria for approval of proposed highway authority agreement
   
54.05   Supplemental agreement
§ 54.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Environmental Protection Act, ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, and any
amendments thereto.
   CITY. The City of Paxton, Illinois.
   CONSULTANT. An engineer, licensed in the State of Illinois, who is qualified
as an expert to render an opinion as to the extent and nature of risks posed to
persons or the environment by various forms of contamination from hazardous
substances, and as to the efficacy and adequacy of proposals to mitigate or
otherwise address those risks; or an entity having on its staff one or more
engineers having the qualifications provided herein.
   CONTAMINATED GROUNDWATER OR SOIL. Groundwater or soil containing
concentrations of hazardous substances as defined in the Illinois
Administrative Code.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance defined as a hazardous substance in ILCS
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.14, and any petroleum or petroleum products.
   HIGHWAY AUTHORITY AGREEMENT. An agreement entered into between an owner/
operator and the city to provide an institutional control that is acceptable to
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and in compliance with the
provisions of the Illinois Administrative Code, for the purpose of avoiding the
need for immediate remediation of contaminated groundwater or soil on or under
the right-of-way.
   ILLINOIS ADMINISTRATIVE CODE. Refers to Title 35, Subtitle G, of the
Illinois Administrative Code, and any amendments thereto.
   INSTITUTIONAL CONTROL.  A legal mechanism for imposing a restriction on land
use in order to protect people and the environment from harmful exposure to
contaminated groundwater or soil that is left in place.
   OWNER/OPERATOR.  Any person, trust, partnership, corporation or other entity
that is legally responsible for the remediation of contaminated groundwater or
soil at a particular site under the pertinent provisions of the Act because of
that person or entity's ownership or control of the real property and/or
facilities at the site.
   PROPERTY.  The real property where the release of contaminants giving rise
to the need for the proposed highway authority agreement occurred.
   RELEASE OF CONTAMINANTS ON THE PROPERTY.  The release of hazardous
substances on the property that gave rise to the requirement, under the
Illinois Administrative Code, to institute an institutional control, such as
the proposed highway authority agreement, in order to avoid the need for
immediate remediation of contaminated groundwater or soil on the right-of-way
adjacent thereto.
   REMEDIATION OF CONTAMINATED GROUNDWATER OR SOIL. The identification and
proper removal and disposal of contaminated groundwater or soil in compliance
with the pertinent provisions of the Act and the Illinois Administrative Code.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parkways or other
thoroughfares or property adjacent thereto, over which the city has
jurisdiction, and that is generally open for public use.
   SUPPLEMENTAL AGREEMENT. An agreement entered into between an owner/operator
and the city to address future issues between the city and the owner/operator
when contamination is left in the public right-of-way. The purpose of the
SUPPLEMENTAL AGREEMENT is to supplement the parties rights and obligations
provided in the highway authority agreement.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Streets and Alleys for the City of
Paxton, or the Superintendent's designee.
(Ord. 10-33, passed 10-11-10)
§ 54.02 APPLICATION FOR HIGHWAY AUTHORITY AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Requirements generally. Any owner/operator requesting that the City
enter into a highway authority agreement shall submit to the Superintendent the
following:
      (1)   A written application requesting the same (hereinafter the
"application");
      (2)   A certified check or money order in the amount of $1,250 as an
application fee, this fee is non-refundable;
      (3)   A certified check or money order in the sum of $1,500, to pay the
minimum fee of the City to hire a consultant. The minimum fee to be charged by
the City to the owner/operator for the costs of hiring a consultant to review
the application for the highway authority agreement and the supplement
agreement shall be $1500; and
      (4)   An executed preliminary agreement, hereinafter "preliminary
agreement", on a form provided by the Superintendent. The preliminary agreement
shall, at a minimum:
         (a)   Commit the city to make a good faith effort to evaluate whether
entering into and implementing the agreement will pose any significant risk of
harm to persons or the environment; and
         (b)   Commit the owner/operator to compensate the city up to a
predetermined amount, above and beyond the minimum fee set forth for the costs
of hiring a consultant to review the application in the manner set forth in §
54.03. The Mayor shall establish said pre-determined amount for each
application, in consultation with the Superintendent, in order to reasonably
anticipate the consultant costs that will be incurred for that application. The
fee shall consider and include the cost to the city of entering into a
supplemental agreement.
   (B)   Contents of application. The application shall include, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   A legal description of and common street address for the property;
      (2)   A draft of a proposed highway authority agreement; and
      (3)   Any and all documents, including any reports and any drawings,
pertaining to any testing performed on the property and in the immediate
vicinity of the property, which disclosed the contamination that is the subject
of the proposed highway authority agreement.
(Ord. 10-33, passed 10-11-10)
§ 54.03 REVIEW OF APPLICATION FOR HIGHWAY AUTHORITY AGREEMENT; HIRING A
CONSULTANT.
   (A)   Hiring a consultant. Upon receipt of a completed application for a
highway authority agreement, administrative fee and executed preliminary
agreement described in the proceeding section, the Superintendent shall hire a
consultant for the purpose of evaluating and making recommendations regarding
said application, and the necessity of entering into a supplemental agreement.
   (B)   (1)   Consultant's responsibilities. The Superintendent shall direct
the consultant to provide a written report to the Superintendent regarding the
risks posed to persons or the environment by the contamination of the property
and the surrounding right-of-way. The report shall at a minimum contain the
following:
         (a)   An assessment regarding the extent and nature of the risk of
harm to persons or the environment, posed by the release of contaminants on the
property;
         (b)   An assessment regarding whether there is any significant risk to
persons or the environment if the proposed highway authority agreement, or an
agreement substantially similar to the same, is executed and properly
implemented by the owner/operator and the city; and
         (c)   An outline of items to be included in a supplemental agreement;
      (2)   If the consultant determines, after receipt of the application and
documents accompanying the same, that additional information is needed from the
owner/operator, the consultant shall specify in writing to the Superintendent,
what additional information is needed from the owner/operator, and the
Superintendent shall forward said request to the owner/operator.
   (C)   After having received and reviewed a written report from the
consultant containing the information described in division (B) of this
section, and based on information contained in the report and any other
pertinent information available to the Superintendent, the Superintendent shall
determine whether it is in the best interest of the public that the proposed
highway authority agreement be executed by the city. Based on that
determination, the Superintendent shall recommend in writing that the Mayor
either execute or decline to execute the proposed highway authority agreement.
   (D)   After having received and reviewed the Superintendent's
recommendation, the Mayor shall return an executed agreement to the owner/
operator, or shall submit a letter to the owner/operator explaining why the
city has determined that it is not in the best interest of the public to
execute the agreement. No action by the City Council shall be required to
authorize the Mayor to execute the agreement.
(Ord. 10-33, passed 10-11-10)
§ 54.04 CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL OF PROPOSED HIGHWAY AUTHORITY AGREEMENT.
   The Superintendent shall not recommend approval of, and the Mayor shall not
execute a proposed highway authority agreement unless the execution and
implementation of the agreement will not pose any significant risk of harm to
persons or the environment from contaminated soil or groundwater. In addition,
any approved and executed highway authority agreement shall, at a minimum, by
its terms and conditions, do the following:
   (A)   Provide that the agreement shall be null and void should the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency not approve it as a basis for issuing a "no
further remediation letter" in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the
Illinois Administrative Code;
   (B)   Provide that there shall be a rebuttable presumption that any
contaminants found in the right-of-way arose from release of contaminants on
the property;
   (C)   Commit the city to prohibiting the use of groundwater under the right-
of-way as a potable or other domestic supply of water, and to imposing
reasonable controls on the access to soils on and under the right-of-way to
reduce to an acceptable level the risks of harmful exposure to contaminated
soils by persons or the environment;
   (D)   Commit the owner/operator to indemnify, defend and hold the city
harmless for any damages to property or injury to individuals, including death
therefrom, and costs incurred, including attorney's fees and court costs,
associated with or in any manner arising from the release of contaminants on
the property;
   (E)   Reserve to the city the right to construct, reconstruct, improve,
repair, maintain and operate a highway upon the right-of-way, or allow others
to do the same by permit, and reserve to the city or others by permit the right
to remove contaminated soil and/or groundwater;
   (F)   Reserve to the city the right to remove and dispose of contaminated
groundwater and/or soil as needed to avoid further release of contaminated
soils or groundwater from activities described in division (E) of this section;
   (G)   Commit the owner/operator, at the city's discretion, to perform the
removal and disposal of contaminated groundwater and/or soil resulting from the
release of contaminants on the property, at no cost to the city, in accordance
with state and federal environmental rules and regulations, as needed to avoid
further release of contaminated soils or groundwater from activities described
in division (E) of this section; and
   (H)   Commit the owner/operator to reimburse the city, or any agent acting
on the city's behalf, for any reasonable costs that it or its agent may incur
in protecting human health and environment from hazards posed by or arising
from release of contaminants on the property, including but not limited to
those associated with identifying, handling, storing, removing or disposing of
contaminated groundwater and/or soil associated with the release of
contaminants on the property.
(Ord. 10-33, passed 10-11-10)
§ 54.05 SUPPLEMENTAL AGREEMENT.
   (A)   The city shall request the owner/operator to enter into a supplemental
agreement, in addition to the highway authority agreement.
   (B)   The owner/operator shall compensate the city up to a predetermined
amount, above and beyond the minimum fee set for the cost of hiring a
consultant to assist the city in the drafting and review of the supplemental
agreement. The Mayor shall establish the pre-determined amount for each
supplemental agreement, in consultation with the Superintendent, in order to
reasonably anticipate the consultant costs that will be incurred for that
supplemental agreement. The fee shall consider and include the cost to the city
of entering into a highway authority agreement.
(Ord. 10-33, passed 10-11-10)
CHAPTER 55: ELECTRIC AGGREGATION PLAN
Section
   
55.01   Adoption of Plan
§ 55.01 ADOPTION OF PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council finds and determines that it is in the best interests
of the city to operate the electric aggregation program under the Illinois
Power Agency Act ("the Act") as an opt-out program.
   (B)   The electric aggregation program shall be administered as follows:
      (1)   The city is hereby authorized to aggregate, in accordance with the
terms of the Act, all residential and small commercial retail electrical loads
located within the corporate limits of the city, and for that purpose may
solicit bids and enter into service agreements to facilitate the sale and
purchase of electricity and related services and equipment for those loads.
      (2)   The Mayor and City Clerk are granted the authority to exercise such
authority jointly with any other municipality or county and, in combination
with two or more municipalities or counties, may initiate a process jointly to
authorize aggregation by a majority vote of each particular municipality or
county as required by the Act.
      (3)   The electric aggregation program for the city shall operate as an
opt-out program for residential and small commercial retail customers.
      (4)   The City Council, with the assistance of the Illinois Power Agency,
shall develop a Plan of Governance for the electric aggregation program. The
Plan of Governance shall provide for universal access to all applicable
residential customers and equitable treatment of applicable residential
customers, shall describe demand management and energy efficiency services to
be provided to each class of customers and shall meet any requirements
established by law concerning aggregated service offered pursuant to the Act.
      (5)   As an opt-out program, the Mayor shall inform residential and small
commercial retail customers in advance that they have the right to opt-out of
the electric aggregation program.
      (6)   The electric aggregation shall occur automatically for each person
owning, occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to
be aggregated in the corporate limits of the city, subject to a right to opt-
out of the program as described under this chapter and the Act.
   (C)   The City Council hereby adopts the Plan of Governance, as set forth in
Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 12-80 and made a part hereof as if fully set
forth by this reference.
(Ord. 12-80, passed 12-10-12)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   RULES OF OPERATION
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES, AND TOY VEHICLES
      
74.   SNOWMOBILES
      
75.   PEDESTRIANS
      
76.   EQUIPMENT; LOADS
      
77.   MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
      
78.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
79.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      
80.   NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLES AND GOLF CARTS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
In General
   
70.01   Definitions
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
   
70.10   Obedience to police officers
   
70.11   Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions
   
70.12   Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn
vehicles
   
70.13   Fleeing or attempting to elude police officer
   
70.14   Scene of fire
   
70.15   Arrests
   
70.16   Tickets
Traffic Signs, Signals, and Markings
   
70.30   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
70.31   Traffic-control signal legend
   
70.32   Pedestrian-control signals
   
70.33   Lane-control signals
   
70.34   Flashing signals
   
70.35   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or advertising signs
   
70.36   Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or
signals
   
70.37   Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances, and structures
   
70.38   Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker
   
70.39   Zones of quiet
   
70.40   No-turning signs and turning markers
   
70.41   Stop and yield signs
   
70.42   Posting signs
 
   
70.99   Penalty
IN GENERAL
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   ALLEY. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of
lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102)
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any U.S. or state numbered route, controlled-access
highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated
by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a major
arterial system of streets or highways.
(ILCS Ch. 70, Act 1205, § 3-9)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of city departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by proper local
authorities; police vehicles; vehicles of the Fire Department; vehicles of a
HazMat or technical rescue team authorized by a county board under ILCS Ch. 55,
Act 5, § 5-1127; ambulances; vehicles of the Illinois Department of
Corrections; vehicles of the Illinois Department of Juvenile Justice; vehicles
of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency; vehicles of the Office of the
Illinois State Fire Marshal; mine rescue and explosives emergency response
vehicles of the Department of Natural Resources; vehicles of the Illinois
Department of Public Health; vehicles of the Illinois State Toll Highway
Authority identified as Highway Emergency Lane Patrol; vehicles of the Illinois
Department of Transportation identified as Emergency Traffic Patrol; and
vehicles of a municipal or county emergency services and disaster agency, as
defined by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-105)
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels except scooters and similar devices.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-106)
   BUS. Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for carrying
more than ten persons.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-107)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within 600 feet along the highway there are buildings in use for business or
industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office
buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side, or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-108)
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons
or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-
hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a
ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational
vehicle not being used commercially.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8)
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street, or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the highway, street, or roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-112)
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of a
highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral
line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk,
with the extension forming a right angle to the centerline of the highway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface,
placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the
Department of Transportation as authorized in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-113)
   DISABLED PARKING PERMIT. A decal or other device issued in accordance with
state law to any disabled driver, using the international disabled symbol.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116)
   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines, and other implements of
husbandry, and every implement of husbandry which is self-propelled.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-120)
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle, whether operated singly or in
combination, without load, plus the weight of load thereon.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-125)
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126)
   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for
agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm
wagons, wagon trailers, or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for
lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry, provided that no farm wagon,
wagon trailer, or like vehicle having a gross weight of more than 36,000
pounds, shall be included hereunder.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-130)
   IMPROVED HIGHWAY. Any roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam and
crushed stone, or gravel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-131)
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 40 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (3)   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not
constitute an intersection.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-132)
   J-TURN. Any turn from a northerly bound lane into a parking space on the
west side of the street, from an easterly bound lane into a parking space on
the north side of the street, from a southerly bound lane into a parking space
on the east side of the street or from a westerly bound lane into a parking
space on the south side of the street.
   LANE-CONTROL SIGNAL. An official traffic-control device consisting of an
electrically controlled and illuminated signal of a square or rectangular
design, and employing distinctive colors or symbols used to control the
direction of vehicular flow on the particular lane to which the indication
applies.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-135)
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-136)
   LEASE. A written document vesting exclusive possession, use, control, and
responsibility of the lessee during the periods the vehicle is operated by or
for the lessee for a specific period of time.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-137)
   LICENSE TO DRIVE. Any driver's license or any other license or permit to
operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of this state including:
      (1)   Any temporary license or instruction permit;
      (2)   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle, whether or
not the person holds a valid license or permit;
      (3)   Any nonresident's driving privilege as defined herein.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-138)
   LIMOUSINE. Any privately owned first division vehicle intended to be used
for the transportation of persons for-hire when the payment is not based on a
meter charge but is prearranged for a designated destination.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-139.1)
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, city, village, and other local board or
body having authority to enact laws relating to traffic under the constitution
and laws of this state and each road district highway commissioner having that
authority.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140)
   LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Same meaning as ascribed to it by Section 38 of
the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 U.S.C. Sec. 2085).
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5 § 1-140.10)
   LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLE. A two or three wheeled device with fully operable
pedals and a gasoline motor of less than one horsepower, whose maximum speed on
a paved level surface, when powered solely by such a motor ridden by an
operator who weighs 170 pounds, is less than 20 miles per hour.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5 § 1-140.15)
   MAIL. To deposit in the United States mail properly addressed and with
postage prepaid.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-141)
   MOPED. A motor-driven cycle, with or without optional power derived from
manually operated pedals, whose speed attainable in one mile is at least 20
m.p.h. but not greater than 30 m.p.h. and less, which is equipped with a motor
that produces two brake horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine is
used, the displacement shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeter displacement and
the power drive system shall not require the operator to shift gears.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, except for vehicles
moved solely by human power, motorized wheelchairs, low-speed electric bicycles
and low-speed gas bicycles. For this section, motor vehicles are divided into
two divisions:
      (1)   First division: motor vehicles designed for carrying not more than
ten persons.
      (2)   Second division: motor vehicles designed for carrying more than ten
persons, those designed or used for living quarters, and those motor vehicles
which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo, and those motor
vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of
the second division.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146)
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than
150 cubic centimeter piston displacement, including motorized pedalcycles.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001)
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider, and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding an autocycle or tractor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-147)
   MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLE. A motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in one
mile is 30 m.p.h. or less, which is equipped with a motor that produces two
brake horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine is used, the
displacement shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeter displacement and the power
drive system shall not require the operator to shift gears.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2)
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle, including a three-wheeled
vehicle, designed for and used by a person with disabilities, that is incapable
of a speed in excess of eight m.p.h. on level ground.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3)
   MULTIFUNCTION SCHOOL ACTIVITY BUS. A school bus manufactured for the purpose
of transporting 11 or more persons, including the driver, whose purposes do not
include transporting students to and from home or school bus stops. A MFSAB is
prohibited from meeting the special requirements of school buses in ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5 §§ 12-801, 12-802(a), 12-803 and 12-805.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5 § 1-148.3a-5)
   NONCOMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-151)
   NOT-FOR-HIRE. Operation of a commercial vehicle in furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise, but not-for-hire.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153)
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings, and devices
which conform with the state manual, and not inconsistent with this title,
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-154)
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the event a
motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of the motor vehicle
is entitled to possession, then the conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this title.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-155)
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-156)
   PARKWAY. That portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.
   PASSENGER CAR. A motor vehicle of the first division, including a
multipurpose passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than ten
persons.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157)
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot or wearing in-line speed skates, including a
person with a physical, hearing, or visual disability.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-158)
   PERSON WITH DISABILITIES. A natural person who, as determined by a licensed
physician, by a physician assistant who has been delegated the authority to
make this determination by his or her supervising physician, by an advanced
practice registered nurse, or by a licensed physical therapist:
      (1)   Cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane,
crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other assistive
device;
      (2)   Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that his or her
forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one second, when measured by
spirometry, is less than one liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less than
60 mm/hg on room air at rest;
      (3)   Uses portable oxygen;
      (4)   Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional
limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class IV, according to
standards set by the American Heart Association; or
      (5)   Is severely limited in the person’s ability to walk due to an
arthritic, neurological, oncological, or orthopedic condition; or
      (6)   Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest because of one of the
above five conditions; or
      (7)   Is missing a hand or arm or has permanently lost the use of a hand
or arm.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-159.1)
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests and issue citations for violations of traffic regulations.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162)
   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place where any person transacts his or her
principal business, or where he or she makes up and approves his or her
payroll, maintains a central file of records, and maintains his or her
principal executive offices. In the event that not all of these functions are
performed in one place, then that place where a majority of these functions are
performed, or the place where the person does in fact principally transact and
control his or her business affairs shall be considered as the principal place
of business.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5)
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership, and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-163)
   PROPERTY LINE. The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots
or property abutting thereon.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166)
   RAILROAD-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING. The intersection of stationary rails owned
or used in the operation of a railroad corporation across a highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166.1)
   RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device, other than an
official traffic-control signal or device, erected in accordance with the laws
governing the same, and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad
tracks or the approach of a railroad train or railroad track equipment.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167)
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168)
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Every camping trailer, motor home, mini motor home,
travel trailer, truck camper, or van camper used primarily for recreational
purposes, and not used commercially nor owned by a commercial business.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169)
   REGISTRATION. The registration certificate or certificates and registration
plates issued under the laws of this state pertaining to the registration of
vehicles. Includes digital registration plates and digital registration
stickers issued by the Secretary of State under state law.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171)
   REGISTRATION STICKER. A device to be attached to a registration plate that
will renew the registration and registration plate or plates for a
predetermined period, not to exceed one registration year.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171)
   REMOVE. Includes removing, defacing, covering, or destroying.
   RESCUE SQUAD. A voluntary association of individuals, or a fire department,
dedicated to saving lives through the rescue of persons entrapped in wrecked
vehicles or other hazardous circumstances.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6)
   RESCUE VEHICLE. Any publicly or privately owned vehicle which is
specifically designed, configured, and equipped for the performance of access
and extrication of persons from hazardous or life-endangering situations, as
well as for the emergency transportation of persons who are sick, injured,
wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.8)
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway, not
comprising a business district, when the property on the highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business. For purposes of establishing maximum speed
limits, a RESIDENCE DISTRICT shall be at least a quarter of a mile long with
residences or residences and buildings in use for businesses spaced no more
than 500 feet apart.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-172)
   RETAIL SALE. The act or attempted act of selling vehicles or otherwise
disposing of a vehicle to a person for use as a consumer.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-174)
   REVOCATION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE. The termination by formal action of the
secretary, of a person's license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the
public highways, which termination shall not be subject to renewal or
restoration, except that an application for a new license may be presented and
acted upon by the secretary after the expiration of at least one year after the
date of revocation.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-176)
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed, and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision, unless one grants precedence to the other.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-177)
   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-178)
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways
collectively.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-179)
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-181)
   SCHOOL BUS.
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, except as provided in division (2) below,
owned or operated by or for any of the following entities for the
transportation of persons regularly enrolled as students in grade 12 or below
in connection with any activity of the entity:
         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school;
         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a religious
institution; or
         (c)   Any public, private, or religious nursery school.
      (2)   This definition does not include the following:
         (a)   A bus operated by a public utility, municipal corporation, or
common carrier authorized to conduct local or interurban transportation of
passengers when the bus is not traveling a specific school bus route but is:
            1.   On a regularly scheduled route for the transportation of other
fare-paying passengers;
            2.   Furnishing charter service for the transportation of groups on
field trips or other special trips or in connection with special events; or
            3.   Being used for shuttle service between attendance centers or
other educational facilities.
         (b)   A motor vehicle of the First Division.
         (c)   A multifunction school activity bus.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-182)
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle, and so constructed its weight and that of its load rests upon or is
carried by another vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187)
   SHOULDER. That portion of the highway adjacent to the roadway for
accommodating stopped vehicles or for emergency use.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.1)
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)
   SPEED-CHANGE LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for
the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the through
traffic lanes.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-193)
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-194)
   STATE. A state, territory, or possession of the United States, the District
of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a province of the Dominion of
Canada.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-195)
   STATE HIGHWAYS. Defined in the Illinois Highway Code as the same may from
time to time be amended.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-196)
   STATE POLICE. The Illinois state police.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-197)
   STOP. The complete cessation from movement.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-199)
   STOP or STOPPING. Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign
or signal.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-200)
   STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-201)
   SUBURBAN DISTRICT. That portion of any city, village, or incorporated town,
other than the business and residence districts.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-203)
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic
is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way
to vehicles on the through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a
yield sign, when those signs are erected as provided in this title.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205)
   TOW TRUCK. Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to
push, tow, or draw vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, towbar, towline, or
auxiliary axle, or to render assistance to disabled vehicles.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-207)
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any official traffic-control device other than a
railroad sign or signal, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to
proceed.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-208)
   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. Any provision of this code or other regulatory
ordinance the purpose of which is to directly control or improve traffic and
safety of both vehicles and pedestrians.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-209)
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide living
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, and of a size or weight not
requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-210.01)
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211)
   TRUCK CAMPER. A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a portable
unit designed to be loaded onto the bed which is constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, travel, or camping use.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01)
   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-212)
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses,
and situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of ¼-mile or
more.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214)
   URBAN AREA. An urban area is any incorporated or unincorporated area
developed primarily for residential or business purposes.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.8)
   VEHICLE.
      (1)   Every device, in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
snowmobiles as defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, unless otherwise prescribed, a
device shall be considered to be a vehicle until such time it either comes
within the definition of a “junk vehicle,” as defined under this section, or a
junking certificate is issued for it.
      (3)   For this section vehicles are divided into two divisions:
         (a)   First division: those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten persons;
         (b)   Second division: those vehicles which are designed for carrying
more than ten persons; those designed or used for living quarters; those which
are designed for pulling or carrying property, freight, or cargo; those
vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as vehicles of the
second division; and those vehicles of the first division used and registered
as school buses.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217)
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62; Am. Ord. 90-28, passed 9-10-90; Am. Ord. 94-13,
passed 4-11-94)
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS
§ 70.10 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer, fireman, person authorized by local authority
to direct traffic, or school crossing guard invested by law with authority to
direct, control, or regulate traffic. Any person convicted of violating this
section is guilty of a petty offense and shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of $150.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.11 PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC CODE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of
vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or
operated by the United States, the state, or any county, city, town, district,
or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this
section, and subject to specific exceptions as set forth in this title with
reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (C)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be required and necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property;
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing the direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
   (D)   The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle,
other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is making use of
either an audible signal when in motion, or visual signals meeting the
requirements of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215.
   (E)   The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of
all persons, nor do these provisions protect the driver from the consequences
of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
   (F)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this traffic
code shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles, and equipment while actually
engaged in work upon the highway, but shall apply to such persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-205)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.12 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN
VEHICLES.
   Every person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those
provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.13 FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who,
having been given a visual or audible signal by a police officer directing the
driver or operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, willfully fails or
refuses to obey that direction, increases his or her speed, extinguishes his or
her lights, or otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer. The signal
given by the police officer may be by hand, voice, siren, or a red or blue
light. However, the officer giving the signal shall be in police uniform and,
if driving a vehicle, the vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official
police vehicle.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.14 SCENE OF FIRE.
   The fire protection district officer in command, or any firefighter
designated by him or her, may exercise the powers and authority of a police
officer in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where its Fire
Department has responded to an emergency call for so long as Fire Department
equipment is on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
§ 70.15 ARRESTS.
   Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be
released upon proper bail being furnished as required by statute. The police
officer in command at the station may, in the absence of a police magistrate or
justice, prescribe the amount of bail or bond in each instance; provided, that
any arrested person may at his or her own request have the amount of such bond
set by a magistrate or justice of the peace as provided by statute.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
§ 70.16 TICKETS.
   For offenses other than driving while intoxicated or reckless driving,
police officers, after making note of the license number of the vehicle (and
name of the offender where possible) may issue a traffic violation ticket
notifying the offender to appear in court at the time designated for hearing
such cases. The officer may sign a complaint for the issuance of a warrant if
the offender does not appear at the time and place so specified.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKINGS
§ 70.30 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device in accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle in this traffic code.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across
private property to avoid an official traffic-control device.
   (C)   No provision of this traffic code, for which official traffic-control
devices are required, shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control
devices are required, the section shall be effective even though no devices are
erected or in place.
   (D)   Whenever any official traffic-control device is placed or held in
position approximately conforming to the requirements of this traffic code, the
device shall be presumed to have been so placed or held by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, and comply with the requirements of this traffic
code, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a traffic-control signal on which
no signal light facing the vehicle is illuminated shall stop before entering
the intersection, in accordance with rules applicable in making a stop at a
stop sign. This provision does not apply to the driver of a vehicle approaching
a pedestrian hybrid beacon.
   (F)   Any violation of division (A) of this section that occurs within a
designated highway construction zone or maintenance zone shall result in a fine
of no less than $100 and no more than $1,000.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.31 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or color lighted arrows, successively one at a time or
in combination, only the colors green, red, and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
   (A)   Green indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by the arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as
provided in §
70.32, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal
is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
   (B)   Steady yellow indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or
that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal,
unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in §
70.32, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway
before a red indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross
the roadway.
   (C)   Steady red indication.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such
crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain standing
until an indication to proceed is shown.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, vehicular
traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not enter the intersection to
make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection
to make a movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then
before entering the intersection; and shall remain standing until an indication
permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is shown.
      (3)   Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn and the city
authorities by ordinance or state authorities by rule or regulation prohibit
any such turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously
enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street
into a one-way street, after stopping as required by division (C)(1) or (C)(2)
of this section. After stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction or roadways. The driver shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk.
      (4)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided in §
70.32, pedestrians facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal alone shall
not enter the roadway.
   (D)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can
have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made; or, in the absence of
such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.32 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or
“Don't Walk” or the illuminated symbols of a walking person or an upraised palm
are in place, these signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   “Walk” or walking person symbol. Pedestrians facing this signal may
proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given
the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
   (B)   “Don't Walk” or upraised palm signal. No pedestrian shall start to
cross the roadway in the direction of this signal, but any pedestrian who has
partly completed his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal or upraised palm
symbol shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the “Don't Walk”
signal or upraised palm symbol is illuminated, steady, or flashing.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.33 LANE-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever lane-control signals are used in conjunction with official signs,
they shall have the following meanings:
   (A)   Downward-pointing green arrow. A driver facing this indication is
permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal is located.
Otherwise, he or she shall obey all other traffic controls present and follow
normal safe driving practices.
   (B)   Red X symbol. A driver facing this indication shall not drive in the
lane over which the signal is located, and this indication shall modify
accordingly the meaning of all other traffic controls present. Otherwise he or
she shall obey all other traffic controls, and follow normal safe driving
practices.
   (C)   Yellow X (steady). A driver facing this indication should prepare to
vacate the lane over which the signal is located, in a safe manner to avoid, if
possible, occupying that lane when a steady red X is displayed.
   (D)   Flashing yellow arrow. A driver facing this indication may use the
lane only for the purpose of approaching and making a left turn.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-308)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.34 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in conjunction
with a traffic-control device, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic
as follows:
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past the signal only with caution.
   (C)   Applicability. This section does not apply at railroad grade
crossings.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-309)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.35 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS, OR ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be,
or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or the
effectiveness of an official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (C)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed without notice.
   (D)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any traffic-control device to
be used on any street or highway in this city which does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information,
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (F)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection of Illinois
Adopt-A-Highway signs by the city as provided in the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway
Act, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.36 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR
SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact
alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control
device, or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia
thereon, or any other part thereof.
   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalties which
may be imposed.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-311)
§ 70.37 UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES, AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure or damage any
public highway or street, or any bridge or culvert, or to willfully damage,
injure, or remove any sign, signpost, or structure upon or used or constructed
in connection with any public highway or street for the protection thereof, or
for the protection or regulation of traffic thereon, by any willfully unusual,
improper, or unreasonable use thereof, or by willfully careless driving or use
of any vehicle thereon, or by willful mutilation, defacing, destruction, or
removal thereof.
   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalty which may
be imposed.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.38 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF HIGHWAY SIGN OR MARKER.
   The City Public Works Department, with reference to traffic-control signs,
signals, or markers owned by the city, is authorized to indicate the ownership
of the signs, signals, or markers in letters not less than 3/8-inch, or more
than 3/4-inch in height, by use of a metal stamp, etching, or other permanent
means. Except for employees of the City Public Works Department, police
officers, contractors and their employees engaged in a highway construction
contract or work on the highway approved by the city, it is unlawful for any
person to possess a sign, signal, or marker so identified.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-313)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.39 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device except in an emergency.
§ 70.40 NO-TURNING SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-
turn is permitted no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the
sign. When authorized marks, buttons, or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be travelled by vehicles, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.
§ 70.41 STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
signs or yield signs as authorized in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a streetcar approaching
a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersection roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for
safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.42 POSTING SIGNS.
   The Superintendent of Streets, the Chief of Police or any other person
designed by the Mayor or City Council shall post or cause to be posted such
signs as shall be necessary to indicate and to carry out the provisions of this
title, including, but not limited to, stop signs, yield right-of-way signs, no
parking signs, no U-turn signs and speed limit signs.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Generally. Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code
for which another penalty is not already otherwise provided by ordinance or by
appropriate statutory penalty as generally set forth in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§
16-101 et seq. shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $750.
      (2)   School buses. In addition to the suspensions authorized by ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-1414, any person convicted of meeting or overtaking a school
bus shall be subject to a mandatory fine of $150 or, upon a second or
subsequent violation, $500.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414(f))
      (3)   Special speed limits. Except as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-605(e-5), a person who violates special speed limits is guilty of a petty
offense. Violations of such speed limits are punishable with a minimum fine of
$150 for the first violation and a minimum fine of $300 for the second or
subsequent violation.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(e))
   (B)   Parking violations. Any person accused of a violation of any provision
of this traffic code prohibiting parking a vehicle in a designated area, or
restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there parked, or parking in a
metered area without putting a coin in the meter to cover the required time,
may settle and compromise the claim against him or her for such illegal parking
by paying to the city $3 for each such offense if paid within 5 days, or $10 if
paid within 21 days. Such payment may be made at the police station, a receipt
shall be issued for all money so received, and such money shall be promptly
turned over to the City Treasurer to be credited to the General Fund. The
members of the Police Department are authorized to refrain from instituting a
prosecution for the alleged offense involved. This section shall not apply to
persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the entrance or exit of any place
where Police or Fire Department apparatus or other emergency equipment is kept
or housed, or so as to block an emergency entrance in a hospital; nor shall
this section apply to any person charged with parking a vehicle so as to
entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley, or parking in such a way as
to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic only; nor to any
person who refuses to move a vehicle illegally parked at the request of any
member of the Police Department.
   (C)   Railroad crossing violations.
      (1)   Vehicles at crossings. It is unlawful to violate any part of §
75.12. A first conviction of a person for a violation of §
75.12 shall result in a mandatory fine of $250; all subsequent convictions of
that person for such violation shall each result in a mandatory fine of $500.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201(e))
      (2)   Pedestrians at crossings. A violation of a pedestrian of bridge and
railroad signals shall result in a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of
community service.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011)
   (D)   Uniform fine schedule.  
      (1)   A uniform schedule of fines, for certain violations under this
chapter, pertaining to motor vehicles is hereby established as follows:
Violation                                             Amount
                                                      (If paid within 48 hours)
         (a)   Violation of §            $25.00
70.40, No-turning signs and turning markers:
         (b)   Violation of §            $25.00
72.01, No parking places set forth by city:
         (c)   Violation of § 71.02, J-tu$25.00
         (d)   Violation of §            $25.00
72.02, Parking at curb:
         (e)   Violation of §            $25.00
72.03, Alleys:
         (f)   Violation of §            $25.00
72.10, General parking regulations:
         (g)   Violation of §
72.20(A), (1)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (i),  $25.00
(j) (k), Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in
specified places:
         (h)   Violation of §
72.20(A), (2)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) Stopping    $25.00
standing, or parking prohibited in specified places:
         (i)   Violation of §
72.20(a), (3)(a), (b) Stopping, standing, or parking  $25.00
prohibited in specified places:
         (j)   Violation of §
72.20(B) Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in $25.00
specified places:
         (k)   Violation of §
72.20(C) Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in $25.00
specified places:
         (l)   Violation of §
73.36(A) and (b), Operation prohibited in certain     $25.00
areas:
         (m)   Violation of §            $25.00
73.37, Clinging to a vehicle:
         (n)   Violation of §            $25.00
73.38, Yield of right-of-way:
         (o)   Violation of §
73.39(A) and (B), Skateboarding, skates and toy       $25.00
vehicles on private property:
         (p)   Violation of §            $25.00
73.40, Damaging city property:
         (q)   Violation of §            $25.00
73.41, Ramps:
 
      (2)   Provided, however, that the forgoing schedule of fines shall be
applicable only if the person guilty of such violation shall, within 48 hours
after such violation, deposit with the City Clerk the amount of the fine above
specified for such violation. No summons or warrant shall be issued against
such person if said sum be so deposited within said 48 hour period. If said sum
is not so deposited within said 48 hour period, then a summons or warrant may
be issued for any of said violations, and the amount of said fine shall be
fixed by the court according to and within the limits of the provisions of this
code.
(Ord. 05-02, passed 1-10-05; Am. Ord. 10-36, passed 11-8-10)
CHAPTER 71: RULES OF OPERATION
Section
Operation
   
71.001   Unattended animals
   
71.002   Riding on running boards
Speed Restrictions
   
71.010   Speed limits
   
71.011   Special speed limits while passing schools
   
71.012   Maximum attainable operating speed
   
71.013   Minimum speed regulation
   
71.014   Speed limit around parks
Turning and Starting; Signals
   
71.020   Required position and method of turning at intersections
   
71.021   Limitations on U-turns
   
71.022   J-turns
   
71.023   Starting parked vehicle
   
71.024   When signal required
   
71.025   Signal by hand and arm or signal device
   
71.026   Method of giving hand and arm signals
Overtaking and Passing
   
71.040   Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions
   
71.041   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
   
71.042   Overtaking vehicles on the left
   
71.043   When overtaking on the right is permitted
   
71.044   Limitations on overtaking on the left
   
71.045   Meeting or overtaking school bus
   
71.046   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
71.047   No-passing zones
   
71.048   Driving on roadways laned for traffic
Right-of-Way
   
71.060   Vehicles approaching or entering intersection
   
71.061   Vehicle turning left
   
71.062   Vehicles entering stop crosswalk
   
71.063   Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection
   
71.064   Merging traffic
   
71.065   Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway
   
71.066   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
   
71.067   Funeral processions
Special Stops Required
   
71.080   Obedience to signal indicating approach of train or railroad track
equipment
   
71.081   Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings
   
71.082   Emerging from alley, building, private road, or driveway
   
71.083   Stop when traffic obstructed
Prohibitions
   
71.095   Backing
   
71.096   Following vehicle too closely
   
71.097   Obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanism
   
71.098   Opening vehicle doors
   
71.099   Coasting
   
71.100   Following fire apparatus; driving over fire hose
   
71.101   Driving upon sidewalk
   
71.102   Use of roller skates, coasters, or similar devices
   
71.103   Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway prohibited
   
71.104   Obstructing person in highways
   
71.105   Farm tractor operation
   
71.106   Driving on controlled-access highway
   
71.107   Excessive engine noise
Parades, Obstructions, and Encroachments
   
71.120   Definitions
   
71.121   Unauthorized obstruction, encroachment, or encumbrance prohibited;
liability therefor
   
71.122   Permit required
   
71.123   Revocation of permit
 
   
71.999   Penalty
OPERATION
§ 71.001 UNATTENDED ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal unattended in
any street without having such animal securely fastened.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.002 RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board
or outside step of any vehicle.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
Penalty, see § 71.999
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
§ 71.010 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No vehicle may be driven upon any highway of this city at a speed
which is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic
conditions and the use of the highway, or which endangers the safety of any
person or property. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the
applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching
and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person
or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and
the duty of all persons to use due care.
   (B)   No person may drive a vehicle upon any street at a speed which is
greater than the applicable statutory maximum speed limit established by
divisions (C) and (D) below, by §
71.011, or by a regulation or ordinance made under this chapter.
   (C)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this chapter,
the maximum speed limit in an urban district (as defined in §
70.01) for all vehicles is:
      (1)   Thirty miles per hour; and
      (2)   Fifteen miles per hour in an alley.
   (D)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this chapter,
the maximum speed limit in a non-urban district shall be as determined under
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601.
   (E)   A first violation of this section is a petty offense with a minimum
fine of $150. A second or subsequent violation of this section is a petty
offense with a minimum fine of $300.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601)
Penalty, see § 71.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate speed, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1 and Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-604
§ 71.011 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS.
   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, SCHOOL means the following
entities:
         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school.
         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a religious
institution.
         (c)   A public, private, or religious nursery school.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, a SCHOOL DAY shall begin at 7:00
a.m. and shall conclude at 4:00 p.m.
   (B)   On a school day when school children are present and so close thereto
that a potential hazard exists because of the close proximity of the motorized
traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 miles
per hour while passing a school zone, or while traveling upon any public
thoroughfare where children pass going to and from school.
   (C)   This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are
posted upon streets wherein the school zone is located. The signs shall give
proper due warning that a school zone is being approached, and shall indicate
the school zone and the maximum speed limit in effect during school days when
school children are present. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of
electronic speed-detecting devices within 500 feet of signs within a special
school speed zone indicating the zone, as defined in this section, nor shall
evidence obtained thereby be inadmissible in any prosecution for speed,
provided the use of the device shall apply only to the enforcement of the speed
limit in the special school speed zone.
   (D)   Except as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §11-605(e-5), a person who
violates this section is guilty of a petty offense. Violations of this section
are punishable with a minimum fine of $150 for the first violation and a
minimum fine of $300 for the second or subsequent violation.
   (E)   (1)   When a fine for a violation of this section is $150 or greater,
the person who violates the section shall be charged an additional $50 to be
paid to the unit school district where the violation occurred for school safety
purposes. If the violation occurred in a dual school district, $25 of the
surcharge shall be paid to the elementary school district for school safety
purposes and $25 of the surcharge shall be paid to the high school district for
school safety purposes. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the entire
$50 surcharge shall be paid to the appropriate school district or districts.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, SCHOOL SAFETY PURPOSES include the
costs associated with school zone safety education and the purchase,
installation, and maintenance of caution lights which are mounted on school
speed zone signs.
(Ord. 04-41, passed 11-8-04)
Penalty, see § 71.999
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions under state law, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605
§ 71.012 MAXIMUM ATTAINABLE OPERATING SPEED.
   No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle on any street or highway
in this city where the minimum allowable speed on that street or highway, as
posted, is greater than the maximum attainable operating speed of the vehicle.
Maximum attainable operating speed shall be determined by the manufacturer of
the vehicle and clearly published in the manual of specifications and
operation, or it shall be determined by applicable rule and regulation
promulgated by the Secretary of State.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-611)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.013 MINIMUM SPEED REGULATION.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and regular movement of traffic except when reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation of his or her vehicle or in compliance with law.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a))
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.014 SPEED LIMIT AROUND PARKS.
   The speed limit for those portions of all streets and/or roadways which are
adjacent to city parks, Paxton Park District Parks, the playground at Eastlawn
Elementary School and the School District Memorial Field on the 600-700 block
of Summer Street shall be 20 miles per hour.
(Ord. 17-43, passed 11-14-17)
TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS
§ 71.020 REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows:
      (1)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made
as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection
shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and
after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction
upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   The state Department of Transportation and local authorities in
their respective jurisdictions may cause official traffic-control devices to be
placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that
a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles
turning at an intersection, and when such devices are so placed no driver of a
vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and
required by such devices.
   (B)   Two-way left turn lanes. Where a special lane for making left turns by
drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by official
traffic-control devices:
      (1)   A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.
      (2)   A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing for
or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when preparing for or making
a U-turn when otherwise permitted by law.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-801)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.021 LIMITATIONS ON U-TURNS.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction unless the movement can be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where the
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within 500 feet.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-802)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.022 J-TURNS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a “J” turn at
any place where, by resolution, such turns are prohibited.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62; Am. Ord. 94-13, passed 4-11-94)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.023 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked,
unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-803)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.024 WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is
in proper position upon the highway as required in §
71.020, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise
turn a vehicle from a direct course, or move right or left upon a roadway
unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person may
so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left, change lanes, otherwise
turn a vehicle from a direct course, move right or left upon a highway, or when
required must be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the vehicle within a business or residence district, and the signal
must be given continuously during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by
the vehicle outside a business or residence district.
   (C)   No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without
first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this chapter to
the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
   (D)   The electric turn signal device required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-
208 must be used and operated as prescribed in division (B) of this section to
indicate an intention to turn, change lanes, turn a vehicle from a direct
course, move right or left upon a highway, or start from a parallel parked
position. Unless the conditions of division (B) of this section are met, an
electric turn signal device required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208 shall not
be left in the on position and must not be flashed on one side only on a parked
or disabled vehicle, or flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal to operators
of other vehicles approaching from the rear. However, signal devices may be
flashed simultaneously on both sides of a motor vehicle to indicate the
presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching,
overtaking, and passing.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-804) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.025 SIGNAL BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.
   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm or by an electric turn signal device conforming to
the requirements provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-805)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.026 METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the
vehicle in the following manner, and the signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn.  Hand and arm extended horizontally.
   (B)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward, except that a person
operating a bicycle may extend the right hand and arm horizontally and to the
right side of the bicycle.
   (C)   Stop or decrease of speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-806)
Penalty, see § 71.999
OVERTAKING AND PASSING
§ 71.040 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing those movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the roadway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic;
      (5)   Whenever there is a single-track paved road on one side of the
public highway and two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the
wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on the pavement to the other
vehicle.
   (B)   Upon a two-lane roadway, providing for two-way movement of traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven in the right-hand lane available for traffic, or as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, or
when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic, and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the
lanes, or except as permitted under division (A)(2). However, this division
shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making
a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
   (D)   Upon an Interstate highway or fully access controlled freeway, a
vehicle may not be driven in the left lane, except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle.
   (E)   Division (D) of this section does not apply:
      (1)   When no other vehicle is directly behind the vehicle in the left
lane;
      (2)   When traffic conditions and congestion make it impractical to drive
in the right lane;
      (3)   When snow and other inclement weather conditions make it necessary
to drive in the left lane;
      (4)   When obstructions or hazards exist in the right lane;
      (5)   When a vehicle changes lanes to comply with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§
11-907 and 11-908;
      (6)   When, because of highway design, a vehicle must be driven in the
left lane when preparing to exit;
      (7)   On toll highways when necessary to use I-Pass, and on toll and
other highways when driving in the left lane is required to comply with an
official traffic control device; or
      (8)   To law enforcement vehicles, ambulances, and other emergency
vehicles engaged in official duties and vehicles engaged in highway maintenance
and construction operations.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-701)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.041 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least half of
the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-702)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.042 OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE LEFT.
   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding
in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions, and special
rules otherwise stated in this chapter:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle. In no event shall the movement be made by driving off the
pavement or the main traveled portion of the roadway.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal, and shall not increase the speed of his
or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   (C)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon the left
of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the right of any
vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is an unobstructed lane
of traffic available to permit the passing maneuver safely.
   (D)   The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle or individual
proceeding in the same direction on a highway shall leave a safe distance, but
not less than three feet, when passing the bicycle or individual and shall
maintain that distance until safely past the overtaken bicycle or individual.
   (E)   A person driving a motor vehicle shall not, in a reckless manner,
drive the motor vehicle unnecessarily close to, toward, or near a bicyclist,
pedestrian, or a person riding a horse or driving an animal drawn vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.043 WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle with three or more wheels may overtake and
pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle;
      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the right of any
other vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the unobstructed pavement
to the right of the vehicle being passed is of a width of not less than eight
feet. This division does not apply to devices propelled by human power.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting the movement in safety. Such movement
shall not be made by driving off the roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-704)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.044 LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   (A)   Passing on the left.
      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless authorized by the provisions of this chapter, and unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction, or any vehicle overtaken.
      (2)   In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized
lane of travel as soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement
involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet of any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-705)
   (B)   Conditions where passing on the left is prohibited.
      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under
the following conditions:
         (a)   When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within a distance as to create a
hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction;
         (b)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing; or
         (c)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of
any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel.
      (2)   The limitations in division (B)(1) above do not apply upon a one-
way roadway, nor upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width
for two or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction, nor to the driver of
a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road, or driveway when
the movements can be made with safety.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-706)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.045 MEETING OR OVERTAKING SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop the vehicle before meeting or
overtaking, from either direction, any school bus stopped at any location for
the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils. The stop is required before
reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the school bus the visual
signals as specified in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-803 and 12-805. The driver
of the vehicle shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion or the
driver of the vehicle is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the
visual signals are no longer actuated.
   (B)   The stop signal arm required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-803 shall be
extended after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of
loading or discharging pupils and shall be closed before the school bus is
placed in motion again. The stop signal arm shall not be extended at any other
time.
   (C)   The alternately flashing red signal lamps of an eight-lamp flashing
signal system required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805 shall be actuated after
the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading or
discharging pupils and shall be turned off before the school bus is placed in
motion again. The red signal lamps shall not be actuated at any other time
except as provided in division (D) below.
   (D)   The alternately flashing amber signal lamps of an eight-lamp flashing
signal system required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805 shall be actuated
continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the school bus
before stopping for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils within an
urban area, and during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by the school
bus outside an urban area. The amber signal lamps shall remain actuated until
the school bus is stopped. The amber signal lamps shall not be actuated at any
other time.
   (E)   The alternately flashing head lamps permitted by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 12-805 may be operated while the alternately flashing red or amber signal
lamps required by that section are actuated.
   (F)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having four or more lanes which
permits at least two lanes of traffic to travel in opposite directions need not
stop the vehicle upon meeting a school bus which is stopped in the opposing
roadway; and need not stop the vehicle when driving upon a controlled access
highway when passing a school bus traveling in either direction that is stopped
in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or improved part of the controlled
access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414(a) - (e))
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.046 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be
driven only in the direction designated at all or such times as shall be
indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island must be driven only
to the right of the island.
   (C)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by
leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or a clearly indicated
dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle
must be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to
use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No
vehicle may be driven over, across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or
section except through an opening in the physical barrier, or dividing section,
or space, or at a cross-over or intersection as established by public
authority.
   (D)   The driver of a vehicle may turn left across a paved noncurbed
dividing space unless prohibited by an official traffic-control device.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-708) (Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62; Am. Ord. 63-18,
passed 8-12-63)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.047 NO-PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   The City Council is authorized to determine those portions of any
highway within the city where overtaking and passing or driving on the left of
the roadway would be especially hazardous, and may by appropriate signs or
markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of the zones, and when
signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant
person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as
set forth in division (A) no driver may at any time drive on the left side of
the roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement
striping designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout its length.
   (C)   This section does not apply under the conditions described in §
71.040(A)(2), nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an
alley, private road, or driveway. The pavement striping designed to mark the
no-passing zone may be crossed from the left-hand lane for the purpose of
completing a pass that was begun prior to the beginning of the zone in the
driver's direction of travel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.048 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith
shall apply.
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for two-
way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same
direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or
in preparation for making a left turn or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle
is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic-control
devices.
   (C)   Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing specific
traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the
roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device.
Drivers must obey lane designation signing except when it is necessary to use a
different lane to make a turning maneuver.
   (D)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of every such device.
   (E)   A person is not in violation of this section if he or she is complying
with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907.5, or ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-908.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-709)
Penalty, see § 71.999
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 71.060 VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.
   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different roadways
at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left must
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. This rule may be modified
at through highways or streets and where otherwise inconsistent with the
provisions of this traffic code.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-901)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.061 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection
or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed
as soon as a safe interval occurs.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-902)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.062 VEHICLES ENTERING STOP CROSSWALK.
   Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection, or
flashing red signals are in place at a plainly marked crosswalk between
intersections, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk, and pedestrians within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of
the roadway shall have the right-of-way over vehicles so stopped. Drivers of
vehicles having so yielded the right-of-way to pedestrians entering or within
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection shall also yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians within any other crosswalk at the intersection.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-903)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.063 VEHICLE ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION.
   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
or yield signs.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another roadway, or which
is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection,
but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed as soon as a safe interval
occurs.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience
to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and,
if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but
if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, of
if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or
stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection.
   (D)   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield
right-of-way sign, the collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield right-of-way.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.064 MERGING TRAFFIC.
   Notwithstanding the right-of-way provision in §
71.060, at an intersection where traffic lanes are provided for merging
traffic, the driver of each vehicle on the converging roadways is required to
adjust his or her vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a
collision with another vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-905)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.065 VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley,
building, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-906)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.066 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of this chapter, or
a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible or visual
signal, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection, and
shall, if necessary to permit the safe passage of the emergency vehicle, stop
and remain in that position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907(a), (b))
Penalty, see § 71.999
Statutory reference:
   Additional offenses; statutory penalties, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907
§ 71.067 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections when
vehicles comprising the procession have their headlights and hazard lights
lighted, subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
      (1)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an
audible or visible signal;
      (2)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way when directed to do so by a traffic officer;
      (3)   The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall
comply with stop signs and traffic-control signals but when the leading vehicle
has proceeded across an intersection in accordance with the signal or after
stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in the procession may
proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or signal, and the leading
vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed with due caution.
      (4)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to
the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as practical and safe.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
   (B)   The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall not
drive his or her vehicle in the funeral procession except when authorized to do
so by a traffic officer or when such vehicle is an authorized emergency vehicle
giving audible or visible signal.
   (C)   Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may not form
a procession or convoy and have their headlights and hazard lights or both
lighted for the purpose of securing the right-of-way granted by this section to
funeral processions.
   (D)   The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may overtake and
pass the vehicles in such procession if such overtaking and passing can be
accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering with such
procession.
   (E)   The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped with a
flashing amber light which may be used only when such vehicle is used as a lead
vehicle in such procession. Vehicles comprising a funeral procession may
utilize funeral pennants or flags or windshield stickers or flashing hazard
warning signal flashers to identify the individual vehicles in such a
procession.
   (F)   In the absence of law enforcement traffic control assistance for a
funeral procession, a funeral director or his or her designee may direct
traffic during a funeral procession.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1420)
Penalty, see § 71.999
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 71.080 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN OR RAILROAD TRACK
EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, that person must exercise due care and caution as the existence
of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of danger, and under any of
the circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall stop within 50 feet
but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall not
proceed until he or she can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall
apply when:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment;
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagger gives or continues
to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train or railroad
track equipment;
         (c)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment approaching a
highway crossing emits a warning signal and the railroad train or railroad
track equipment, by reason of its speed or nearness to the crossing, is an
immediate hazard;
         (d)   An approaching railroad train or railroad track equipment is
plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing;
         (e)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment is approaching so
closely that an immediate hazard is created.
      (2)   Whenever any person driving a commercial motor vehicle, as defined
in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-500, approaches a railroad grade crossing where the
driver is not always required to stop, the person must exercise due care and
caution as the existence of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of
danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver
shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of
the railroad and shall not proceed until the tracks are clear and he or she can
do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment;
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman gives or continues
to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train or railroad
track equipment;
         (c)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment approaching a
highway crossing emits a warning signal and such railroad train or railroad
track equipment, by reasons of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard;
         (d)   An approaching railroad train or railroad track equipment is
plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing;
         (e)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment is approaching so
closely that an immediate hazard is created.
      (3)   Whenever a person driving a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-500, approaches a railroad grade crossing where the
driver is not always required to stop but must slow down, the person must
exercise due care and caution as the existence of a railroad track across a
highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in
this section, the driver shall slow down within 50 feet but not less than 15
feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he or
she checks that the tracks are clear of an approaching train or railroad track
equipment.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   When stop signs are erected at railroad grade crossings, the driver of
any vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of the railroad, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care.
   (D)   At any railroad grade crossing provided with railroad crossbuck signs,
without automatic, electric, or mechanical signal devices, crossing gates, or a
human flagger giving a signal of the approach or passage of a train or railroad
track equipment, the driver of a vehicle shall in obedience to the railroad
crossbuck sign, yield the right-of-way and slow down to a speed reasonable for
the existing conditions and shall stop, if required for safety, at a clearly
marked stopped line, or if no stop line, within 50 feet but not less than 15
feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he or
she can do so safely. If a driver is involved in a collision at a railroad
crossing or interferes with the movement of a train or railroad track equipment
after driving past the railroad crossbuck sign, the collision or interference
is prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure to yield right-of-way.
   (E)   No person may drive any vehicle through a railroad crossing if there
is insufficient space to drive completely through the crossing without
stopping.
   (F)   It is unlawful to violate any part of this section. A first conviction
of a person for a violation of any part of this section shall result in a
mandatory fine of $250. All subsequent convictions of that person for any
violation of any part of this section shall result in a mandatory fine of $500.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201(a) - (d)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.081 CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   The driver of any of the following vehicles shall, before crossing a
railroad track or tracks at grade, stop that vehicle within 50 feet but not
less than 15 feet from the nearest rail, and while so stopped, shall listen and
look for the approach of a train or railroad track equipment, and shall not
proceed until that movement can be made with safety:
      (1)   Any second division vehicle carrying passengers for hire;
      (2)   Any bus that meets all of the special requirements for school buses
in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-801, 12-803, and 12-804. The driver of the bus,
in addition to complying with all other applicable requirements of this
division, must also (i) turn off all noise producing accessories, including
heater blowers, defroster fans, auxiliary fans, and radios, and (ii) open the
service door and driver’s window, before crossing a railroad track or tracks;
      (3)   The driver of any of the following vehicles shall, before crossing
a railroad track or tracks at grade, stop such vehicle within 50 feet, but not
less than 15 feet from the nearest rail and, while so stopped, shall listen and
look for the approach of a train or railroad track equipment and shall not
proceed until such movement can be made with safety:
         (a)   A commercial motor vehicle, as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
6-500, carrying passengers for hire;
         (b)   Any bus than meets all of the special requirements for school
buses in ILCS, Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-801, 12-803 and 12-805 and is designed to
transport 16 or more persons, including the driver. The driver of the bus, in
addition to complying with all other applicable requirements of this division,
must also turn off all noise producing accessories, including heater blowers,
defroster fans, auxiliary fans, and radios, and open the service door and
driver’s window, before crossing a railroad track or tracks;
         (c)   Any other vehicle which is required by federal or state law to
be placarded when carrying as cargo or part of a cargo hazardous material as
defined in the Illinois Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
   (B)   This section shall not apply:
      (1)   At any railroad grade crossing where traffic is controlled by a
police officer or flagger;
      (2)   At any railroad grade crossing controlled by a functioning traffic-
control signal transmitting a green indication which, under law, permits the
vehicle to proceed across the railroad tracks without slowing or stopping,
except that division (A) of this section shall apply to any school bus;
      (3)   At any streetcar grade crossing within a business or residence
district; or
      (4)   At any abandoned industrial or spur track railroad grade crossing
designated as exempt by the Illinois Commerce Commission and marked with an
official sign as authorized in the state Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1202) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.082 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, BUILDING, PRIVATE ROAD, OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road, or
driveway within an urban area shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to
driving into the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance,
road, or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the
point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic thereon, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrians as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1205) (Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.083 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or railroad grade crossing to accommodate
the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (B)   (1)   No driver shall enter a highway rail grade crossing unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the highway rail grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the passage of a
train or other railroad equipment using the rails, notwithstanding any traffic-
control signal indication to proceed.
      (2)   No driver operating a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-500, shall enter a highway rail grade crossing unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the highway rail grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the passage of a
train or other railroad equipment using the rails, notwithstanding any traffic-
control signal indication to proceed.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1425(a), (b)) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Fines, suspension of driving privileges, and community service for
violation, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1425(c)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.095 BACKING.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless the movement
can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any shoulder or
roadway of any controlled- access highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.096 FOLLOWING VEHICLE TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the vehicles
and the traffic upon and conditions of the street or highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-710)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.097 OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle or streetcar shall ride in a position as to
interfere with the driver's or motorman's view ahead or to the sides, or to
interfere with his or her control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle or
streetcar.
   (C)   No passenger on a school bus may ride or stand in a position as to
interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the side or to the rear, or to
interfere with his or her control of the driving mechanism of the bus.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1406)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.098 OPENING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving
traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1407)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.099 COASTING.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall
not coast with the gears or transmission of the vehicle in neutral.
   (B)   The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a down grade shall
not coast with the clutch disengaged.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1410)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.100 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS; DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall
not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than
500 feet or stop the vehicle within 500 feet of any fire apparatus stopped in
answer to a fire alarm.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1411)
   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when laid down on any street, private road, or driveway to be used
at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.101 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively by human
power nor to any motorized wheelchair.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.102 USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, OR SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, skateboard, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play
streets when authorized by the traffic authority.
Penalty, see § 71.999
Cross-reference:
   Skates, skateboards and toy vehicles, see §§ 73.35 et seq.
§ 71.103 PUTTING GLASS OR OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall throw, spill or deposit upon any highway any bottle,
glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any litter, as defined in the Litter
Control Act, ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3.
   (B)   Any person who violates division (A) upon any highway shall
immediately remove the material or cause it to be removed.
   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other debris, except any hazardous substance as defined in
ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.215, hazardous waste as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act
5, § 3.220, and potentially infectious medical waste as defined in ILCS Ch.
415, Act 5, § 3.360, dropped upon the highway from such vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1413)
Penalty, see § 71.999
Cross-reference:
   Litter, see §§
93.20 et seq.
§ 71.104 OBSTRUCTING PERSON IN HIGHWAYS.
   No person shall willfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct, or delay, or
willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder, or obstruct any other
person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any highway within this
city, or offer for barter or sale merchandise on the highway so as to interfere
with the effective movement of traffic.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.105 FARM TRACTOR OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a farm tractor on a highway in this city
unless the tractor is being used as an implement of husbandry in connection
with farming operations.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the use of a farm tractor as an
implement of husbandry in connection with farming operations shall be deemed to
include use of the tractor in connection with the transportation of
agricultural products and of farm machinery, equipment, and supplies, as well
as the transportation of the implement of husbandry from its place of purchase
to its place of storage, in connection with the obtaining of repairs of the
implement of husbandry, and the towing of a registered truck of not more than
8,000 pounds for use as return transportation after the tractor is left at the
place of work or repair.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1418)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.106 DRIVING ON CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person may drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at entrances and exits established by public authority.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-711)
Penalty, see § 71.999
§ 71.107 EXCESSIVE ENGINE NOISE.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle driven or operated upon the streets, roads, alleys
and highways of the city shall at all times be equipped with an adequate
muffler or exhaust system in constant operation and properly maintained to
prevent any excessive or unusual noise. No such muffler or exhaust system shall
be equipped with a cutout, bypass or similar device. No person shall modify the
exhaust system of a motor vehicle in a manner which will amplify or increase
the noise of such vehicle above that emitted by the muffler originally
installed on the vehicle, and such original muffler shall comply with all the
requirements of this section.
   (B)   No driver of a commercial vehicle, as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 1-111.8 of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall operate or cause to be operated or
actuate any engine braking system that emits excessive noise.
   (C)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated within the city limits
of the City of Paxton, Illinois, any compression/release engine brake on any
vehicle while parking or decelerating. For purposes of this section,
COMPRESSION/RELEASE ENGINE BRAKE is defined as any mechanical exhaust device
designed to aid in the parking or deceleration of any vehicle by converting
engine power to compressed air which results in excessive, loud, unusual, or
explosive noise from such vehicle and which is otherwise known as JAKE-BRAKING.
   (D)   This section does not apply to the use of an engine braking system
that has an adequate sound muffling system in proper working order that
prevents excessive noise.
   (E)   It is a defense to this section that the driver or person used an
engine braking system that emits excessive noise or who operated or caused to
be operated or actuated a compression/release engine brake did so in an
emergency to avoid a collision with a person or another vehicle on the street,
road, highway or alley.
   (F)   Appropriate signs shall be posted at the city limits of the City of
Paxton, Illinois, on every road or highway entering the c, which signs shall
advise all persons entering the city on such roads or highways, that excessive
engine braking noise is prohibited within the limits of the city. All signs
shall be of the type and size approved by the Illinois Department of
Transportation and shall be in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-602.1
of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 04-06, passed 3-8-04; Am. Ord. 07-25, passed 8-13-07)
Penalty, see § 71.999
PARADES, OBSTRUCTIONS, AND ENCROACHMENTS
§ 71.120 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Paxton, Illinois.
   CRUISING. The repeated operation of two or more vehicles in a continuous or
nearly continuous flow through a parking lot.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park, or other public place in the city, or CRUISING as defined above.
   PARKING LOT. Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or
shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall not
include those operated for hire.
   PERMIT. Any document signed by the Mayor of the city or his or her designee,
which conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(Am. Ord. 23-38, passed 9-12-23)
§ 71.121 UNAUTHORIZED OBSTRUCTION, ENCROACHMENT, OR ENCUMBRANCE PROHIBITED;
LIABILITY THEREFOR.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place, throw, leave, or cause to be placed or
left any encroachment, obstruction, or encumbrance in or upon any street,
sidewalk, or public way, except as authorized by this code.
   (B)   Any person who shall place or leave or cause to be left any
encroachment, obstruction, or encumbrance upon any street, avenue, or alley
shall in cases be liable to the city and to private persons for all injury or
damage arising therefrom.
   (C)   No person shall make, or cause to be made, any enclosure, fence,
arched way or building of any kind extending over or across any street, avenue,
alley, or sidewalk within said city, under a penalty of not less than $10 nor
more than $100 for each offense, and a further penalty of $5 for each day that
he or she shall allow such enclosure, fence, bridge, or building to remain
after being notified to remove the same by the city.
   (D)   No person shall erect or place any building, in whole or in part, upon
any street, avenue, alley, or other public ground of the city.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 9-12-23)
§ 71.122 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit to obstruct any public way other than a traffic lane;
requirements of permit.
      (1)   Any persons or entities desiring to occupy or otherwise obstruct
any portion of a public right-of-way other than a traffic lane shall first
obtain a permit from the city before obstructing said area.
      (2)   All permits issued for this purpose must be obtained not less than
one business day in advance of the anticipated placement of any materials or
obstructions in the permit area.
      (3)   The Mayor or his or her designee is empowered to promulgate a
specimen permit and application therefor. At a minimum, the permit and
application shall be required to state:
         (a)   The location and nature of the obstruction;
         (b)   The amount of public right-of-way to be occupied;
         (c)   The length of time to be occupied;
         (d)   An obligation by the applicant to observe the code of the city
in relation thereto; and
         (e)   An obligation by the applicant to protect the city from any
liability to any person or persons on account of accident or damage arising
from said occupied space and to restore the area to its original condition
immediately upon the expiration of the period granted in said permit.
      (4)   Permit time limits and fees.
         (a)   The city may charge a permit fee for each permit issued under
this division. A permit fee of $25 may be charged for each permit issued for a
period of up to two weeks. If the obstruction is to remain for a period of more
than two weeks, but less than one month, a permit fee of $50 may be charged. No
permit shall be issued for more than a one-month period, without prior approval
from the City Council.
         (b)   All sidewalks, parkways, or parking lanes that are obstructed
for longer than four hours shall require a permit as described in this section.
If any persons or entities obstruct any of these areas on a public right-of-way
without said permit, the Mayor or his or her designee is empowered to charge a
permit fee of double the amounts provided herein for the appropriate type of
permit.
      (5)   General traffic control regulations. All permits issued under this
section shall include provisions for public protection based on work site
circumstances. The requirements, standards, and methods of application for
traffic control in all permit areas shall conform with the Illinois Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Only traffic control devices and applications
approved in this manual will be allowed in use within the city. Any variance
from these standards without prior permission from the city shall be considered
a violation of permit conditions and may result in penalties as described in §
71.999.
   (B)   Permit to obstruct any traffic lane; requirements of permit.
      (1)   Any persons or entities desiring to occupy or otherwise obstruct
all or part of a traffic lane shall first obtain a permit from the city before
obstructing said area.
      (2)   All permits issued for this purpose must be obtained not less than
one business day in advance of the anticipated placement of any materials or
obstructions in the permit area.
      (3)   The Mayor or his or her designee is empowered to promulgate a
specimen permit and application therefor. At a minimum, the permit and
application shall be required to state:
         (a)   The location and nature of the obstruction;
         (b)   The amount of public right-of-way to be occupied;
         (c)   The length of time to be occupied;
         (d)   An obligation by the applicant to observe the code of the city
in relation thereto; and
         (e)   An obligation by the applicant to protect the city from any
liability to any person or persons on account of accident or damage arising
from said occupied space and to restore the area to its original condition
immediately upon the expiration of the period granted in said permit.
      (4)   Permit time limits and fees.
         (a)   The city may charge a permit fee for each permit issued under
this provision. A permit fee of $10 per day may be charged. If such permit is
not sought within the time periods required by this section, but later
obtained, the Mayor or his or her designee is empowered to charge a permit fee
of double the amounts provided herein for the appropriate type of permit.
         (b)   All traffic lanes that are obstructed for a period of time
sufficient enough to materially disrupt or alter the flow of traffic within
said traffic lane shall require a permit as described in this section.
      (5)   General traffic control regulations. All permits issued under this
section shall include provisions for public protection based on work site
circumstances. The requirements, standards, and methods of application for
traffic control in all permit areas shall conform with the Illinois Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Only traffic control devices and applications
approved in this manual will be allowed in use within the city. Any variance
from these standards without prior permission from the city shall be considered
a violation of permit conditions and may result in penalties as described in §
71.999.
   (C)   Permit required for parade; exceptions; requirements of permit.
      (1)   No person or entity shall engage, participate in, aid, form, start,
or cause to be engaged, formed, or started, any parade for which a permit has
not been issued.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing division, this division (C) shall not
apply to:
         (a)   Funeral processions;
         (b)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided the conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities;
         (c)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
      (3)   All permits issued for this purpose must be obtained not less than
five business days, nor more than 60 business days, in advance of the parade.
      (4)   The Mayor or his or her designee is empowered to promulgate a
specimen permit and application therefor. At a minimum, the permit and
application shall be required to state:
         (a)   The proposed date, time, and location of the parade;
         (b)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
         (c)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will
be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
         (d)   The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the
termination point;
         (e)   The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles which
will constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the description of
the vehicles;
         (f)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park, or other public place
proposed to be traversed;
         (g)   The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
         (h)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any such assembly area or areas;
         (i)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade;
         (j)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or
for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall
file a communication in writing from the person authorizing the applicant to
apply for the permit on his or her behalf;
         (k)   An obligation by the applicant to observe the code of the city
in relation thereto;
         (l)   An obligation by the applicant to protect the city from any
liability to any person or persons on account of accident or damage arising
from said occupied space and to restore the area to its original condition
immediately upon the expiration of the period granted in said permit; and
         (m)   Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued.
      (5)   Standards for parade permit issuance. The Mayor or his or her
designee shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the application and
from other information obtained, he or she finds that:
         (a)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
         (b)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;
         (c)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions
of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and
areas contiguous thereto;
         (d)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
         (e)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement
of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
         (f)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its
point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
         (g)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising
any product, goods, or event, and is not designated to be held purely for
private profit;
         (h)   The parade, if it takes the form of cruising, has the approval
in writing of the owner or an authorized agent of the owner for the use of the
parking lot which is the site of the parade.
      (6)   Notice upon issuance. Promptly on the issuance of a permit under
this section, a copy thereof shall be sent to the Police Chief, Fire Chief,
Director of Public Works, and City Clerk.
      (7)   Notice of rejection of permit application; appeal therefrom.
         (a)   The Mayor or his or her designee shall act on the application
for a parade permit within three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays
excepted, after filing thereof. If he or she disapproves the application, he or
she shall mail to the applicant within the three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excepted, after the date on which the application was filed, a notice
of his or her action stating the reasons for his or her denial of the permit.
         (b)   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial
of a parade permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within 30
days after notice of denial. The City Council shall act on the appeal within 30
days after its receipt.
         (c)   The Mayor or his or her designee, in denying an application for
a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a
date, at a time, or over a route different than that named by the applicant. An
applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a written notice of
his or her acceptance. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the
requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this
subchapter.
      (8)   Public conduct during parades.
         (a)   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle, or
animal participating or used in a parade.
         (b)   No driver of a vehicle except a police car or other emergency
vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when
such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a
parade.
         (c)   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall have
the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking
of vehicles along a street or other public right-of-way to aid in the
effectuation of a parade permit. Signs shall be posted to such effect, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street or other
public thoroughfare unless signs have been posted in accordance with this
section.
(Am. Ord. 23-38, passed 9-12-23)
§ 71.123 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Mayor or his or her designee are empowered to revoke any permit issued
under the authority of this chapter. The basis for said denial shall be
provided to the permittees in writing. Said permit shall not be revoked for
arbitrary or capricious reasons. The permittee shall have the right to appeal
the revocation to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. At
said meeting, any revocation may be overturned by a two-thirds vote of the City
Council.
(Am. Ord. 23-38, passed 9-12-23)
§ 71.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating §
71.107 shall be subject, for each violation, to a fine as provided in §
70.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined as set forth in §
70.99.
   (C)   Every person convicted of §
71.042(E) shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor if the violation does not
result in great bodily harm or permanent disability or disfigurement to
another. If the violation results in great bodily harm or permanent disability
or disfigurement to another, the person shall be guilty of a Class 3 felony.
(Am. Ord. 07-25, passed 8-13-07)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Parking Provisions
   
72.01   No parking places and limited time parking places set forth by city
   
72.02   Parking at curb
   
72.03   Alleys
Method of Parking
   
72.10   General parking regulations
   
72.11   Unattended motor vehicles
Restrictions on Stopping, Standing, and Parking
   
72.20   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places
   
72.21   Stopping, standing, or parking outside business or residence district
Disabled Parking
   
72.35   Definition
   
72.36   Applicability
   
72.37   Disabled motorist cards
   
72.38   Exemptions to parking restrictions
   
72.39   Parking prohibitions
   
72.40   Unauthorized use of parking space prohibited
   
72.41   Disabled person without sticker
   
72.42   Disabled parking permit issued by another state
Snow Emergencies
   
72.55   Announcement of snow emergency
   
72.56   Termination of emergency
   
72.57   Snow emergency routes
Violations
   
72.65   Officers authorized to remove vehicles
   
72.66   Duty of lessor of vehicle on notice of violation of this chapter
Zone Permit Parking
   
72.70   Zone permit parking
 
   
72.99   Penalty
GENERAL PARKING PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 NO PARKING PLACES AND LIMITED TIME PARKING PLACES SET FORTH BY CITY.
   (A)   The City Council, by resolution or ordinance, may prohibit parking or
prohibit parking during certain hours of the day or night on any street or
alley and upon adoption of such resolution or ordinance parking on any such
street or alley during the hours therein designated shall be prohibited.
   (B)   The City Council, by resolution or ordinance, may limit parking of any
vehicle for a longer consecutive period of time in any area or zone designated
as a limited time parking zone and so marked and upon adoption of such
resolution or ordinance parking for a longer consecutive period of time in the
area or zone therein designated shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62; Am. Ord. 74-18, passed 9-9-74; Am. Ord. 90-28,
passed 9-10-90; Am. Ord. 05-30, passed 8-16-05)
§ 72.02 PARKING AT CURB.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to
the curb, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street
other than parallel with the curb and with the two right wheels of the vehicle
within 12 inches of the regularly established curb line, except that upon those
streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at
the angle to the curb indicated by such marks.
   (B)   When any vehicle shall be parked within an area having street parking
lines the vehicle shall be parked either parallel to or diagonally from the
curb, as indicated by the curb or street marking lines and shall be parked only
between said curb and street parking lines.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62; Am. Ord. 05-03, passed 1-10-05)
§ 72.03 ALLEYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
Penalty, see § 72.99
METHOD OF PARKING
§ 72.10 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand
wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as
practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
   (B)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so
stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction
of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of
the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-
hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand
curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
   (C)   No angle parking shall be permitted except as set forth by ordinance.
   (D)   No person shall park in violation of signs placed by and under the
jurisdiction of the state Department of Transportation which prohibit, limit,
or restrict the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304)
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.11 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key
from the ignition, effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing
upon any perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the
highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1401)
Penalty, see § 72.99
RESTRICTIONS ON STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
§ 72.20 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer, or an official
traffic-control device, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, upon a highway, or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   On any railroad tracks;
         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         (j)   On any controlled-access highway;
         (k)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers;
         (l)   In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a
current annual registration sticker or digital registration sticker or current
temporary permit pending registration.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of the entrance (when properly sign-posted);
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any prohibited area or away from a curb a distance as is unlawful.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any semi-tractor, semi-
trailer, truck exceeding five tons, school bus, motor home, camper or boat on
any street, alley or public right-of-way in the city for a period of time
longer than two consecutive hours. As used herein CAMPER means a separate
vehicle designed for human habitation which can be attached or detached from a
motor vehicle. As used herein MOTOR HOME means a self-contained vehicle,
designed for human habitation, with its own motive power, and with a passage
way from the body of the home to the driver's and front passenger's seat.
   (D)   Except for emergency vehicles and further except for any vehicle
parked within a permit parking district, which permit parking district is
defined by an ordinance of the city, it shall be unlawful to operate the engine
of any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of
10,000 pounds or 4,536 kilograms or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a
vehicle, for a period longer than five minutes in any hour while the vehicle is
stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303) (Ord. 03-12, passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 03-07,
passed 2-10-03; Am. Ord. 04-12, passed 4-12-04; Am. Ord. 05-04, passed 1-10-05)
Penalty, see divisions (A) and (C) of §
72.99
§ 72.21 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING OUTSIDE BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park,
or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway
when it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave the vehicle off the roadway,
but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing
vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view
of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon the highway.
   (B)   The city, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction or for the
maintenance of which it is responsible, may place signs prohibiting or
restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway where
in its opinion stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous to those using the
highway, or where stopping, standing, or parking vehicles would unduly
interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. Any regulations adopted by
the city regarding the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles upon any
specific street, streets, or highways become effective at the time of the
erection of appropriate signs indicating the regulations.
   (C)   This section, and § 72.20 and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304 shall not
apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such manner and to such
extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the
vehicle in such position.
   (D)   Any second division vehicle used exclusively for the collection of
garbage, refuse, or recyclable material may stop or stand on the road in a
business, rural, or residential district for the sole purpose of collecting
garbage, refuse, or recyclable material. The vehicle, in addition to having its
hazard lights lighted at all time that it is engaged in stopping or standing,
shall also use its amber oscillating, rotating, or flashing light or lights as
authorized under paragraph 12 of subsection (b) of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-
215, if so equipped.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301)
Penalty, see § 72.99
DISABLED PARKING
§ 72.35 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the term PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON
shall mean every natural person who, as determined by a licensed physician, by
a physician assistant who has been delegated the authority to make this
determination by his or her supervising physician, or by an advanced practice
nurse who has a written collaborative agreement with a collaborating physician
that authorizes the advanced practice nurse to make this determination: cannot
walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane, crutch, another
person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other assistive device; is restricted
by lung disease to such an extent that his or her forced (respiratory)
expiratory volume for one second, when measured by spirometry, is less than one
liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less than 60 mm/hg on room air at
rest; uses portable oxygen; has a cardiac condition to the extent that the
person's functional limitations are classified in severity as Class III or
Class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association; is
severely limited in the person's ability to walk due to an arthritic,
neurological, or orthopedic condition; or cannot walk 200 feet without stopping
to rest because of one of the above five conditions.
(Ord. 85-20, passed 5-13-85; Am. Ord. 06-09, passed 3-20-06)
§ 72.36 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall apply to:
   (A)   All streets within the city; and
   (B)   All off-street parking facilities owned or operated by the city or by
any privately owned or operated parking lot.
(Ord. 85-20, passed 5-13-85)
§ 72.37 DISABLED MOTORIST CARDS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall issue, without charge, upon application of any
disabled person or disabled veteran, a special disabled motorist decal or
device furnished by the Illinois Secretary of State, pursuant to the provisions
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2), for the
purpose of allowing the decal or device to be used and displayed on a vehicle
being used to transport the disabled person or disabled veteran, but not owned
or displaying a special disabled or disabled veteran's license plate, so as to
identify the vehicle and entitle it to all the parking privileges afforded to a
vehicle possessing such special disabled or disabled veteran license plates as
herein provided. The decal or device shall be issued only to disabled persons
or disabled veterans who are residents of the city and the same shall be
displayed along the right border of the front windshield of a vehicle and shall
allow the vehicle to utilize special, disabled parking privileges when used to
transport a disabled person or disabled veteran. The decal or device shall be
valid for no more than 90 days subject to renewal for like periods based upon
continued disability, and further provided that the decal or device clearly
sets forth the date that the card or decal expires.
   (B)   All applicants must furnish a certified form designating the
disability. All applicants must be residents of the city at the time of
application and must furnish proof of the same. No disabled motorist vehicle
card shall be transferable. The use of the card by any person other than the
disabled person to whom it is issued except as provided herein shall be deemed
a violation of this section and shall render the card void. Any abuse of the
card or unauthorized use shall render the card subject to revocation. No
disabled motorist card shall be issued until an application is completed and
received by the City Clerk. Providing false information in the application
filed with the City Clerk shall be deemed a violation of this section.
(Ord. 85-20, passed 5-13-85; Am. Ord. 06-09, passed 3-20-06)
§ 72.38 EXEMPTIONS TO PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a physically
disabled person or to a disabled veteran pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code,
as amended, or the special decal or device issued pursuant to this subchapter,
is declared to be exempt from any provision imposing time limitations on
parking in a business district, except limitations of one-half hour or less,
but otherwise is subject to the laws which prohibit parking in "No Stopping"
and "No Standing" zones in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public
building entrances and exits, bus stops and loading areas and is prohibited
from parking where the motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard and the motor
vehicle must be moved at the instruction and request of a law enforcement
officer to a location designated by the officer. Any motor vehicle bearing
registration plates specified in this section or similar registration plates
issued under the vehicle codes of other states, as amended, or disabled
motorist cards issued by the city as evidence that the vehicle is operated by
or for a disabled person or disabled veteran, may park, in addition to any
other lawful place, in any parking place specifically reserved, by posting of
an official sign, for such vehicles. Parking privileges granted by this section
are strictly limited to those persons to whom the special registration places,
special decal or device or cards were issued and to qualified operators acting
under such persons express direction while the disabled person is present. A
person to whom privileges were granted shall, at the request of a police
officer or any other person invested by law with authority to direct, control
or regulate traffic, present an identification card with a picture as
verification that the person is the person to whom the special registration
plates, special decal or device was issued. No person shall use any area for
parking of any motor vehicle pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303,
effective July 1, 1970, as amended, or where an official sign controlling such
area expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours.
   (B)   Such parking privileges granted by this section are also extended to
motor vehicles of not-for-profit organizations used for the transportation of
persons with disabilities when such motor vehicles display the decal or device
issued by the State of Illinois pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 85-20, passed 5-13-85; Am. Ord. 06-09, passed 3-20-06)
§ 72.39 PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not properly
displaying registration plates or decals issued to a person with disabilities
as defined by §
72.35, pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code or §
72.37, or to a disabled veteran pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a
person with disabilities or disabled veteran, in any parking place, including
any private or public off-street parking facility, specifically reserved, by
the posting of an official sign as designated under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-
301 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, for motor vehicles displaying such
registration plates. It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle in a
designated access aisle adjacent to any parking place specifically reserved for
persons with disabilities, by the posting of an official sign as designated
under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, for motor
vehicles displaying such registration plates. When using the parking privileges
for persons with disabilities, the parking decal or device must be displayed
properly in the vehicle where it is clearly visible to law enforcement
personnel, either hanging from the rearview mirror or placed on the dashboard
of the vehicle in clear view.
(Ord. 85-20, passed 5-13-85; Am. Ord. 06-09, passed 3-20-06)
Penalty, see § 72.99
Cross-reference:
   Disabled parking, see Ch. 79, Sched. VI
§ 72.40 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING SPACE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   An individual with a vehicle displaying disability license plates or a
parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a disability under
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code or §
72.37 or to a disabled veteran under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code is in violation of this section if the person using the
disability license plate or parking decal or device is not the authorized
holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device or is not
transporting the authorized holder of the disability license plate or parking
decal or device to or from the parking location and the person uses the
disability license plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges
granted through the disability license plate or parking decals or devices under
this Code.
   (B)   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or
private off-street parking facility may, after notifying the police or
sheriff's department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or
other place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for
use by a person with disabilities which does not display person with
disabilities registration plates or a special decal or device as required under
this section.
   (C)   This provision shall apply not only in parking areas and parking lots
owned or operated by the city but also in all private parking areas in the
city.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62; Am. Ord. 90-28, passed 9-10-90; Am. Ord. 05-03,
passed 1-10-05; Am. Ord. 06-09, passed 3-20-06)
§ 72.41 DISABLED PERSON WITHOUT STICKER.
   No person shall be convicted of violating this chapter if such person in
fact met the criteria for obtaining a disabled parking permit at the time of
the parking, even if the disabled parking permit had not been obtained or was
not displayed on the vehicle.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62; Am. Ord. 90-28, passed 9-10-90)
§ 72.42 DISABLED PARKING PERMIT ISSUED BY ANOTHER STATE.
   Any disabled driver exhibiting a disabled parking permit issued by another
state may park a vehicle in a space reserved for vehicles of disabled drivers.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62; Am. Ord. 90-28, passed 9-10-90)
SNOW EMERGENCIES
§ 72.55 ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Mayor finds that falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain will
create a condition which makes it necessary that the parking of motor vehicles
on snow emergency routes be prohibited, or whenever he or she finds on the
basis of a firm forecast of snow, sleet, or freezing rain that the weather
conditions so forecasted may create a condition making it necessary that such
parking be prohibited, he or she is authorized to announce such prohibition, to
become effective at a time specified by him or her. After the effective time of
such prohibition no person shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to
remain parked on a snow emergency route. However, if a fall of snow, sleet, or
freezing rain occurs after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and the Mayor has
not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that parking on snow emergency routes is to
be prohibited after a specified time, a vehicle parked on a snow emergency
route may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m. following such fall. The prohibition
of parking announced by the Mayor under the authority of this section shall
remain in effect until he or she announces the termination of the snow
emergency, in part or in whole, after which the prohibition of parking
authorized by this section shall no longer be in effect.
Penalty, see § 72.99
§ 72.56 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Mayor shall find that some or all of the conditions which gave
rise to the snow emergency prohibition no longer exist, he or she is authorized
to declare the termination of the emergency, in part or in whole, effective
immediately on announcement. If such announcement is made other than between 6:
00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it shall be repeated between those hours.
§ 72.57 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated by the Mayor.
On such street or highway designated as a snow emergency route, special signs
shall be posted to this effect.
VIOLATIONS
§ 72.65 OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of any of the
provisions of §
72.21 or any other applicable section of this traffic code or ordinance of the
city, the officer is authorized to move the vehicle, or require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the
roadway.
   (B)   Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to a
place of safety any unattended vehicle illegally left standing upon any
highway, bridge, causeway, or in a tunnel, or in a position or under
circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic.
   (C)   Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to
the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle found upon a highway
when:
      (1)   Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or taken
without the consent of its owner; or
      (2)   The person or persons in charge of the vehicle are unable to
provide for its custody or removal; or
      (3)   The person driving or in control of the vehicle is arrested for an
alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the person
arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay; or
      (4)   The registration of the vehicle has been suspended, cancelled, or
revoked.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302)
§ 72.66 DUTY OF LESSOR OF VEHICLE ON NOTICE OF VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
   Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and who
leases such vehicle to others, after receiving written notice of a violation of
this chapter involving such vehicle, shall upon request provide such police
officers as have authority of the offense, and the court having jurisdiction
thereof, with a written statement of the name and address of the lessee at the
time of such offense and the identifying number upon the registration plates or
digital registration plates and registration sticker or stickers or digital
registration sticker or stickers of such vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305)
ZONE PERMIT PARKING
§ 72.70 ZONE PERMIT PARKING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      RESIDENT. A person who customarily resides and maintains a place of abode
within the city limits of the city.
   (B)   Designation of area. The following described area is hereby
established as a permit parking district:
      That portion of the following described real estate as established and
designated by the Superintendent of Streets of the City of Paxton, Illinois, to
be the permit parking district, to-wit:
      A parcel of land, situated in the Southeast Quarter (SE 1/4) of the
Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of Section Eight (8) in Township Twenty-three (23)
North, Range Ten (10) East of the Third Principal Meridian, more particularly
described as follows:
      Parcel 1:
      Beginning at a point on the East line of the right-of-way of S.B.I. Route
No.25, (now U.S. Route No. 45), which point is 711.3 feet northerly of the
intersection of said East line and the South line of the North Half (N 1/2) of
said Section Eight (8); thence southeasterly 651.6 feet, at right angles with
said East line, along the Northerly boundary of the Bear Brand Hosiery
property; thence North 486.37 feet parallel with the East line of the Northwest
Quarter (NW 1/4) of said Section Eight (8); thence 90° to the left 527.26 feet
to said East right-of-way line of S.B.I. Route No. 25; and thence Southerly
along said right-of-way line 300 feet to the place of beginning, situated in
the City of Paxton, in the County of Ford and State of Illinois.
      Parcel 2:
      Commencing at a stone at the Southeast Corner of the Northwest Quarter
(NW 1/4) of Section Eight (8), Township Twenty-three (23) North, Range Ten (10)
East of the Third Principal Meridian, thence North 0°16'20" West 475.30 feet on
the East line of said Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4), thence North 89°53'40" West
504.86 feet, thence North 0°10'16" East 485.94 feet to a true place of
beginning, thence North 89°53'40" West 527.48, thence North 18°04'19" East
280.71 feet on the East Line of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway Route 45, and
thence South 58°41'37" East 515.45 feet to the place of beginning, situated in
Ford County, Illinois.
   (C)   Permit required; application.
      (1)   Unless a valid zone parking permit is properly displayed, no motor
vehicle nor semi-tractor, nor semi-trailer shall be parked within a permit
district.
      (2)   No person shall park a motor vehicle, semi-tractor or semi-trailer
within a permit parking district until and unless the fee established by this
section has been paid.
      (3)   Residents may apply to the Office of the Chief of Police of the
city for a permit to park a motor vehicle or semi-trailer within the permit
parking district.
      (4)   An annual fee of $150 shall be charged each resident for the
issuance of one parking permit for a semi-tractor-trailer. A fee of $10 shall
be charged each resident for any replacement permit. The fee is nonrefundable.
No parking permit shall be issued until after the payment of the fee required
by this section.
      (5)   The fee for a parking permit issued for the first time to an
applicant during the calendar year shall be prorated based upon the number of
days remaining in the calendar year.
      (6)   Only one parking permit shall be issued to each applicant for one
semi-tractor-trailer operated by the applicant, upon proof that such applicant
is a resident of the city and the owner or operator of the semi-tractor-
trailer.
      (7)   Only one parking permit shall be issued to each applicant for an
automobile or pickup truck or motorcycle owned by the applicant, upon proof
that such applicant is a resident of the city and the owner or operator of the
automobile or pickup truck or motorcycle. No parking permit for an automobile
or pick-up or motorcycle shall be issued to an applicant unless the applicant
is the owner or operator of a semi-tractor-trailer for which a parking permit
has been issued to the applicant pursuant to the terms of this section. No fee
shall be charged for this parking permit.
      (8)   Parking permits issued under the provisions of this section shall
be valid commencing January 1 and expiring December 31 of each year.
      (9)   A parking permit issued under the provisions of this section shall
be personal, non- assignable and non-transferrable. Each parking permit shall
be valid only for a specifically prescribed vehicle.
      (10)   No person shall transfer, or allow another person to use or
possess any parking permit issued to him or her, or give false answers upon
application therefor, or use or continue to use such parking permit after
termination or expiration thereof by expiration of time or operation of law or
cessation of residence, or violate any of the terms, conditions, rules or
regulations applicable to the same.
      (11)   The application for the zone parking permit shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   Name and address of owner;
         (b)   Name and address of operator;
         (c)   Make, model year and serial number of motor vehicle or semi-
trailer;
         (d)   Name and number, if any, painted on or displayed in the motor
vehicle or semi-trailer; and
         (e)   Any other information needed by the Chief of Police of the city
to enforce the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Signs. A sign shall be placed near the above described premises which
sign shall be of such character as to inform readily and an ordinarily
observant person of the existence of the permit parking district created by
this section. No person, except the City Superintendent of Streets, shall
install or place any sign or signs, other than the signs as set forth in this
division, within the permit parking district.
   (E)   Sales prohibited. No merchandise or service shall be vended or
displayed for sale within the permit parking district by any person.
   (F)   Operation of motors. No person shall permit or allow any motor of any
kind or character to run, operated or be on for more than 30 consecutive
minutes when located within the permit parking district.
   (G)   Violations. In any prosecution charging a violation of this section,
proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons or warrant was
parked in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant was
at the time of such parking the registered owner or the registered operator of
the vehicle, shall have constituted in evidence a prima facie presumption that
such registered owner or registered operator of the vehicle was the person who
parked the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred.
   (H)   Waiver and release of all claims. By obtaining a zone parking permit
and by parking a semi- tractor, semi-trailer, automobile, pickup truck or any
other motor vehicle in the permit parking district the owner of the semi-
tractor, semi-trailer, automobile, pickup truck or other motor vehicle and the
operator of the semi-tractor, semi-trailer, automobile, pickup truck or other
motor vehicle consent and agree as follows:
      (1)   To assume full risk of any injuries, including death, damages or
loss which they may sustain as a result of participating in the use of the
permit parking district;
      (2)   To waive and relinquish all claims that they may have for injury to
person or property as a result of participating in the use of the permit
parking district;
      (3)   To fully release and discharge the city and its officials, agents,
servants and employees from any and all claims from injuries, including death,
damage or loss which they may have or may accrue to them on account of
participating in the use of the permit parking district; and
      (4)   To indemnify and hold harmless and defend the city and its
officials, agents, servants and employees from any and all claims resulting
from injuries, including death, damages and losses sustained by them and
arising out of, connected with, or in any way associated with the use of the
permit parking area.
(Ord. 03-38, passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord. 04-14, passed 4-12-04; Am. Ord. 09-57,
passed 12-14-09)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined as set forth in §
70.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
72.39 shall be fined $250 in addition to any costs and charges connected with
the removal or storage of the motor vehicle. It shall not be a defense to a
charge under §
72.39 that either the sign posted pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code or this
Code or the intended accessible parking place does not comply with the
technical requirements of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, Illinois Department of Transportation regulations, or this Code if a
reasonable person would be made aware by the sign or notice on or near the
parking place that the place is reserved for a person with disabilities.
   (C)   Whoever violates §
72.40 shall be fined $500.
(Ord. 06-09, passed 3-20-06)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
72.39 shall be fined $100 in addition to any costs or charges connected with
the removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized under this chapter for
each offense. The Police Department of the city may remove or cause to be
removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle parked
within a stall or space reserved for the use by the physically disabled which
does not display disabled registration plates or decals as required under this
chapter. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
72.35 through
72.42 all be fined not less that $5 nor more than $100 for each offense.
(Ord. 85-20, passed 5-13-85; Am. Ord. 96-7, passed 4-8-96; Am. Ord. 05-02,
passed 1-5-02)
CHAPTER 73: MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
73.01   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles
   
73.02   Riding on bicycles
   
73.03   Clinging to vehicles
   
73.04   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
73.05   Carrying articles
   
73.06   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles
   
73.07   Lamps on mopeds
   
73.08   Riding on mopeds
Motorcycles
   
73.20   Riding on motorcycles
   
73.21   Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles, motor driven cycles
or mopeds
   
73.22   Required equipment on motorcycles
   
73.23   Operating motorcycle, motor driven cycle or moped on one wheel
Skates, Skateboards and Toy Vehicles
   
73.35   Definitions
   
73.36   Operation prohibited in certain areas
   
73.37   Clinging to a vehicle
   
73.38   Yield right-of-way
   
73.39   Skateboarding, skates and toy vehicles on private property
   
73.40   Damaging city property
   
73.41   Ramps
   
73.42   Agreement for impoundment
   
73.43   Bicycles not included in provisions
BICYCLES
§ 73.01 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of the
rights, and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this traffic code, except as to special regulations in this traffic
code, and except as to those provisions of this traffic code which by their
nature can have no application.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1502)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.02 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped, except that an adult rider may
carry a child securely attached to his or her person in a back pack or sling.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1503)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.03 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1504)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.04 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a roadway
at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable and safe to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under the following situations:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedalcycle,
or vehicle proceeding in the same direction;
      (2)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway;
      (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not
limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles,
motorized pedalcycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard
width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge.
For purposes of this subsection, a “substandard width lane” means a lane that
is too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle and a vehicle to travel
safely side by side within the lane; or
      (4)   When approaching a place where a right turn is authorized.
   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a one-way
highway with two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left-hand
curb or edge of the roadway as practicable.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505)
   (C)   Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedalcycles upon a roadway shall
not ride more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside
for their exclusive use. Persons riding two abreast shall not impede the normal
and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a
single lane subject to the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.05 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article
which prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of the
bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on the
handlebars at all times.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1506)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.06 LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the State Department of Transportation which shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the
red reflector.
   (B)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a
bicycle, any siren. This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle that is a
police vehicle or Fire Department vehicle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately
control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle.
   (D)   No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that
is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed
by the State Department of Transportation, on each pedal, visible from the
front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of 200 feet.
   (E)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with side reflectors. The reflectors shall be visible from each side
of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet, and shall be essentially colorless
or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially colorless or
amber to the front of the center of the bicycle. The requirements of this
division may be met by reflective materials which shall be at least 3/16-inch
wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as possible the
continuous circular shape and size of the tires or rims of the bicycle, and
which reflective materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear
tire or rim. The reflectors shall conform to specifications prescribed by the
State Department of Transportation.
   (F)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.07 LAMPS ON MOPEDS.
   Every moped, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by
the State Department of Transportation which shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when in front of lawful, low-
powered beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the
red reflector.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.08 RIDING ON MOPEDS
   (A)   The operator of a moped shall ride only astride the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and shall not permit two persons to ride thereon
at the same time, unless the moped is designed to carry two persons. Any moped
designed for two persons must be equipped with a passenger seat and footrests
for use of a passenger.
   (B)   Neither the operator nor any passenger on a moped shall be required to
wear any special goggles, shield, helmet, or glasses.
   (C)   The provisions of §§
73.01 through
73.07 shall be applicable to the operation of mopeds, except for those
provisions which by their nature can have no application to mopeds.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
MOTORCYCLES
§ 73.20 RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.
   (A)   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and the operator shall not carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is
designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride
upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon
another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the
operator.
   (B)   A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the
seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.
   (C)   No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebar grips higher
than the height of the head of the operator when the operator is seated in the
normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or saddle occupied by
the operator.
   (D)   The operator of any motorcycle shall keep at least one hand on a
handlebar grip at all times the motorcycle is in motion.
   (E)   The operator of a motorcycle may not transport a passenger unless the
passenger is capable of resting a foot on the footrest while the motorcycle is
in motion.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.21 SPECIAL EQUIPMENT FOR PERSONS RIDING MOTORCYCLES, MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES
AND MOPEDS.
   The operator of a motorcycle, motor driven cycle or moped and every
passenger thereon shall be protected by glasses, goggles, or a transparent
shield. This equipment shall meet the requirements based upon those set forth
in Vehicle Equipment Safety Commission Regulation VESC-8, “Minimum Requirements
for Motorcyclists' Eye Protection.”
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.22 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT ON MOTORCYCLES.
   Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed
cab, shall be equipped with footrests for the passenger.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1405)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.23 OPERATING MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE OR MOPED ON ONE WHEEL.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or moped on
one wheel.
   (B)   Aggravated operating a motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or moped on one
wheel. A person commits aggravated operating a motorcycle, motor driven cycle,
or moped on one wheel when he or she violates division (A) while committing a
violation of §
71.010(B) or ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601.5. A violation of this division is a
petty offense with a minimum fine of $100, except a second conviction of a
violation of this division is a Class B misdemeanor and a third or subsequent
conviction of a violation of this division is a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2) Penalty, see §
70.99
SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND TOY VEHICLES
§ 73.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SKATEBOARD. Any board or platform device having at least two axles with
wheels on each end of a style commonly occurring on roller skates or any other
similar device, such device intended to be ridden by a person who propels
himself or herself by pushing the platform forward and then riding upon it as
it coasts, including, without limitations, skateboards of all types.
   SKATES. A device with wheels for riding upon, usually standing, including,
without limitations, roller blades and roller skates of all types.
   TOY VEHICLES. A coaster, scooter, sled, toboggan, unicycle or any other non-
motorized device with wheels or rollers upon which a person may ride. This
definition does not apply so long as they are used for the purposes for which
they are intended, to wagons, wheelchairs and strollers or other devices
designed and used for the purpose of transporting children, infants, physically
challenged or incapacitated persons or to bicycles or to carts or other devices
intended and used for transporting merchandise or materials.
(Ord. 95-23, passed 6-12-95)
§ 73.36 OPERATION PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (A)   The use of skates or skateboards or toy vehicles by any person shall
be prohibited on any public sidewalk, except that skateboards, skates and toy
vehicles shall be permitted on sidewalks in districts zoned as R1, R2 and R3
under the zoning ordinance of the city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything heretofore stated in division (A) of this
section, the use of skates or skateboards or toy vehicles by any person shall
be prohibited on any public sidewalk on Orleans Street between Market Street
and Railroad Avenue in the city.
(Ord. 95-23, passed 6-12-95; Am. Ord. 01-22, passed 8-13-01)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.37 CLINGING TO A VEHICLE.
   No person operating skates, skateboards, toy vehicles or other non-motorized
device shall attach himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(Ord. 95-23, passed 6-12-95)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.38 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Any person operating a skateboard, skates or other toy vehicle must yield
right-of-way to any pedestrian or motor vehicle.
(Ord. 95-23, passed 6-12-95)
§ 73.39 SKATEBOARDING, SKATES AND TOY VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall operate a skateboard, skates or toy vehicle on the
premises of any business, residence or other private property in violation of a
sign complying with this section.
   (B)   Areas in which skateboarding, skates or operation of a toy vehicle is
prohibited must be indicated by one or more signs which are positioned to
provide notice and which contain the words “No Skateboarding” or “No Skates” or
“No Roller Blades” or any other word or combination of words indicating that
skateboarding, skates or operation of a toy vehicle is prohibited. Letters on
the sign must be clearly legible.
(Ord. 95-23, passed 6-12-95)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.40 DAMAGING CITY PROPERTY.
   No person shall operate a skateboard, skates or toy vehicle on or against
any city-owned table, bench, structure, tennis court, parking stop, retaining
wall, fountain, statute or other improvement which may suffer damage by such
use.
(Ord. 95-23, passed 6-12-95)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.41 RAMPS.
   No person shall use or place a ramp, jump or any other device used to force
a skateboard, skates or toy vehicle off the pavement on the grounds of any
city-owned parking lot, park or sidewalk.
(Ord. 95-23, passed 6-12-95)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.42 AGREEMENT FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
   In place of any other penalty provided by law, any person violating this
chapter may, for a first offense, agree to have the skateboard, skates or toy
vehicle impounded by the Police Department for one week.
(Ord. 95-23, passed 6-12-95)
§ 73.43 BICYCLES NOT INCLUDED IN PROVISIONS.
   The operation of bicycles is covered by other provisions and is not intended
to be regulated by this chapter.
(Ord. 95-23, passed 6-12-95)
CHAPTER 74: SNOWMOBILES
Section
   
74.01   Definitions
   
74.02   Regulations
   
74.03   Designated areas available for use of snowmobiles
   
74.04   Equipment required
   
74.05   Unattended vehicles
   
74.06   Traffic regulations
 
   
74.99   Penalty
§ 74.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATE. To control the operation of a snowmobile.
   OPERATOR. A person who operates or is in actual control of a snowmobile.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice in a
natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.
(Ord. 81-32, passed 10-12-81)
§ 74.02 REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under the
following circumstances:
   (A)   On private property of another without the express permission to do so
by the owner or occupant of the property;
   (B)   On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreational
areas and golf courses without express provision or permission to do so by the
proper public authority;
   (C)   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as
to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons;
   (D)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
safety of any person or the property of any other person;
   (E)   Without having such snowmobile registered as provided for by statute
except that this provision shall not apply to the operation of a snowmobile on
the private property of the owner by the owner or a member of his or her
immediate family;
   (F)   Within the right-of-way of any public street within the city except as
hereinafter provided;
   (G)   Without a valid driver’s license;
   (H)   At a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour.
(Ord. 81-32, passed 10-12-81)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.03 DESIGNATED AREAS AVAILABLE FOR USE OF SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   Any alley within the city.
   (B)   Walnut Street from the north corporate boundary to the alley between
and parallel to Taft Street and Market Street.
   (C)   Union Street from a point one-half block north of Chestnut Street to
the alley between and parallel to Chestnut Street and Spruce Street.
   (D)   Pine Street from the alley between and parallel to Taft Street and
Market Street to the alley between and parallel to Railroad Avenue and
Vermilion Street.
   (E)   Taft Street from the alley between and parallel to Pine Street and
Holmes Street to the alley between and parallel to Holmes Street and State
Street.
   (F)   Vermilion Street from the alley between and parallel to Pine Street
and Holmes Street to the alley between and parallel to Holmes Street and State
Street.
   (G)   Vermilion Street from the alley between and parallel to Patton Street
and Franklin Street to the south corporate boundary.
   (H)   Fall Street from the alley between and parallel to Orleans Street and
Patton Street to Summer Street.
   (I)   Elm Street from the alley between and parallel to Patton Street and
Franklin Street to the alley between and parallel to Franklin Street and Ottawa
Street.
   (J)   Cherry Street from the alley between and parallel to Franklin Street
and Ottawa Street to Ottawa Street.
   (K)   On other streets to make a direct crossing provided:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing;
      (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street; and
      (3)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes a hazard.
(Ord. 81-32, passed 10-12-81)
§ 74.04 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   All snowmobiles operated within the city shall have the following equipment:
   (A)   At least one white head-lamp having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to exhibit a white light plainly visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet ahead during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions;
   (B)   At least one red tail lamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions;
   (C)   A brake system in good mechanical condition;
   (D)   Reflective material of a minimum area of 16 square inches mounted on
each side of the cowling. Identifying numbers may be included in computing the
required 16 square inch area;
   (E)   Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of
operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating the
vehicle, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass or similar device
on the vehicle;
   (F)   A safety or so-called dead man throttle in operating condition; a
SAFETY or DEAD MAN THROTTLE is defined as a device which when pressure is
removed from the accelerator or throttle causes the motor to be disengaged from
driving track.
(Ord. 81-32, passed 10-12-81)
§ 74.05 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a snowmobile to
be or remain unattended on public property while the motor is running or with
the keys for starting the vehicle left in the ignition.
(Ord. 81-32, passed 10-12-81)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.06 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   Each person operating a snowmobile shall strictly observe all traffic signs
and signals and all other traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto and
shall obey the orders and directions of any police officer of the city
authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
(Ord. 81-32, passed 10-12-81)
Penalty, see § 74.99
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(Ord. 81-32, passed 10-12-81)
CHAPTER 75: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
75.01   Pedestrian obedience to traffic-control devices and traffic regulations
   
75.02   Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks
   
75.03   Crossing at other than crosswalks
   
75.04   Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians
   
75.05   Blind, hearing-impaired, or physically disabled pedestrian right-of-way
   
75.06   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks
   
75.07   Pedestrians soliciting rides or business
   
75.08   Pedestrians walking on highways
   
75.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks
   
75.10   Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles
   
75.11   Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs
   
75.12   Bridge and railroad signals
   
75.13   Motorized wheelchairs
§ 75.01 PEDESTRIAN OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-
control device specifically applicable to him or her, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
   (B)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian-control signals
provided in §§
70.31 and
70.32 of this traffic code; but at all other places, pedestrians shall be
accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this
chapter.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1001)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.02 PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of
the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is
approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in
danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety,
and walk or run into the path of a moving vehicle which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) shall not apply under the condition stated in §
75.03(B).
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers
shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians as set forth in §
71.062.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.03 CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic- control devices; and, when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to the crossing movements.
   (E)   Pedestrians with disabilities may cross a roadway at any point other
than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk where the
intersection is physically inaccessible to them but they shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.04 DRIVERS TO AVOID COLLIDING WITH PEDESTRIANS.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, or any person
operating a bicycle or other device propelled by human power and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated,
or intoxicated person.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.05 BLIND, HEARING-IMPAIRED, OR PHYSICALLY DISABLED PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-
WAY.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any blind, hearing-
impaired, or physically disabled pedestrian carrying a clearly visible white
cane or accompanied by a support or guide dog.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.06 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.07 PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle, unless expressly permitted by
this code. Solicitation on highways within this city shall be allowed only at
intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop. Any person
engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age or more and shall
be wearing a high visibility vest. The soliciting agency shall be:
      (1)   Registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization
as provided by the Solicitation for Charity Act.
      (2)   Engaged in a statewide fund raising activity.
      (3)   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
   (D)   No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a roadway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or
about to be parked on a street or highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.08 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (E), where a sidewalk is provided and
its use is practicable, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (E), where a sidewalk is not available,
any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder,
as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (E), where neither a sidewalk nor a
shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall
walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of a roadway, and, if on a two-
way roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a
roadway shall yield the right- of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (E)   In municipalities with a population of under 2,000,000 inhabitants,
upon highways where the maximum posted speed limit is 45 miles per hour or
less, and during the period from sunrise to sunset, a pedestrian who is 18
years of age or older and wearing in-line speed skates may travel upon the
roadway as near as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway. Pedestrians
wearing in-line speed skates upon a roadway may not impede or obstruct other
vehicular traffic. Pedestrians wearing in-line speed skates shall be subject to
all other rights and duties under this code. Nothing in this code shall be
construed to prevent a pedestrian wearing in-line speed skates from using a
lane designated for bicycles.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1007)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians on a
sidewalk.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.10 PEDESTRIANS YIELD TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
an audible signal and visual signals meeting the requirements of ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 12-601, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an
audible signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the
authorized emergency vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1009)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.11 PEDESTRIANS UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree
which renders himself or herself a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway,
except on a sidewalk.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1010)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.12 BRIDGE AND RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.13 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair upon a sidewalk or roadway
shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties
applicable to a pedestrian.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1)
CHAPTER 76: EQUIPMENT; LOADS
Section
Equipment
   
76.01   Scope and effect of equipment requirements
Loads
   
76.10   Scope and effect of size, weight, and load regulations
   
76.11   Projecting loads on passenger vehicles
   
76.12   Protruding members of vehicles
   
76.13   Spilling loads prohibited
   
76.14   Pushing of disabled vehicles
EQUIPMENT
§ 76.01 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to
cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles which is in an unsafe condition as to endanger any
person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all
times equipped with the lamps and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment as required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq., or which is
equipped in any manner in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq.,
or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required
under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq.
   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq., with respect
to equipment on vehicles shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road
machinery, road rollers, or farm tractors, or to farm-wagon type trailers
having a fertilizer spreader attachment permanently mounted thereon, having a
gross weight of not to exceed 36,000 pounds and used only for the
transportation of bulk fertilizer, or to farm-wagon type tank trailers of not
to exceed 2,000 gallons capacity, used during the liquid fertilizer season as
field-storage “nurse tanks,” supplying the fertilizer to a field applicator and
highways only for bringing the fertilizer to a field applicator from a local
source of supply to the farm or field or from one farm or field to another.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101)
Penalty, see § 70.99
LOADS
§ 76.10 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF SIZE, WEIGHT, AND LOAD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move on, upon, or across, or
for the owner to cause to knowingly permit to be driven or moved on, upon, or
across any highway any vehicle or vehicles of a size and weight exceeding the
limitations stated in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq., or otherwise in
violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq.
   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq. governing
size, weight, and load do not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow and
ice removal operations owned or operated by the city, or to implements of
husbandry, as defined in §
70.01, temporarily operated or towed in a combination upon a highway provided
such combination does not consist of more than three vehicles or, in the case
of hauling fresh, perishable fruits or vegetables from farm to the point of
first processing, not more than three wagons being towed by an implement of
husbandry, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit.
   (C)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15.101 governing size,
weight, and load do not apply to any snow and ice removal equipment that is no
more than 12 feet in width, if the equipment displays flags at least 18 inches
square mounted on the driver’s side of the snow plow. These vehicles must be
equipped with an illuminated rotating, oscillating, or flashing amber light or
lights, or a flashing amber strobe light or lights, mounted on the top of the
cab and of sufficient intensity to be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight.
If the load on the transport vehicle blocks the visibility of the amber
lighting from the rear of the vehicle, the vehicle must also be equipped with
an illuminated rotating, oscillating, or flashing amber light or lights, or a
flashing amber strobe light or lights, mounted on the rear of the load and of
sufficient intensity to be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101)
   (D)   No person shall use the highways under the jurisdiction of the city in
violation of weight and location restrictions and commercial vehicle
restrictions set forth in any applicable ordinance, except for the purpose of
making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may be driven
on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the
purpose.
   (E)   No person shall operate a single axle vehicle in excess of six short
tons (12,000 pounds) or a tandem axle vehicle in excess of ten short tons
(20,000 pounds) on the highways under the jurisdiction of the city known as
Lane Drive and Dawn Avenue between the dates of February 1 and May 1 of each
year.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62; Am. Ord. 08-08, passed 4-14-08)
Penalty, see § 70.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to regulate loads, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1
§ 76.11 PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES.
   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street with any load
carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of
the vehicle, nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders
on the right side thereof.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-105)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 76.12 PROTRUDING MEMBERS OF VEHICLES.
   No vehicle with boom, arm, drill rig, or other protruding component shall be
operated upon any highway in the city unless the protruding component is
fastened so as to prevent shifting, bouncing, or moving in any manner.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-106)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 76.13 SPILLING LOADS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless the vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping,
shifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be
dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may
be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load
unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent
the covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard
to other users of the highway.
   (C)   The State Department of Transportation shall adopt those rules and
regulations it deems appropriate which require the securing of steel rolls and
other objects on flatbed trucks so as to prevent injury to users of highways
and damage to property. Any person who operates a flatbed truck on any highway
in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department
of Transportation under this division shall be punished as provided in § 70.99.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 76.14 PUSHING OF DISABLED VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful under any circumstances for any vehicle to push any other
vehicle on or along any highway outside an urban area in this city, except in
an extreme emergency, and then the vehicle shall not be pushed farther than is
reasonably necessary to remove it from the roadway or from the immediate hazard
that exists.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-114)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 77: MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
Section
   
77.01   Reckless driving
   
77.02   (Reserved)
   
77.03   Crashes involving death or personal injuries
   
77.04   Duty to give information and render aid
   
77.05   Crash involving damage to vehicle
   
77.06   Duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property
   
77.07   Duty to report accident
   
77.08   False reports
   
77.09   When driver fails to report
   
77.10   Liquor or drugs
   
77.11   Driver's license
Cross-reference:
   Use of motor vehicle in the commission of certain offenses, see Ch. 138
§ 77.01 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   A person commits reckless driving if he or she:
   (A)   Drives any vehicle with a willful or wanton disregard for the safety
of persons or property; or
   (B)   Knowingly drives a vehicle and uses an incline in a roadway, such as a
railroad crossing, bridge approach, or hill, to cause the vehicle to become
airborne.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503(a)) (Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 77.02 (RESERVED).
   ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-504 concerning drag racing was repealed by the
Illinois General Assembly. For provisions concerning street racing and
aggravated street racing, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-506.
§ 77.03 CRASHES INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash resulting
in personal injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop the vehicle
at the scene of such crash, or as close thereto as possible, and shall then
forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at the scene of the crash
until the requirements of §
77.04 have been fulfilled. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing
traffic more than is necessary.
   (B)   Any person who has failed to stop or to comply with the requirements
of division (A) above shall, as soon as possible but in no case later than one-
half hour after such motor vehicle crash, or, if hospitalized and incapacitated
from reporting at any time during such period, as soon as possible but in no
case later than one-half hour after being discharged from the hospital, report
the place of the crash, the date, the approximate time, the driver’s name and
address, the registration number of the vehicle driven, and the names of all
other occupants of the vehicle, at a police station or sheriff’s office near
the place where such crash occurred. No report made as required under this
division (B) shall be used, directly or indirectly, as a basis for the
prosecution of any violation under division (A) above.
   (C)   Any person arrested for violating this section is subject for chemical
testing of his or her blood, breath, or urine for the presence of alcohol,
other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination
thereof, as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1, if the testing occurs
within 12 hours of the time of the occurrence of the crash that led to his or
her arrest. The person’s driving privileges are subject to statutory summary
suspension under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1 if he or she fails testing or
statutory summary revocation under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1 if he or she
refuses to undergo the testing.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, PERSONAL INJURY shall mean any injury
requiring immediate professional treatment in a medical facility or doctor’s
office.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 77.04 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash resulting
in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or
attended by any person shall give the driver’s name, address, registration
number, and owner of the vehicle the driver is operating, and shall upon
request and if available, exhibit the driver’s license to the person struck or
the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with, and
shall render to any person injured in such crash reasonable assistance,
including the carrying or the making of arrangements for the carrying of the
person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical treatment,
if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is
requested by the injured person.
   (B)   If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to this
section is in condition to receive and understand the information and no police
officer is present, the driver, after rendering reasonable assistance, shall
forthwith report the crash at the Police Department, disclosing the information
required by this section.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403) (Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 77.05 CRASH INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash resulting
only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall
immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the motor vehicle crash or as
close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every event
shall remain at the scene of the motor vehicle accident until the requirements
of this chapter have been fulfilled. A driver does not violate this section if
if the driver moves the vehicle as soon as possible off the highway to the
nearest safe location on an exit ramp shoulder, a frontage road, the nearest
suitable cross street, or other suitable location that does not obstruct
traffic and remains at that location until the driver has fulfilled the
requirements of this chapter. Every stop shall be made without obstructing
traffic more than is necessary. If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic
lanes, the driver of the vehicle must make every reasonable effort to move the
vehicle or have it moved so as not to block the traffic lanes.
   (B)   Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the court shall make a
finding as to whether the damage to a vehicle is in excess of $1,000, and in
such case a statement of this finding shall be reported to the Secretary of
State with the report of conviction. Upon receipt of such report of conviction
and statement of finding that the damage to a vehicle is in excess of $1,000,
the Secretary of State shall suspend the driver’s license or any nonresident’s
driving privileges.
   (C)   If any peace officer or highway authority official finds (i) a vehicle
standing upon a highway or toll highway in violation of a prohibition,
limitation, or restriction on stopping, standing, or parking imposed under the
Illinois Vehicle Code or (ii) a disabled vehicle that obstructs the roadway of
a highway or toll highway, the peace officer or highway authority official is
authorized to move the vehicle or to require the operator of the vehicle to
move the vehicle to the shoulder of the road, to a position where parking is
permitted, or to public parking or storage premises. The removal may be
performed by, or under the direction of, the peace officer or highway authority
official or may be contracted for by local authorities. After the vehicle has
been removed, the peace officer or highway authority official shall follow
appropriate procedures, as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203.
   (D)   A towing service, its officers, and its employees are not liable for
loss of or damage to any real or personal property that occurs as the result of
the removal or towing of any vehicle under division (C) above, as provided in
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-213(b).
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 77.06 DUTY UPON DAMAGING UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR OTHER PROPERTY.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in a
motor vehicle crash with any vehicle which is unattended, or other property,
resulting in any damage to such other vehicle or property shall immediately
stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of
such vehicle or other property of the driver’s name, address, registration
number, and owner of the vehicle the driver was operating or shall attach
securely in a conspicuous place on or in the vehicle or other property struck a
written notice giving the driver’s name, address, registration number, and
owner of the vehicle the driver was driving and shall without unnecessary delay
notify the Police Department and shall make a written report of such crash when
and as required in §
77.07. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary. If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver of the
vehicle must make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved
so as not to block the traffic lanes.
   (B)   If any peace officer or highway authority official finds (i) a vehicle
standing upon a highway or toll highway in violation of a prohibition,
limitation, or restriction on stopping, standing, or parking imposed under the
Illinois Vehicle Code or (ii) a disabled vehicle that obstructs the roadway of
a highway or toll highway, the peace officer or highway authority official is
authorized to move the vehicle or to require the operator of the vehicle to
move the vehicle to the shoulder of the road, to a position where parking is
permitted, or to public parking or storage premises. The removal may be
performed by, or under the direction of, the peace officer or highway authority
official or may be contracted for by local authorities. After the vehicle has
been removed, the peace officer or highway authority official shall follow
appropriate procedures, as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203.
   (C)   A towing service, its officers, and its employees are not liable for
loss of or damage to any real or personal property that occurs as the result of
the removal or towing of any vehicle under division (C) above, as provided in
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-213(b).
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-404)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 77.07 DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
within this city, resulting in injury to or death of any person or in which
damage to the property of any one person, including himself or herself, in
excess of $1,500 (or $500 if any of the vehicles involved in the accident is
subject to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 7-601 but is covered by a liability insurance
policy in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 7-601) is sustained shall, as
soon as possible but not later than ten days after the accident, file with the
Police Department a copy of the written report required to be filed with the
state under state law.
   (B)   Whenever a school bus is involved in an accident in this city, caused
by a collision, a sudden stop, or otherwise, resulting in any property damage,
personal injury, or death, and whenever an accident occurs within 50 feet of a
school bus in this city resulting in personal injury to or the death of any
person while awaiting or preparing to board the bus or immediately after
exiting the bus, the driver shall as soon as possible, but not later than ten
days after the accident, file with the Police Department a copy of the written
report required to be filed with the state under state law. If a report is also
required under division (A) above, that report and the report required by this
division (B) shall be submitted on a single form.
   (C)   The Chief of Police may require any driver, occupant, or owner of a
vehicle involved in an accident of which report must be made as provided in
this section or §
77.09 to file supplemental reports whenever the original report is insufficient
in the opinion of the Chief of Police and may require witnesses of the accident
to submit written reports. The report may include photographs, charts,
sketches, and graphs.
   (D)   Should the Police Department learn through other reports of accidents
required by law of the occurrence of an accident reportable under this chapter
and the driver, owner, or witness has not reported as required under (A)
through (C) above or §
77.09 within the time specified, the person is not relieved of the
responsibility and the Police Department shall notify the person by first class
mail directed to his or her last known address of his or her legal obligation.
However, the notification is not a condition precedent to impose the penalty
for failure to report as provided in (E) below.
   (E)   The Secretary of State shall suspend the driver’s license or any
nonresident’s driving privilege of any person who fails or neglects to make
report of a traffic accident as herein required or as required by any other law
of this state.
Statutory reference:
   Authorization for city to require accident reports, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 11-415
§ 77.08 FALSE REPORTS.
   Any person who provides information in an oral or written report required by
this chapter with knowledge or reason to believe that the information is false
shall be fined as provided in §
70.99.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-409)
§ 77.09 WHEN DRIVER FAILS TO REPORT.
   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a
required written accident report and if there was another occupant in the
vehicle at the time of the motor vehicle accident capable of making a written
report, the occupant shall make or cause the written report to be made. If the
driver fails for any reason to make the report the owner of the vehicle
involved in the motor vehicle accident shall, as soon as practicable, make the
report to the Police Department.
§ 77.10 LIQUOR OR DRUGS.
   It shall be unlawful for the habitual user of narcotic drugs to operate any
motor vehicle on any street, and it shall be unlawful for any intoxicated
person, or any person under the influence of alcohol or of a narcotic drug, to
operate or attempt to operate any motor vehicles on any street.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 77.11 DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who does not have a valid driver’s
license to operate or attempt to operate any motor vehicle on any street.
(Ord. 62-13, passed 7-9-62)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 78: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Truck routes
   
II.   Speed limits
   
III.   Load streets and loading zones
   
IV.   One-way streets
   
V.   Yield right-of-way signs
   
VI.   Stop streets
   
VII.   Weight limits
SCHEDULE I. TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   Industrial Park Drive, from Illinois Route 9 to south city limits be
designated a Class II highway.
   (B)   Technology Lane, commencing at its intersection with Illinois State
Route 9 and proceeding southerly for 1,295 feet be, and the same is, designated
a Class III truck route.
   (C)   The portion of Technology Lane designated a Class III truck route
shall be properly signed in accordance with the Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices.
(Ord. 96-02, passed 1-8-96; Am. Ord. 2001-1, passed 2-12-01)
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS.
Location                                                      Speed Limit (mph)
East Center Street, between Railroad Avenue and Union Street
on any day on which public schools are in session between the 20
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
East Franklin Street, between South Washington Street and
South High Street on any day on which public schools are in   20
session between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Fall Street, between Summer Street and East Pells Street      20
Market Street, between Ottawa Road and Hunt Street            20
North Elm Street, between West State Street and West Holmes   20
Street
Park Street, between East Franklin Street and East Ottawa     20
Street
South Taft Street, between Center Street and Orleans Street   20
on any day when school children are present
West Orleans Street, between South Maple Street and South
Cherry Street on any day on which public schools are in       20
session between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
West Pells Street, between Cherry Street and Plum Street      20
(being the 600 block), designated as a school zone
 
(Ord. 68-20, passed 7-8-68; Ord. 69-18, passed 7-14-69; Ord. 87-6, passed 3-9-
87; Ord. 90-37, passed 11-13-90; Ord. 97-1, passed 1-13-97; Am. Ord. 04-42,
passed 11-8-04; Am. Ord. 09-44, passed 10-12-09)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE III. LOAD STREETS AND LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   Load streets. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Market
Street between Patton Street and Holmes Street, and on Pells Street between
Taft Street and Railroad Avenue, Franklin Street between Cherry and John
Streets, Cherry Street from Route 9 to Orleans Street, Market Street between
Patten and Holmes Street, Pells Street between Railroad Avenue and Market
Street, and John Street between Ottawa Road and Franklin Street, and on Taft
Street between Ottawa Road and Holmes Street in the city when the gross weight
on the surface of the road through any axle of such vehicle exceeds 12,000
pounds, except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in
which case such vehicle may be driven on the street for not more than the
minimum distance necessary for the purpose. For purposes of this section school
buses will be exempt.
   (B)   Loading zones.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         DRIVER.  Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
         LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
         SCHOOL BUS LOADING ZONE. That part of the street adjacent to private
property reserved for the exclusive use of school buses for the loading or
unloading of passengers.
         VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moving by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      (2)   Loading zone on Market Street. It shall be unlawful for the driver
of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is
necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed five
minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight carrying vehicles for a period
of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to
exceed five minutes, in any place designated as a loading zone and marked as
such.
      (3)   Loading zone on alley between Market Street and Taft Street.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand any
freight carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is necessary to
load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed 20 minutes, in place
hereinafter designated as a loading zone and marked as such.
         (b)   The east side of the alley which extends in a northerly and
southerly direction between Market Street and Taft Street, from West Orleans
Street to West Holmes Street.
      (4)   Loading zone on West Center Street.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand any
freight carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is necessary to
load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed 60 minutes, in place
hereinafter designated as a loading zone and marked as such, during the hours
of 6:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m.
         (b)   The west three parking spaces on West Center Street which are
adjacent to Lot 1 in Block “B” in the Original Town of Prospect City, now City
of Paxton, west of the Illinois Central Railroad, situated in the City of
Paxton, is designated as the loading zone.
      (5)   Miscellaneous loading zones.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand any
freight carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is necessary to
load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed 30 minutes, in place
hereinafter designated as a loading zone and marked as such.
         (b)   The west half of the alley which extends in a northerly and
southerly direction between Market Street and Railroad Avenue, from State
Street to Pells Street; the east half of the alley which extends in a northerly
and southerly direction between Market Street and Taft Street, from Pine Street
to Orleans Street; the north half of the alleys which extend in an easterly and
westerly direction in Blocks “B,” 12, 14 and 30 in the Original Town of
Prospect City, now City of Paxton, west of the Illinois Central Railroad; are
designated as loading zones.
         (c)   It shall be unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to stand any
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers, not to exceed three minutes, between the hour of 7:30
a.m. and 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday of each and every week on the north
side of East Center Street immediately adjacent to the following described real
estate: the east 40 feet of Lot 10, all of Lot 11 and the west 16 feet of Lot
12 (measured along the southerly line thereof) in Block 12 in the Original Town
of Prospect City, now City of Paxton, east of the Illinois Central Railroad,
situated in the City of Paxton.
      (6)   School bus stand. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle,
other than a school bus, to stand or park any vehicle in any area designated by
this subsection as a school bus loading zone and marked as such. No vehicle
other than a school bus shall be parked in a place designated as a school bus
loading zone.
   (C)   Marking places. The Chief of Police shall have markings painted or
placed upon the curb of the street to designate the above area as a loading
zone, subject to the terms of this schedule.
   (D)   City staff shall ensure that the necessary signs are posted to
prohibit the thru traffic of commercial trucks at the locations set forth in
this section.
(Ord. 77-8, passed 4-11-77; Ord. 92-31, passed 8-10-91; Ord. 93-29, passed 7-
12-93; Ord. 95-14, passed 5-8-95; Ord. 98-20, passed 9-14-98; Am. Ord. 05-29,
passed 8-16-05; Am. Ord. 09-44, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 7-12-
16) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE IV. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   The following streets are designated as one-way streets.
 
Location                                                          Direction
East Franklin Street from its intersection with South Washington  Easterly
Street to its intersection with South High Street
East Franklin Street from its intersection with South Washington  Easterly
Street to its intersection with South College Street
South Park (also known as Glen Street) from its intersection with Southerly
East Franklin Street to it intersection with East Ottawa Street
 
(Ord. 77-32, passed 8-18-77; Ord. 90-22, passed 8-13-90)
SCHEDULE V. YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   Traffic signs commonly known and referred to as yield right-of-way signs
shall be erected within the city at the following locations.
Street At its Intersection With
Street            At its Intersection With
American Street   Center Street
American Street   Orleans Street
American Street   Spruce Street
American Street   State Street
Cherry Street     Orleans Street
Elm Street        Patton Street
Franklin Street   Taft Street (for traffic traveling both east and west)
John Street       Franklin Street
Meridian Terrace  Summer Street
Orleans Street    Taft Street (for traffic traveling both east and west)
Patton Street     Cherry Street
Patton Street     High Street
Patton Street     Taft Street (for traffic traveling both east and west)
Patton Street     Vermilion Street
Pine Street       Maple Street
Pine Street       Taft Street
Summer Street     Park Street
Summer Street     Union Street
Summer Street     Vermilion Street
Taft Street       Center Street
Taft Street       Holmes Street
Taft Street       State Street
Union Street      Franklin Street
Vermilion Street  East Chestnut Street, in the northwest corner of the
                  intersection
Vermilion Street  Franklin Street
Vermilion Street  Pine Street
Washington Street State Street
 
(Res. 62-17, passed 7-9-62; Res. 66-27, passed 12-12-66; Ord. 75-6, passed 3-
10-75; Ord. 83-11, passed 4-11-83; Ord. 95-41, passed 10-9-95; Ord. 99-34,
passed 12-13-99; Ord. 09-30, passed 8-10-09)
SCHEDULE VI. STOP STREETS.
   The following designated street intersections, or parts thereof, within the
city are designated as stop streets.
Street At its Intersection With
Street                  At its Intersection With
                        Walnut Street, making said intersection a one- way
1900 East Road          stop, with the southbound traffic on 1900 East Road
                        stopping at the intersection with Walnut Street
All streets which lead to or intersect those streets which are traversed by
S.B.I. Route No. 9 or by U.S. Route No. 45 within the city at such intersection
where such streets lead into or intersect the streets traversed by Route No. 9
or U.S. Route No. 45.
Allison Drive           Summer Street
American Street         Pells Street (two-way stop)
American Street         Walnut Street (for traffic traveling both north and
                        south)
Cambridge Drive         Summer Street
Center Street           Elm Street
Center Street           High Street
Center Street           Taft Street
Center Street           Vermilion Street
Center Street           Washington Street
Center Street           Winter Street
Cherry Street           Franklin Street
Cherry Street           Pells Street
Cherry Street           West Center Street
Cherry Street           West Orleans Street
Chestnut Street         Maple Street (for traffic traveling in both directions)
Chestnut Street         Taft Street (for traffic traveling both east and west)
College Street          Patton Street
East Franklin Street    South College Street (for traffic traveling both east
                        and west)
East Franklin Street    South Washington Street
East Ottawa Street      South Union Street
East Ottawa Street      South Washington Street
East Patton Street      Vermilion Street
East Pine Street        North Union Street
East Spring Street      East Center Street
Elm Street              Center Street
Elm Street              Patton Street
Elm Street              Pells Street
Fall Street             Summer Street
Franklin Street         Cherry Street
Franklin Street         High Street
Holmes Street           Market Street
Holmes Street           Railroad Avenue
High Street             Franklin Street
High Street             Summer Street
Larson Street           Union Street
Larson Street           Vermilion Street
Maple Street            Chestnut Street (for traffic traveling in both
                        directions)
Market Street           State Street (for traffic traveling both north and
                        south)
Meridian Terrace        Franklin Street
Mueser Drive            Union Street
North American Street   West Pine Street
North Maple Street      West Pells Street
North Union Street      East Pine Street
Oak Street              American Street (for traffic traveling in both
                        directions)
Oak Street              Maple Street (for traffic traveling in both directions)
Oak Street              Market Street
Oak Street              Taft Street
Orleans Street          Washington Street
Ottawa Street           Vermillion Street
Park Terrace            Stockholm Road
Patton Street           College Street
Patton Street           Elm Street
Patton Street           High Street
Patton Street           Taft Street
Patton Street           Washington Street (for traffic traveling both east and
                        west)
Pells Street            Cherry Street
Pells Street            Elm Street
Pells Street            Plum Street
Pine Street             North Market Street
Plum Street             Pells Street
South College Street    East Franklin Street
South Elm Street        West Orleans Street
South Maple Street      West Orleans Street
South Union Street      East Ottawa
South Washington Street East Franklin Street (for traffic traveling both north
                        and south)
State Street            Market Street (for traffic traveling both east and
                        west)
State Street            Taft Street (for traffic traveling both east and west)
Summer Street           Fall Street
Summer Street           High Street
Summer Street           Union Street
Summer Street           Vermilion Street
Taft Street             Center Street
Taft Street             Holmes Street
Taft Street             Oak Street
Taft Street             Pells Street
Union Street            Larson Street
Union Street            Mueser Drive
Union Street            Summer Street (for traffic traveling both north and
                        south)
Vermilion Street        Center Street
Vermilion Street        East Patton Street
Vermillion Street       Ottawa Street
Vermilion Street        Summer Street
Walnut Street           American Street (for traffic traveling in both
                        directions)
West Center Street      West Cherry Street
West Orleans Street     Cherry Street
West Pells Street       Taft Street
West Pine Street        North American Street
West Pine Street        North Maple
West Pine Street        North Taft Street
 
(Res. 62-15, passed 7-9-62; Res. 65-19, passed 10-11-65; Res. 66-18, passed 9-
12-66; Res. 68-19, passed 7-8-68; Ord. 75-33, passed 11-10-75; Ord. 77-10,
passed 4-18-77; Ord. 77-17, passed 7-11-77; Ord. 77-30, passed 8-18-77; Ord.
78-6, passed 2-13-78; Ord. 80-14, passed 7-14-80; Ord. 81-30, passed 9-14-81;
Ord. 83-11, passed 4-11-83; Ord. 86-7, passed 4-14-86; Ord. 86-32, passed 12-8-
86; Ord. 88-37, passed 9-12-88; Ord. 89-30, passed 8-14-89; Ord. 90-5, passed
3-12-90; Ord. 90-7, passed 4-9-90; Ord. 90-24, passed 8-13-90; Ord. 92-3,
passed 2-10-92; Ord. 93-21, passed 6-14-93; Ord. 95-35, passed 8-14-95; Ord.
97-11, passed 5-12-97; Ord. 99-1, passed 1-11-99; Ord. 99-22B, passed 8-9-99;
Ord. 2001-4, passed 3-12-01; Ord. 01-35, passed 11-12-01; Am. Ord. 02-21,
passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 03-08, passed 2-10-03; Am. Ord. 03-26, passed 6-9-03;
Am. Ord. 04-32, passed 10-11-04; Am. Ord. 05-15, passed 5-23-05; Am. Ord. 06-
21, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord. 07-29, passed 9-10-07; Am. Ord. 08-26, passed 8-
11-08; Am. Ord. 08-30, passed 9-8-08; Am. Ord. 08-31, passed 9-8-08; Am. Ord.
08-32, passed 9-8-08; Am. Ord. 09-06, passed 1-19-09; Am. Ord. 10-09, passed 4-
26-10; Am. Ord. 12-09, passed 3-12-12; Am. Ord. 12-10, passed 3-12-12; Am. Ord.
19-05, passed 5-14-19; Am. Ord. 19-0-8, passed 6-11-19; Am. Ord. 19-0-12,
passed 7-9-19)
SCHEDULE VII. WEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   Definitions.  
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled
      OPERATE. To ride in or on, other than as a passenger, use or control in
any manner the operation of any device or vehicle whether motorized or
propelled by human power.
      OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of
any device or vehicle, whether motorized or propelled by human power.
      VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway.
   (B)   Prohibitions. No vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with
pneumatic tires shall be operated, unladen or with load, upon the following:
 
Location                                                 Maximum Weight (lbs.)
Bridge over the Illinois Central Railroad on Center      20,000
Street
Bridge over the Illinois Central Railroad on Pine Street 20,000
 
(Ord. 02-30, passed 7-8-02)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 79: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Fifteen-minute parking
   
II.   One-hour parking zone; 30-minute parking zone
   
III.   Two-hour parking zone
   
IV.   Theater parking
   
V.   Parking after snowfall prohibited
   
VI.   Disabled parking
   
VII.   No parking places
   
VIII.   Limited parking
SCHEDULE I. FIFTEEN-MINUTE PARKING.
   (A)   There is created a limited parking district (the “Post Office Limited
Parking District”), which is described as follows: the north five parking
spaces on South Market Street which are adjacent to Lots 1 and 2 in Block “A”
in the Original Town of Prospect City, now City of Paxton, west of the Illinois
Central Railroad, situated in the City of Paxton, commonly known as the U.S.
Post Office, 209 South Market Street, Paxton, Illinois.
   (B)   There is created a limited parking district (the "South Market Limited
Parking District"), which is described as follows: the one parking space on
South Market Street which is adjacent to Lot 6 in Block "I" in the Original
Town of Prospect City, now City of Paxton, west of the Illinois Central
Railroad, situated in the City of Paxton, bearing parcel number 11-14-18-229-
005 and street address 343 South Market Street, Paxton, IL 60957.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any motor
vehicle in the Post Office Limited Parking District for a period of more than
15 minutes between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
only.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any motor
vehicle in the South Market Limited Parking District for a period of more than
15 minutes on any date and/or at any time.
(Ord. 94-6, passed 2-14-94; Am. Ord. 2025-01-02, passed 1-14-25) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. ONE-HOUR PARKING ZONE; 30-MINUTE PARKING ZONE.
   (A)   One-hour parking zone. There is established a one-hour limited time
parking zone on Pells Street (Illinois Route 9) east of Railroad Avenue (U.S.
Route 45) to the city limits.
   (B)   Thirty-minute parking zone. There are hereby established 30-minute
limited time parking zones as follows:
      (1)   Between the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on the west side of
Market Street, 75 feet north of Orleans Street, consisting of the seven
designated parking places in front of the library.
      (2)   In the alley running in a northerly and southerly direction, being
Block Two in the Original Town of Prospect City, now City of Paxton, east of
the Illinois Central Railroad - 100 South Railroad Avenue.
(Ord. 90-13, passed 6-11-90; Am. Ord. 06-43, passed 11-13-06; Am. Ord. 07-30,
passed 9-17-07; Am. Ord. 12-07, passed 2-13-12)
SCHEDULE III. TWO-HOUR PARKING ZONE.
   (A)   Two-hour parking zone. There is established a two-hour limited time
parking zone on the following streets in the city between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Mondays through Saturdays, except on the following
holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Thanksgiving and Christmas; the
streets being described as follows:
      (1)   Market Street, from Orleans Street to Holmes Street, excepting the
55 feet of the east side thereof in front of the post office and further
excepting the north 143.5 feet on the east side of Market Street and further
excepting the north 143.5 feet on the west side of Market Street;
      (2)   The north side of Center Street, from Market Street, westerly one-
half block to alley and the first seven parking spaces westerly from Market
Street on the south side of Center Street;
      (3)   Both sides of Pells Street, from Market Street, easterly to the
right-of-way of the Illinois Central and Gulf Railroad Company and from Market
Street westerly to Taft Street;
      (4)   Both sides of State Street, from Market Street easterly to the
right-of-way of the Illinois Central and Gulf Railroad Company and from Market
Street westerly one-half block to alley; and
      (5)   The east side of Taft Street from Pells Street northerly one-half
block to alley.
   (B)   Parking in two-hour parking zone. When any vehicle shall be parked
within the two-hour parking zone, the same shall be parked either parallel to
or diagonally from the curb or street marking lines and shall be parked only
between the curb or street parking lines.
   (C)   Post office. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
park the same at any time on the east side of Market Street and in front of the
United States Post Office Building for a period longer than ten minutes.
   (D)   Over-parking penalties. See §
70.99.
   (E)   Daylight saving time. The hours mentioned in division (A) of this
section shall be determined according to Daylight Saving Time, when Daylight
Saving Time is in force within the city, otherwise according to Central
Standard Time.
   (F)   There is hereby established a two hour limited time parking zone on
the north side of East Center Street between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:30
p.m., Monday through Friday, immediately adjacent to the east 40 feet of Lot 10
and the west 20 feet of Lot 11 (measured along the southerly side thereof) in
Block 12 in the Original Town of Prospect City, now City of Paxton, east of the
Illinois Central Railroad, situated in the City of Paxton.
(Ord. 79-7, passed 4-9-79; Am. Ord. 05-30, passed 8-16-05)
SCHEDULE IV. THEATER PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers, not to exceed three minutes, and for the driver to
stand any freight carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is
necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed five minutes,
directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the theater
is open for business.
(Ord. 76-12, passed 4-12-76)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE V. PARKING AFTER SNOWFALL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any of the following
public streets in the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
within 48 hours after a snowfall of two or more inches has occurred:
      (1)   Market Street from Orleans Street to Holmes Street;
      (2)   Center Street from Taft Street to Railroad Avenue;
      (3)   Pells Street from the alley between and parallel to Taft and Market
Streets to Railroad Avenue;
      (4)   State Street from the alley between and parallel to Taft and Market
Streets to Railroad Avenue.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer or Street Department employee finds a
vehicle unattended standing upon any street in violation of the provisions of
this schedule, the officer or employee is authorized to provide for the removal
of the vehicle and the owner or bailee of the vehicle shall not repossess the
vehicle until he or she has paid the cost of towing and storage.
   (C)   Any police officer, Street Department employee, towing service owner,
operator or employees shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in
any action brought by the registered owner, his or her legal representative or
any other person legally entitled to the possession of any motor vehicle or
other vehicle so removed.
(Ord. 89-11, passed 3-13-89)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SCHEDULE VI. DISABLED PARKING.
   (A)   The following areas are designated to be disabled parking areas:
      (1)   On the west side of Maple Street, the first two parking spaces
south of State Street (St. Mary’s Catholic Church);
      (2)   On the west side of Maple Street, the first two parking spaces
north of Pells Street (St. Mary’s Catholic Church);
      (3)   On the south side of Center Street, the first parking space west of
Taft Street (United Methodist Church);
      (4)   On the west side of Taft Street, the first parking space north of
the alley between Center Street and Orleans Street and the first parking place
south of Center Street (United Methodist Church);
      (5)   On the east side of Vermilion Street, the first parking space south
of Center Street (Westminster Presbyterian Church);
      (6)   On the west side of Union Street, two parking spaces adjacent to
the east side entrance to the Evangelical Covenant Church;
      (7)   On the south side of Orleans Street, the first parking space east
of College Street (First ELCA Lutheran Church);
      (8)   On the north side of the alley between Orleans Street and Patton
Street, the first two parking spaces east of College Street (First ELCA
Lutheran Church);
      (9)   On the north side of State Street, the first two parking spaces
west of Taft Street (Ford County Courthouse);
      (10)   On the north side of State Street, the first parking space west of
Market Street;
      (11)   On the south side of State Street, the first parking space east of
Market Street;
      (12)   On the east side of Market Street, the first parking space south
of State Street;
      (13)   On the west side of Market Street, the first parking space north
of Pells Street;
      (14)   On the west side of Market Street, the first parking space south
of Pells Street;
      (15)   On the east side of Market Street, the first parking space south
of Pells Street;
      (16)   On the east side of Market Street, the first parking space north
of Center Street;
      (17)   On the west side of Market Street, the first parking space south
of Center Street;
      (18)   On the east side of Taft Street, immediately adjacent to the
following described real estate: the north 10 feet of even width of the south
40 feet of even width of the north one-half of Lots 18 and 19 in Block 30 in
Railroad Addition to Paxton, situated in the city;
      (19)   On the north side of Center Street, immediately adjacent to the
following described real estate: the west 25 feet of Lot 14 in Block 12 in the
Original Town of Prospect City, now City of Paxton, east of the Illinois
Central Railroad, situated in the City of Paxton.
      (20)   On the north side of East Center Street, immediately adjacent to
the following described real estate: the east 34 feet of Lot 12 and the west 6
feet of Lot 13 (measured along the southerly side thereof) in Block 12 in the
Original Town of Prospect City, now City of Paxton, east of the Illinois
Central Railroad, situated in the City of Paxton.
      (21)   On the west side of north Market Street, immediately adjacent to
the following described real estate: the north 25 feet of Lot One (measured
along the easterly side thereof) in Block 14 in the Original Town of Prospect
City, now City of Paxton, west of the Illinois Central Railroad, situated in
the City of Paxton.
   (B)   The Superintendent of Streets is authorized and directed to mark the
areas as disabled parking stalls or spaces with appropriate signs and symbols
as set forth in the Illinois Statutes and §§
72.35 et seq.
(Ord. 93-16, passed 4-12-93; Am. Ord. 97-18, passed 8-11-97; Am. Ord. 98-22,
passed 9-14-98; Am. Ord. 2000-28, passed 9-25-00; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-
03; Am. Ord. 05-31, passed 8-16-05; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed 3-20-06)
SCHEDULE VII. NO PARKING PLACES.
   In order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens, parking
will be prohibited at the following locations:
Street Location
Street       Location
Center       West of Cherry Street.
Street
Cherry       Between Orleans Street and Pine Street.
Street
College
Street, east From Franklin Street to Patton Street.
side
Dawn Avenue  From Railroad Avenue to Vermilion Street.
Dawn Avenue  From Railroad Avenue to Vermilion Street, southerly one-half only.
East Center  Between Railroad Avenue and Union Street during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
Street       p.m., except on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
East Center  Between College Street and High Street, commonly known as the 600 Block of East
Street,      Center Street.
south side
East Patton
Street,      Between Market Street and Railroad Avenue.
either side
East Patton
Street,      Between Railroad Avenue and College Street.
north side
East Pells   Between Railroad Avenue and the alley which extends in a northerly and southerly
Street       direction through Block 2 of the Original Town of Prospect City.
East Pells   Between Railroad Avenue and the alley which extends in a northerly and southerly
Street,      direction through Block 4 of the Original Town of Prospect City.
north side
East Pells
Street,      200 Block, between Railroad Avenue and Vermillion Street.
north side
East Pells
Street,      200 Block, between Railroad Avenue and Vermillion Street.
south side
Franklin     Between Washington Street and College Street between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
Street,      4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday of each week when school is in session.
north side
             Between a point commencing at the intersection of the east line of the east
Franklin     driveway of Clara Peterson School with Franklin Street and proceeding thence
Street,      east on Franklin Street for a distance of 45 feet, between the hours of 8:00
south side   a.m. through 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday of each week when school is in
             session.
Franklin
Street,      Between Market Street and Railroad Avenue.
north or
south sides
Fulton
Street,      From Union Street to Washington Street.
north side
High Street, From Meridian Street to Pells Street.
both sides
High Street, North 100 feet.
both sides
Intersection
of U.S.
Route 45
(Railroad    On both sides of U.S. Route 45 extending 100 feet both north and south of
Street) and  Illinois Route 9; and on both sides of Illinois Route 9 extending 200 feet both
Illinois     east and west of U.S. Route 45.
Route 9
(Pells
Street)
John Street  Between Franklin Street and Ottawa Street (S.B.I. Route 9).
Lane Drive   From Dawn Avenue to Railroad Avenue.
Lane Drive   From Dawn Avenue to Railroad Avenue, westerly one-half only.
Market       In the area immediately in front of the Paxton Theater, South Market Street,
Street       between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
Market       South of Holmes Street and north of Orleans Street between the hours of 1:00
Street       a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or on any Monday.
Market       South of Holmes Street and north of Orleans Street between the hours of midnight
Street       and 6:00 a.m. on any Monday.
Market       South of Orleans Street and north of Holmes Street, unless parked in the South
Street       Market Limited Parking District.
Orleans      West of Cherry Street.
Street
Park Street, South of Franklin Street and north of Ottawa Street.
east side
Patton       Between Market Street and Railroad Avenue.
Street
Pells Street Between Railroad Avenue and the east corporate limits at Fall Street.
Pells
Street, east Between Fall Street and Spring Street.
half of the
south side
Pells        Between the southeast corner of Larson’s Subdivision and a point 100 feet west
Street,      of the southeast corner of the subdivision.
north side
Pells        Between High Street and a point 125 feet west of the southwest corner of the
Street,      intersection of High Street and Pells Street.
south side
Pells        Between High Street and a point 30 feet east of the southeast corner of the
Street,      intersection of High Street and Pells Street.
south side
Pine Street  Between Cherry Street and Market Street
Prospect     From Lane Drive to Vermilion Street.
Avenue
Prospect     From Lane Drive to Vermilion Street, southerly one-half only.
Avenue
             On either side, for a distance of 125 feet, south from the south line of the
             intersection of Railroad Avenue and East State Street; West side, from the north
             line of the intersection with East Pells Street to a point 125 feet north of the
             stop and go light located at the northwest corner of the intersection; East
             side, from the north line of the intersection with East Pells Street to a point
Railroad     125 feet north of the stop and go light located at the northeast corner of the
Avenue       intersection; West side, from south line of the intersection with East Pells
             Street to a point 125 feet south of the stop and go light located at the
             southwest corner of the intersection; East side, from the south line of the
             intersection with East Pells Street to a point 125 feet south of the stop and go
             light located at the southeast corner of the intersection; Either side, for a
             distance of 125 feet north from the north line of the intersection of Railroad
             Avenue and East Center Street.
Railroad     Between Franklin Street and Center Street and between State Street and Larch
Avenue       Street.
Railroad     Between Center Street and State Street except on the east side of Railroad
Avenue       Avenue and parallel to the curb.
South Market Between Ottawa Road and Patton Street.
Street
             Commencing at the alley which extends in an easterly and westerly direction in
Taft Street, Block 12 in the Original Town of Prospect City, and thence in a northerly
east side    direction 55 feet, also being described as that portion of Taft Street which is
             adjacent to the south 55 feet of Lot 13 in Block 12 in the Original Town of
             Prospect City.
Taft Street, The south 30 feet of even width of the north half of Lots 18 and 19 in Block 30
east side    in Railroad Addition.
             Commencing at the south side of the sidewalk which extends in an easterly and
Taft Street, westerly direction on the north side of Block C in the Original Town of Prospect
west side    City, and thence in a southerly direction 39 feet along the west side of Taft
             Street.
U.S. Route   From ±100 feet north of Franklin Street in Paxton southerly ±0.57 mile to the
45, both     city’s south corporate limits.
sides
Unnamed      Extends in a northerly and southerly direction between Market Street and
alley        Railroad Avenue, from State Street to Pells Street.
             Extends in a northerly and southerly direction between Market Street and Taft
             Street, from Pine Street to Orleans Street.
Unnamed      Extend in an easterly and westerly direction in Blocks “B,”12, 14 and 30 in the
alley        Original Town of Prospect City;
Unnamed      All designated as the Loading Zone.
alleys
Unnamed      East half of the alley which extends in a northerly and southerly direction
alley        between Market Street and Taft Street from Orleans Street to State Street.
Unnamed      Extends in a northerly and southerly direction between Market Street and Taft
alley,       Street, from West Orleans Street to West Holmes Street.
either side
Unnamed      Extends in an easterly and westerly direction between West Pells Street and West
alley, north Center Street from Taft Street, easterly to the intersection of the alley
half         extending northerly and southerly through the block.
Vermilion    Between Washington Blvd. and Summer Street.
Street
West Ottawa  Between Cherry Street and Market Street.
Road
West Ottawa  Between Cherry Street and Market Street.
Street
West Pells   Commencing at the intersection of Pells Street with Taft Street and thence in an
Street,      easterly direction 48 feet.
south side
West State
Street,      200 block, between American Street and Taft Street
south side
 
(Res. 62-16, passed 7-9-62; Res. 63-12, passed 4-17-63; Res. 64-12, passed 6-8-
64; Res. 64-27, passed - -; Res. 65-20, passed 10-11-65; Ord. 66-4, passed 2-
14-66; Ord. 67-34, passed 11-13-67; Res. 67-36, passed 12-11-67; Res. 70-17,
passed 7-13-70; Ord. 74-19, passed 9-9-74; Ord. 75-25, passed 7-14-75; Ord. 75-
31, passed 10-13-75; Ord. 78-23, passed 8-14-78; Ord. 78-48, passed 12-21-78;
Ord. 83-50, passed 12-12-83; Ord. 86-12, passed 5-12-86; Ord. 86-19, passed 8-
11-86; Ord. 89-21, passed 6-12-89; Ord. 89-38, passed 10-12-89; Ord. 90-19,
passed 7-9-90; Ord. 90-23, passed 8-13-90; Ord. 91-28, passed 8-12-91; Ord. 92-
29, passed 8-10-92; Ord. 92-30, passed 8-10-92; Ord. 93-51, passed 12-13-93;
Ord. 95-15, passed 5-8-95; Ord. 97-17, passed 8-11-98; Ord. 98-21, passed 9-14-
98; Ord. 2000-38, passed 12-11-00; Ord. 02-02, passed 3-11-02; Am. Ord. 03-37,
passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord. 05-07, passed 3-14-05; Am. Ord. 07-11, passed 5-7-07;
Am. Ord. 09-44, passed 10-12-09; Am. Ord. 18-21, passed 8-14-18; Am. Ord. 19-
11, passed 7-9-2019; Am. Ord. 2025-01-02, passed 1-14-25)
SCHEDULE VIII. LIMITED PARKING.
   (A)   Eight-hour parking. There is established an eight-hour limited time
parking zone in the alley running in a northerly and southerly direction
through Block Two in the Original Town of Prospect City, now City of Paxton,
east of the Illinois Central Railroad - 100 South Railroad Avenue.
   (B)   City Hall parking. Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.,
Mondays through Fridays, immediately adjacent to the following-described real
estate, to-wit: the two parking spaces adjacent to the north 18 feet of Lot 6
and the south 22 feet of Lot 7 in Block Two in the original town of Prospect
City, now City of Paxton, west of the Illinois Central Railroad, situated in
the City of Paxton, County of Ford and State of Illinois (145 South Market
Street), shall be designated as City Hall customer parking only.
(Ord. 06-45, passed 12-11-06; Am. Ord. 12-07, passed 2-13-12)
CHAPTER 80: NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLES AND GOLF CARTS
Section
   
80.01   Definitions
   
80.02   Permits
   
80.03   Equipment required
   
80.04   Regulations
   
80.05   Designated areas and times available for use
   
80.06   Unattended vehicles
   
80.07   Traffic regulations
 
   
80.99   Penalty
§ 80.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses
who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and
civic interests of a community.
   CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit
an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
   CITY ROADWAYS. Any of the streets or alleys within the corporate limits of
the city, except for state and county streets or roads.
   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common
to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported schools.
   FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs and/or maintenance
equipment while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf,
or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
   NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE. A self-propelled, electronically powered four-wheeled
motor vehicle (or a self-propelled gasoline-powered four-wheeled motor vehicle
with an engine displacement under 1,200 cubic centimeters) which is capable of
obtaining in one mile a speed of more than 20 miles per hour, but not more than
25 miles per hour, and which conforms to federal regulations under Title 49
C.F.R. Part 571.500.
   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
   OPERATE. To control the operation of a neighborhood vehicle or golf cart.
   OPERATOR. A person who operates or is in actual control of a neighborhood
vehicle or golf cart.
   RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE or UTILITY TASK VEHICLE (collectively
"UTV"). Any motorized off-highway device designed to travel primarily off-
highway, 64 inches of less in width, having a manufacturer's dry weight of
2,000 pounds or less, traveling on four or more non-highway tires, designed
with a non-straddle seat and a steering wheel for steering control, except
equipment such as lawnmowers.
   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for
the purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit.
(Ord. 09-35, passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. 11-21, passed 8-8-11; Am. Ord. 18-09,
passed 5-8-18)
§ 80.02 PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a neighborhood vehicle, golf cart or UTV
within the city without first obtaining a permit from the Police Department as
provided herein.
   (B)   Neighborhood vehicles, golf cart and UTV owners shall complete a
permit application form and such forms are available at the Police Department.
The completed forms shall be maintained by the city.
   (C)   All neighborhood vehicles, golf carts and UTVs must be inspected by a
designated officer of the Police Department to ensure that the neighborhood
vehicle, golf cart or UTV is safe to operate on city roadways and is in
compliance with this chapter and with the State of Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
   (D)   Any person who operates a neighborhood vehicle, golf cart or UTV must
present valid proof of liability insurance or personal injury and property
damage with limits of liability not less than the minimum required by the State
of Illinois for passenger vehicles. Insurance coverage will be verified as in
effect by the city when issuing or renewing a permit.
   (E)   Permits shall be granted for a period of one year and may be renewed
annually.
   (F)   The cost of the permit shall be $25 per neighborhood vehicle, golf
cart or UTV.
   (G)   Permits shall be displayed at all times on the rear of all
neighborhood vehicles, golf carts and UTVs.
   (H)   Special use permit. A special use permit license shall allow a
licensee to operate a neighborhood vehicle, golf cart or UTV within the city
for a period not to exceed 24 continuous hours. A special use permit license
may be granted only to a unit of state or local government or issued to bona
fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans
organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been
in existence continuously for a period of five years immediately before making
application for a license and which have had during that entire five-year
period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives. A
licensee shall be limited to three special use permit licenses in a calendar
year. There shall be no fee for the issuance of a special use permit license.
(Ord. 09-35, passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. 11-21, passed 8-8-11; Am. Ord. 12-06,
passed 2-13-12; Am. Ord. 18-09, passed 5-8-18) Penalty, see §
80.99
§ 80.03 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate any neighborhood vehicle or UTV within the
city unless such neighborhood vehicle meets or exceeds the equipment
requirements set forth in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1426.1(e) and must be
equipped with seatbelts for the rear seats.
   (B)   No person shall operate any golf cart within the city unless such golf
cart meets or exceeds the equipment requirements set forth in ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 1 l-1428(e) and must be equipped with seat belts for the rear seats.
(Ord. 09-35, passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. 12-06, passed 2-13-12; Am. Ord. 18-09,
passed 5-8-18) Penalty, see §
80.99
Editor's note:
   ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1428 was repealed by P.A. 96-279, effective 1-1-
10. For state law provisions concerning operation of golf carts and required
equipment, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §11-1426.1.
§ 80.04 REGULATIONS.
   Neighborhood vehicles, golf carts and UTVs may only be operated on city
roadways within the city in accordance with the following regulations:
   (A) Any person who operates a neighborhood vehicle, golf cart or UTV must be
at least 18 years of age and possess a valid driver's license to operate a
motor vehicle issued by Illinois or any other state.
   (B)   All passengers must be seven years of age or older.
   (C)   The maximum occupancy of the golf carts traveling on city roadways
will be one person per bucket seat or two people per bench seat.
   (D)   Every neighborhood vehicle, golf cart or UTV shall have its headlights
and tail lamps lighted at all times when operated on city roadways.
   (E)   Any person operating or who is in actual physical control of a
neighborhood vehicle, golf cart or UTV as described herein on a city roadway
while under the influence of alcohol or drugs is subject to ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, §§ 11-500 through 11-502.
(Ord. 09-35, passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. 18-09, passed 5-8-18) Penalty, see §
80.99
§ 80.05 DESIGNATED AREAS AND TIMES AVAILABLE FOR USE.
   (A)   Neighborhood vehicles, golf carts and UTVs may only be operated on
city roadways under the jurisdiction of the city, unless it meets an exception
as provided herein.
   (B)   No person operating a neighborhood vehicle, golf cart or UTV shall
make a direct crossing upon or across any highway under the jurisdiction of the
State of Illinois or an interstate highway except at an intersection of the
highway with another public street, road or highway.
   (C)   Neighborhood vehicles, golf carts and UTVs may not be operated on
sidewalks within the city, other than parking areas.
   (D)   No person shall operate a neighborhood vehicle, golf cart or UTV when
visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog of other conditions or at any
time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on a
city roadway at a distance of 500 feet.
(Ord. 09-35, passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. 12-06, passed 2-13-12; Am. Ord. 15-16,
passed 7-13-15; Am. Ord. 18-09, passed 5-8-18) Penalty, see §
80.99
§ 80.06 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a neighborhood
vehicle, golf cart or UTV to be or remain unattended on public property while
the motor is running or with the keys for starting the vehicle left in the
ignition.
(Ord. 09-35, passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. 18-09, passed 5-8-18) Penalty, see §
80.99
§ 80.07 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Each person operating a neighborhood vehicle, golf cart or UTV shall
strictly observe all traffic signs and signals and all other traffic rules and
regulations applicable thereto and shall obey the orders and directions of any
police officer of the city authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
   (B)   At no time may a person operating a neighborhood vehicle, golf cart or
UTV exceed the speed limit of 25 miles per hour.
(Ord. 09-35, passed 12-14-09; Am. Ord. 18-09, passed 5-8-18) Penalty, see §
80.99
§ 80.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $15 nor more than $750 for each offense.
   (B)   Repeat offenders may have the privileges granted by this chapter
revoked by the City Council upon the recommendation by the Police Department
and/or the Mayor.
(Ord. 09-35, passed 9-14-09; Am. Ord. 18-09, passed 5-8-18)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
      
90.   TREES
      
91.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
94.   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
      
95.   AIRPORTS
      
96.   ANIMALS
      
97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
98.   FAIR HOUSING
      
99.   CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
CHAPTER 90: TREES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   City contribution toward cost of topping certain trees
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Creation and establishment of City Forestry Committee
   
90.04   Duties and responsibilities
   
90.05   Review by City Council
Regulations
   
90.20   Street tree species to be planted
   
90.21   Spacing
   
90.22   Distance from curb and sidewalk
   
90.23   Distance from street corners and fireplugs
   
90.24   Utilities
   
90.25   Public tree care
   
90.26   Tree topping
   
90.27   Pruning, corner clearance
   
90.28   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
   
90.29   Removal of stumps
   
90.30   Interference with City Forestry Committee
   
90.31   Arborist’s license and bond
   
90.32   Establishment of shared cost tree planting program
   
90.33   Individual agreements with property owners
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 CITY CONTRIBUTION TOWARD COST OF TOPPING CERTAIN TREES.
   (A)   The city will contribute toward the cost of the topping of trees
located on city property as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The property owner shall notify and receive permission from the
Superintendent of Streets before topping. Also, the Superintendent is to be
notified upon completion of work for approval. The property owner shall hire
any qualified tree trimmer and shall assume all liability, including payment.
The Superintendent will determine the cost to the city according to the size
and height of the tree. The basis for the amount of city contribution shall be
as follows:
      (1)   Twenty dollars for any qualifying tree that is 35 feet to 45 feet
in height;
      (2)   Twenty-five dollars for any qualifying tree that is 45 feet to 55
feet in height;
      (3)   Thirty dollars for any qualifying tree that is over 55 feet in
height.
   (C)   After inspection and approval by the Superintendent of Streets, as
aforesaid, a bill from the property owner for the designated amount is to be
sent to the City Clerk for payment.
   (D)   Certain tree species are not acceptable for topping purposes and they
will not be approved for contribution payment. The non-acceptable trees are as
follows: Tree of Heaven, Willow, Boxelder, Poplar and Catalpa. This list may be
added to in the future as the city may deem necessary.
   (E)   Tree species acceptable for contribution payments are as follows: Ash,
Birch, Buckeye, Chestnut, Cherry, Cottonwood, Coffee Tree, Elm (American type),
Gingko, Maple, Oak, Tulip, Sycamore and Walnut.
(Ord. 69-1, passed 1-13-69; Am. Ord. 69-29, passed 12-8-69; Am. Ord. 03-02,
passed 1-13-03)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names and all areas owned by the city of to which the
public has free access as a park.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the city.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.03 CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY FORESTRY COMMITTEE.
   The City Property Committee shall also serve as the City Forestry Committee.
It shall consist of four members of the City Council, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.04 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Committee to study, investigate,
counsel and develop and/or update annually and administer a written plan for
the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition
of trees and shrubs in parks along streets and in other public areas. Such plan
will be presented annually to the City Council and upon their acceptance and
approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the
city. The Committee, when requested by the City Council, shall consider,
investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of
question coming within the scope of its work.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.05 REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the City Forestry Committee. Any person may appeal from any ruling
or order of the City Forestry Committee to the City Council, who may hear the
matter and make final decision.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
REGULATIONS
§ 90.20 STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   The following list constitutes the official street species for Paxton,
Illinois. All tree species on this list shall be native to the State of
Illinois. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as
street trees without written permission of the City Forestry Committee.
Small Trees (up to 25 feet) Medium Trees (25 to 50 Large Trees (50 feet and up)
                            feet)
Small Trees (up to 25 feet) Medium Trees (25 to 50   Large Trees (50 feet and
                            feet)                    up)
Flowering Dogwood           American Yellowwood      Sugar Maple
Downy Serviceberry          Black Tupelo (Black Gum) Black Maple
Northern Redbud             Common Sassafras         Red Maple
Prairie or Wild Crabapple   Ohio Buckeye             Northern Red Oak
Cockspur Hawthorn           American or Hop Hornbeam Chinapin Oak
Carolina Silverbell                                 Pin Oak
                                                   Shingle Oak
                                                   Scarlet Oak
                                                   Black Oak
                                                   Bur Oak
                                                   White or Swamp White Oak
                                                   Common Hackberry
                                                   Common Baldcypress
                                                   American Elm (Cultivars)
                                                   Tulip Tree (Yellow Poplar)
                                                   American Linden (Basswood)
                                                   American Sweetgum
 
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.21 SPACING.
   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species
size classes listed in §
90.20, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small
trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in
special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.22 DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.
   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in §
90.20, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees,
four feet.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.23 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS.
   No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of the street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street
tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.24 UTILITIES.
   No street trees, other than those species listed as small trees in §
90.20, may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility
wire or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer
line, transmission line or other utility.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.25 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to plant, maintain and remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes,
squares and public grounds, as may be necessary, to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
   (B)   The City Forestry Committee may remove, cause, or order to be removed
any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or, which by reason of
its nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water
lines or other public improvements or is affected with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street
trees by adjacent property owners, providing that the selection and location of
the trees is in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.26 TREE TOPPING.
   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or City
Department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempt from
this chapter at the determination of the City Forestry Committee.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.27 PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE.
   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the
street or sidewalk. The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous
trees or broken or decaying limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of
the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light among the street
from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device
or sign.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.28 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the city when such trees constitute a hazard
to life and property or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential
threat to other trees within the city. The City Forestry Committee will notify,
in writing, the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by the owners at
their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the
event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have
the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the
owners' property tax notice.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.29 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.30 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY FORESTRY COMMITTEE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
City Forestry Committee, or any of its agents while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street
trees, park trees or trees on private grounds as authorized in this chapter.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.31 ARBORIST’S LICENSE AND BOND.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or
occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the
city without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall
be $25 annually in advance; provided, however, that no license shall be
required of any public service company or city employee doing such work in the
pursuit of their public service endeavors. Any applicant for a tree service
business license shall provide, at the time of application, a certificate of
insurance showing insurance coverage for general liability, automobile
liability, worker's compensation, and other coverages required by law in
minimum amounts set by the city. The certificate of insurance shall name the
city, its officials and employees as additional insured.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.32 ESTABLISHMENT OF SHARED COST TREE PLANTING PROGRAM.
   The Cooperative Share-the-Cost Tree Planting Program is hereby established,
whereby the city shall offer to provide shade trees for planting in the public
right-of-way to participating property owners at a cost equal to one-half of
the purchase of the shade trees planted. Such trees shall be planted by city
employees without charge to the property owner.
(Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.33 INDIVIDUAL AGREEMENTS WITH PROPERTY OWNERS.
   The City Public Works Department is hereby authorized to implement the
program through individual agreements with property owners who request that one
or more trees be planted on the public right-of-way abutting their property and
who desire to share the cost of those trees.
(Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction
or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $1,500.
(Ord. 89-16, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 21-6, passed 4-13-21)
CHAPTER 91: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
91.01   Park hours
   
91.02   Tobacco ban; parks
§ 91.01 PARK HOURS.
   (A)   All parks and recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the city
shall be closed from 9:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. daily.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
section shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurred or continues.
(Ord. 86-8, passed 4-4-86; Am. Ord. 17-45, passed 11-14-17; Am. Ord. 2024-06-
06, passed 6-11-24)
§ 91.02 TOBACCO BAN; PARKS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   E-CIGARETTE. An e-cigarette is a device that contains a cartridge filled
with nicotine, flavor and other chemicals and which turns nicotine and/or
chemicals into a vapor that is then inhaled by the user.
   PARK. Any public park or recreation area within the city that is open to and
used by the general public.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any piece of playground equipment, any bleacher or
riser, any play field for baseball, softball, football, t-ball, soccer and/or
football and any building structure shall constitute a Public Improvement for
purposes of this chapter. Any bench and/or picnic table not located within 15
feet of a public improvement shall not constitute a public improvement under
this chapter.
   SMOKELESS TOBACCO. Includes any tobacco product including but not limited to
pouch, dip, chew, snuff, and chaw.
   SMOKE or SMOKING. The carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar,
cigarette or e-cigarette of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment or
the lighting or emitting or exhaling of the smoke of a pipe, cigar, cigarette
or e-cigarette of any kind. SMOKE also means the gaseous products and particles
created by the use of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or e-cigarette of any
kind or any other lighted smoking equipment.
   (B)   Prohibition. Smoking, the use of e-cigarettes, and the use of
smokeless tobacco products is hereby prohibited within 15 feet of public
improvements in all city parks.
   (C)   Violations and penalties.
      (1)   A person who smokes, utilizes an e-cigarette, or utilizes smokeless
tobacco in an area prohibited by this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction,
punishable by a fine of $100 for the first violation, one $150 for the second
violation and $200 for each subsequent violation.
      (2)   A person who is given notice of this violation by a City of Paxton
Police Officer and who fails to abide by the direction to comply with this
chapter shall then become a trespasser and may be removed from said park for a
period of 24 hours.
      (3)   Each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be
considered a separate and distinct violation.
(Ord. 17-45, passed 11-14-17)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Outdoor fires and open burning
   
92.02   Cooking fires
   
92.03   Fines
   
92.04   City mitigation
Fire Prevention Code
   
92.20   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
   
92.21   Establishment and duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention
   
92.22   Definitions
   
92.23   Establishment of limits of districts in which the storage of explosives
and blasting agents is to be prohibited
   
92.24   Establishment of limits of districts in which manufacture and storage
of fireworks is to be prohibited
   
92.25   Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable
liquids in aboveground tanks is to be prohibited
   
92.26   Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum
gases is to be restricted
   
92.27   Amendments made in Fire Prevention Code
   
92.28   Establishment of fire lanes on private property devoted to public use
   
92.29   Modifications
   
92.30   Appeals
   
92.31   New materials, processes or occupancies which require permits
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 OUTDOOR FIRES AND OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall set fire
to or cause or permit to be burned in any yard, lot, street or alley, any
rubbish, garbage, paper or other combustible material or operate any burn
barrels for waste.
   (B)   Any other provisions of this section to the contrary notwithstanding,
it shall be lawful for any person to burn leaves under the following
restrictions:
      (1)   Such fires can only burn from dawn to dusk.
      (2)   Burning is not permitted on the following holidays: New Years Day,
Easter, Memorial Day, 4th of July, Labor Day, Halloween, Thanksgiving and
Christmas Day.
      (3)   Any such fire must be kept under competent and continuous
supervision and must be kept a sufficient distance from any building, structure
or other materials so as not to constitute a hazard and shall further be
subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   A responsible person of not less than 18 years of age shall be
present at the site of the fire at all times to observe and control the fire.
         (b)   Water shall be available by way of a hose connected to an
operational water source which hose shall have a sufficient length and capacity
to promptly extinguish the fire.
         (c)   Fires shall be completely extinguished and not allowed to
smolder after substantial completion of the combustion.
   (C)   Any other provisions of this section to the contrary notwithstanding,
it shall be lawful for any person to burn seasoned wood for a recreational fire
under the following restrictions:
      (1)   Such fires shall be contained in an outdoor fireplace or burn pit.
      (2)   Any such fire must be kept under competent and continuous
supervision and must be kept a sufficient distance from any building, structure
or other materials so as not to constitute a hazard and shall further be
subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   A responsible person of not less than 18 years of age shall be
present at the site of the fire at all times to observe and control the fire.
         (b)   Water shall be available by way of a hose connected to an
operational water source which hose shall have a sufficient length and capacity
to promptly extinguish the fire.
         (c)   Fires shall be completely extinguished and not allowed to
smolder after substantial completion of the combustion.
(Ord. 61-16, passed 11-13-61; Am. Ord. 18-18, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 19-22,
passed 11-12-19)
§ 92.02 COOKING FIRES.
   Any other provision of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, it
shall be lawful for any person as a means of cooking food to burn combustible
material ordinarily used for the purpose of cooking food outdoors in any
permanent or temporary outdoor fireplace, grill or barbecue pit. The burning of
leaves, branches, and/or green (fresh) wood shall not be utilized. In addition,
any such fire must be kept under competent and continuous supervision and must
be kept a sufficient distance from any building, structure or other material so
as not to constitute a fire hazard and shall further be subject to the
following requirements:
   (A)   A responsible person of not less than 18 years of age shall be present
at the site of the fire at all times to observe and control the fire.
   (B)   Water shall be available by way of a hose connected to an operational
water source which hose shall have a sufficient length and capacity to promptly
extinguish the fire.
   (C)   Fires shall be completely extinguished and not allowed to smolder
after substantial completion of the combustion.
(Ord. 61-17, passed 11-13-61; Am. Ord. 18-18, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 19-22,
passed 11-12-19) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 FINES.
   For the first offense of this subchapter the violator shall be subject to a
fine of $50. For any subsequent offenses the violator shall be subject to a
fine of $200 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be a
separate offense.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 19-22, passed 11-12-19)
§ 92.04 CITY MITIGATION.
   In order for the city to accommodate the public’s need to dispose of leaves
each fall, the city shall develop a plan including alternatives to burning and
present it by its second meeting in September, 2018.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-10-18)
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 92.20 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   There is adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion,
that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code recommended by the American
Insurance Association, being particularly the 1976 Edition thereof and the
whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
modified or amended, of which Code not less than three copies have been and now
are filed in the office of the City Clerk and the same are adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on
which this subchapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the city.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.21 ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.
   (A)   The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention in the Fire Department of the Paxton Fire Protection District which
is established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief
of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
   (B)   The Chief in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be
appointed by the Paxton Fire Protection District Trustees and the Mayor with
the consent of the City Council, on the basis of his or her qualifications. His
or her appointment shall continue at the pleasure of the appointing authority.
   (C)   The Chief of the Fire Department is permitted to detail such members
of the Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The
Chief of the Fire Department shall recommend to the Paxton Fire Protection
District Trustees and the City Council the employment of technical inspectors,
who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination
to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to
members and non-members of the Fire Department, and the appointments made after
examination shall be at the pleasure of the appointing authority.
   (D)   A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually and
transmitted to the Mayor; it shall contain all proceedings under this Code,
with such statistics as the Chief of the Fire Department decides to include
therein; the Chief of the Fire Department shall also recommend any amendments
to the Code which, in his or her judgment, shall be desirable.
   (E)   The Chief of the Fire Department may request and shall receive so far
as may be necessary, in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the municipality.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.22 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the word “municipality” is used in the Fire Prevention Code,
it shall be held to mean the City of Paxton, Illinois.
   (B)   Wherever the term “Corporation Counsel” is used in the Fire Prevention
Code, it shall be held to mean the City Attorney for the City of Paxton,
Illinois.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.23 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND
BLASTING AGENTS IS TO BE PROHIBITED.
   The limits referred to in Section 12.5b of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are established
as follows: within the city limits of the City of Paxton, County of Ford, State
of Illinois.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.24 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH MANUFACTURE AND STORAGE
OF FIREWORKS IS TO BE PROHIBITED.
   The limits referred to in Section 13.3a of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which manufacture and storage of fireworks is prohibited, are established as
follows: within the city limits of the City of Paxton, County of Ford, State of
Illinois.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.25 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE
LIQUIDS IN ABOVEGROUND TANKS IS TO BE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The limits referred to in Section 16.22a of the Fire Prevention Code
in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is
prohibited are established as follows: within the city limits of the City of
Paxton, County of Ford, State of Illinois.
   (B)   The limits referred to in Section 16.61 of the Fire Prevention Code,
in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited,
are established as follows: within the city limits of the City of Paxton,
County of Ford, State of Illinois.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.26 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS IN WHICH BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM
GASES IS TO BE RESTRICTED.
   The limits referred to in Section 21.6a of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are established as
follows: within the city limits of the City of Paxton, County of Ford, State of
Illinois.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.27 AMENDMENTS MADE IN FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   The Fire Prevention Code is amended and changed in the following respects:
Section 12.7, 20.14 and 28.16 of the Fire Prevention Code are hereby deleted.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.28 ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY DEVOTED TO PUBLIC USE.
   The fire lanes referred to in Section 28.16 of the Fire Prevention Code are
established as follows: in the area commonly used as an alley between Holmes
Street and Center Street in the city.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.29 MODIFICATIONS.
   The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have the power to modify
any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing
by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
Code, provided that the intent of the Code shall be observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when
granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Department and a
signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.30 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that
the provisions of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of
the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant is
permitted to appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention to the Paxton Fire Protection District Trustees and the City Council
within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.31 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH REQUIRE PERMITS.
   (A)   The President of the Paxton Fire Protection District Board of
Trustees, the Mayor, the Chief of the Fire Department and the Chief of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify,
after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials,
processes or occupancies, which shall require permits in addition to those now
enumerated in the Code.
   (B)   The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall post such list in a
conspicuous place in his or her office and distribute copies thereof to
interested persons.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate a provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Code
adopted in § 92.20 or fail to comply therewith, who shall violate or fail to
comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order, as
affirmed or modified by the Paxton Fire Protection District Trustees and the
City Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, punished by a fine of not less than $5
nor more than $750. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; when not otherwise specified, each 30 days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Ord. 77-2, passed 2-14-77)
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances on Private Property
   
93.01   Definition
   
93.02   Duty of maintenance of private property
   
93.03   Enforcement
Litter
   
93.20   Depositing of litter prohibited
   
93.21   Vehicles to be covered
Weeds
   
93.35   Weeds declared a nuisance
   
93.36   Height
   
93.37   Barberry bushes
   
93.38   Removal; notices
   
93.39   Abatement
   
93.40   Lien
Insect Infestation
   
93.50   Infestation
   
93.51   Owner responsible for extermination
   
93.52   Occupant notification of infestation to structure owner
Vacant Buildings
   
93.60   Vacant buildings
   
93.61   Nuisance abatement
   
93.62   Charges for nuisance abatement; lien
   
93.63   Severability
 
   
93.99   Penalty
NUISANCES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 93.01 DEFINITION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the term NUISANCE is defined to
mean any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is
detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause
substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in
which such premises are located.
   (B)   This includes but is not limited to:
      (1)   The keeping or the depositing on or the scattering over the
premises of any of the following:
         (a)   Lumber, junk, trash or debris;
         (b)   Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as
furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers;
         (c)   Any compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread or
harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gas or attract rodents, vermin
or other disease-carrying pests, animals or insects, provided that the presence
of earthworms in a compost pile shall not constitute a nuisance.
      (2)   Any lot, ground or premises within the city on which stagnant water
may be standing so as to become or likely to become foul, putrid, offensive,
harborage for insect and/or rodents or detrimental to the health and comfort of
persons residing in the vicinity thereof.
      (3)   Any property which because of its physical condition or use is a
public nuisance at common law, under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or under
this code.
      (4)   Any buildings which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard,
or manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb or property.
      (5)   Any property which constitutes a blight on the surrounding area, or
any property which is not fit for human habitation under the applicable fire,
building or housing codes.
      (6)   Any property on which any illegal activity involving controlled
substances (as defined in the Illinois Controlled Substance Act),
methamphetamine (as defined in the Methamphetamine Control and Community
Prospection Act), or cannabis (as defined in the Cannabis Control Act) takes
place.
      (7)   Any property on which any street gang-related activity (as defined
in the Illinois Street Gang Terrorism Omnibus Prevention Act) takes place.
(Ord. 79-15, passed 6-11-79; Am. Ord. 15-15, passed 7-13-15; Am. Ord. 22-19,
passed 10-11-22)
§ 93.02 DUTY OF MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall
maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or
maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value
of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located.
(Ord. 79-15, passed 6-11-79)
§ 93.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement of this subchapter may be accomplished by the city in any manner
authorized by law, and in addition, any person who by reason of another’s
violation of any provision of this subchapter suffers special damage to himself
or herself different from that suffered by other property owners throughout the
city generally may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an existing
violation.
(Ord. 79-15, passed 6-11-79)
LITTER
§ 93.20 DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by
his or her agent, employee or servant, to cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit
in any manner in or upon any public way or other public place in the city or
any river, canal, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin within the
jurisdiction of the city any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste article, thing of
substance whatsoever, whether liquid or solid; nor shall any person, firm or
corporation cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit any of the aforementioned items
anywhere within the jurisdiction of the city in such manner that it may be
carried or deposited in whole or in part, by the action of the sun, wind, rain
or snow, into any of the aforementioned places; provided, that this section
shall not apply to the deposit of material under a permit authorized by any
ordinance of the city or to goods, wares or merchandise deposited upon any
public way or other public place temporarily, in the necessary course of trade,
and removed therefrom within two hours after being so deposited in or conducted
into the city sewer system through lawful drains in accordance with the
ordinances of the city relating thereto.
(Ord. 79-16, passed 6-11-79)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.21 VEHICLES TO BE COVERED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by
his, her or its agent, employee or servant, to use any vehicle to haul any kind
of dirt, rubbish, waste articles or things or substance, whether liquid or
solid, unless such vehicle is covered to prevent any part of its load from
spilling or dropping at all times while such vehicle is in motion on any street
or alley in the municipality; provided, however, that the requirements herein
for covering such vehicles shall not apply to vehicles carrying brush cuttings,
tree trimmings, branches, logs or similar waste material, if such matter is
securely lashed to such vehicle to prevent spilling or dropping as aforesaid.
(Ord. 79-16, passed 6-11-79)
Penalty, see § 93.99
Cross-reference:
   Construction of refuse collection vehicles, see §
50.24
WEEDS
§ 93.35 WEEDS DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   Any weeds, such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other
weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city are
declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to
grow or remain in any such place.
(Ord. 65-18, passed 9-13-65)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.36 HEIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants to grow to a height
exceeding five inches anywhere in the city; any such plants or weeds exceeding
such height are declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 65-18, passed 9-13-65; Am. Ord. 03-22, passed 5-12-03)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.37 BARBERRY BUSHES.
   It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to plant or permit the growth of the
bush of the species of tall, common or European barberry, further known as
Berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties within the city.
(Ord. 65-18, passed 9-13-65)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.38 REMOVAL; NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to serve or cause to be served a
notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants are
permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this subchapter and to
demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten days.
(Ord. 65-18, passed 9-13-65)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.39 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten days
after such notice, the Street Department may proceed to abate such nuisance, or
to cause the same to be abated.
   (B)   For each separate abatement, the cost to abate said nuisance shall be
a minimum of $350 per street address. For each separate abatement, if the cost
to abate said nuisance is in excess of $350 per street address the Street
Superintendent shall keep an account of the additional expense. The cost of
abatement shall be charged to, and paid by such owner or occupant.
(Ord. 65-18, passed 9-13-65; Am. Ord. 03-22, passed 5-12-03; Am. Ord. 14-20,
passed 10-13-14)
§ 93.40 LIEN.
   (A)   Charges for such weed removal shall be a lien upon the premises. The
Clerk may file with the Recorder of Deeds of Ford County, Illinois, a notice of
lien claim. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof, which shall include the street address of the property;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
      (3)   The date or dates on which such cost and expense was incurred by
the city.
   (B)   Notice of the lien shall be served upon the person to whom was sent
the last tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last preceding
year, either personally or by certified mail.
(Ord. 65-18, passed 9-13-65; Am. Ord. 99-15, passed 6-14-99)
INSECT INFESTATION
§ 93.50 INFESTATION.
   All structures shall be kept free from insect infestation, including bed
bugs. All structures in which insects are found shall be promptly exterminated
by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 3-9-15)
§ 93.51 OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR EXTERMINATION.
   The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination of an
insect infestation, if necessary, prior to renting or leasing the structure, in
addition to the responsibilities as set forth below in §
93.52.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 3-9-15)
§ 93.52 OCCUPANT NOTIFICATION OF INFESTATION TO STRUCTURE OWNER.
   (A)   Any occupant that observes an insect infestation must report said
infestation in writing to both the owner of the structure and the Zoning
Officer of the City of Paxton.
   (B)   Within seven days of the tenant's notification of the owner and Zoning
Officer, the owner must present to the Zoning Officer either a written
inspection report of no infestation or a written service/extermination plan.
The report or plan must be from a state licensed pest control company.
   (C)   If there is an infestation, the owner must complete the written
service/extermination plan within 30 days from the initial written notice to
the owner and Zoning Officer, and provide written proof of the completion of
the service/extermination plan to the Zoning Officer.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 3-9-15) Penalty, see §
93.99
VACANT BUILDINGS
§ 93.60 VACANT BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Vacant residential building. A vacant residential building is a
building or portion of a building which is:
      (1)   Unoccupied and unsecured; or
      (2)   Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means; or
      (3)   Unoccupied and a dangerous structure; or
      (4)   Unoccupied and condemned by the city pursuant to applicable
provisions of this code or the Property Maintenance Code; or
      (5)   Unoccupied and has multiple code violations; or
      (6)   Unoccupied and the building or its premises have been the site of
unlawful activity within the previous six months; or
      (7)   Condemned by the city and unlawfully occupied; or
      (8)   Unoccupied for over 180 days and during which time the Code
Enforcement Officer has issued an order to correct public nuisance conditions
and same gave not been corrected in a code-compliant manner; or
      (9)   Unoccupied for over two years and for which at least one
installment of property tax is unpaid and delinquent; or
      (10)   Defined in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-15.1 as an “abandoned
residential property": being a residential dwelling unit that has been
unoccupied by any lawful occupant or occupants for at least 90 days, and for
which, after such 90 day period, the city has made good-faith efforts to
contact the legal owner or owners of the property or, if known, the agent of
the owner, and no contact has been made.
   (B)   Vacant commercial building. A building located in a commercial zoning
district shall be referred to as a commercial building which is:
      (1)   A building that has not been occupied for six or more months
lacking current water, electric, and/or sewer service; or
      (2)   A building at which substantially all lawful manufacturing,
commercial business operations and/or occupancy has ceased, has the presence or
reoccurrence of uncorrected ordinance violations, and has materials on site in
violation of city ordinances all for a period of one or more months.
   (C)   Vacancy as a nuisance. Any vacant residential building and/or vacant
commercial building as defined by this subchapter shall constitute a nuisance
under this subchapter.
(Ord. 22-19, passed 10-11-22)
§ 93.61 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   The city is authorized to require that property maintenance activities be
performed to abate the nuisance caused by a vacant building, including the
following:
   (A)   Cutting and removal of neglected weeds, grass, trees, and bushes as
authorized by this code, as amended, and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-7;
   (B)   Pest control activities, as authorized by this code, as amended, and
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-8;
   (C)   Removal of infected trees as authorized by this code, as amended, and
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-12;
   (D)   Removal of garbage, debris and graffiti and related activities as
authorized by this code, as amended, and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5,§ 11-20-13;
   (E)   Removal, securing, and enclosing of abandoned residential properties
as authorized by this code, as amended, and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-1.01;
and
   (F)   Any abatement activities directed by the Code Enforcement Officer
under the city Property Maintenance Code.
(Ord. 22-19, passed 10-11-22)
§ 93.62 CHARGES FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT; LIEN.
   (A)   Collection of costs. The city shall have the authority to collect from
the property owner the costs incurred in performing the property maintenance
activities to abate the nuisances described in § 93.61. The city shall send a
bill for the cost to the property owner, his or her agent, legal
representative, or occupant in legal possession or control of the premises.
   (B)   Lien procedure. If a bill sent pursuant to division (A) is not paid
within 30 days of the date of the bill, the city shall have the authority to
file and record a lien against the property, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-20-15, and as set forth within the city Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien has
been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the city or person
in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded of
record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
   (D)   Enforcement of lien. A lien under this section is enforceable by the
city, or entity or person who performs work on behalf of the city, at the
hearing for confirmation of the foreclosure sale of the abandoned residential
property and is limited to a claim of interest in the proceeds of the sale. The
priority lien is superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax
liens.
(Ord. 22-19, passed 10-11-22)
§ 93.63 SEVERABILITY.
   In the event any section of this subchapter or any part of any section of
this subchapter is declared to be unconstitutional, such decision shall in no
way affect the operation of any other section or part thereof; the remainder of
this subchapter shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 22-19, passed 10-11-22)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate a provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
93.01 et seq. shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each
offense.
(Ord. 79-15, passed 6-11-79)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
93.20 et seq. shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $200 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 79-16, passed 6-11-79)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
93.35 et seq. shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $200 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which such nuisance continues unabated after ten days from receipt of the
notice above mentioned.
   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
93.52 shall be fined $100 for each day that they are in violation.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 3-9-15)
CHAPTER 94: ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Abandonment of vehicles prohibited
   
94.03   Use of towing service to remove vehicles
   
94.04   Record of vehicles towed
   
94.05   Search for identity of registered owners
   
94.06   Owner may reclaim vehicle
   
94.07   Sale of vehicle
   
94.08   Report of transactions
   
94.09   Proceeds to be deposited in City Treasury
   
94.10   Police officer and towing service not liable for damages
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of
disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or
any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven
consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
   ANTIQUE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or other vehicle 25 years of age or
older.
   HIGHWAY. Any street, alley or public way within the city.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on
which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise
so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power. Vehicles without valid registration and not properly displaying current
vehicle plates affixed in a manner prescribed in the Illinois Motor Vehicle
Code for a period of at least seven days shall be deemed inoperable. However,
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include any of the following:
      (1)   A motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of
being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or
repair operations;
      (2)   Any motor vehicles that are kept within a building when not in use;
      (3)   Any operable antique vehicle; and
      (4)   Any motor vehicle on premises of a place of business engaged in
wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 70-15, passed 6-8-70; Am. Ord. 03-21, passed 5-12-03; Am. Ord. 04-13,
passed 4-12-04; Am. Ord. 10-05, passed 3-8-10; Am. Ord. 14-14, passed 7-14-14)
§ 94.02 ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part
thereof on any highway in this city is unlawful and subject to penalties as set
forth herein. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part
thereof on private or public property, other than a highway, in view of the
general public anywhere in this city is unlawful except on property of the
owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle.
   (B)   A motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on
private property may be authorized for removal by or upon the order of the
Chief of Police Department, after a waiting period of seven days or more has
expired.
   (C)   Inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property and
in view of general public, are hereby declared to be nuisance.
   (D)   Any inoperable motor vehicle maybe authorized for removal by or upon
the order of the Chief of Police Department, after a waiting period of seven
days or more has expired.
(Ord. 70-15, passed 6-8-70; Am. Ord. 03-21, passed 5-12-03)
Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.03 USE OF TOWING SERVICE TO REMOVE VEHICLES.
   (A)   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in this
state, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the
Police Department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the city.
Upon receipt of such notification, the Chief of the Police Department shall
authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned,
lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service
shall safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents and maintain a record of
the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally
entitled to possession thereof or until it is disposed of as provided in this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a highway
in this city ten hours or more, its removal by towing service may be authorized
by order of the Chief of the Police Department of this city.
      (2)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially
dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because
of its position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance is
causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway by a
towing service may be authorized by order of the Chief of the Police Department
of this city.
      (3)   When a vehicle removed from either public or private property is
authorized by order of the Chief of the Police Department of this city, the
owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all towing costs.
(Ord. 70-15, passed 6-8-70)
§ 94.04 RECORD OF VEHICLES TOWED.
   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the
Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed,
listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade name,
manufacturer’s series name, body style, vehicle identification number and
license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also
include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to,
reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
(Ord. 70-15, passed 6-8-70)
§ 94.05 SEARCH FOR IDENTITY OF REGISTERED OWNERS.
   (A)   Where the Police Department does not know the identity of the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, they will cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the State of Illinois to be searched by a
directed communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining
the required ownership information. The Police Department will cause the stolen
motor vehicle files of the Illinois State Police to be searched by a directed
communication to the Illinois State Police for stolen or wanted information on
the vehicle. Then the Illinois State Police files are searched with negative
results, the information contained in the National Crime Information Center
(FCIC) files will be searched by the Illinois State Police. The information
determined from these records searches will be used by the Police Department in
sending a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally entitled
person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting disposition be made and
setting forth public sale information.
   (B)   When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from the
registration files of this state or from the registration files of a foreign
state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify the Illinois State
Police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle’s owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by
the Illinois State Police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement
agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of the owner.
(Ord. 70-15, passed 6-8-70)
§ 94.06 OWNER MAY RECLAIM VEHICLE.
   Anytime before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled to
its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police Department
proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. No
vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this section until
all towing and storage charges have been paid.
(Ord. 70-15, passed 6-8-70)
§ 94.07 SALE OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle
or other vehicle, seven years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by the
registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a
period of 30 days after notice has been given as provided herein, the Police
Department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public
sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be
posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten days prior to the sale of the
premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least 10 days prior to the
sale, the Police Department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the
sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other person known
by the Police Department or towing service to be legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle. The notice shall contain a complete description of
the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled
person to reclaim the vehicle.
      (2)   In those instances where the certified notification specified
herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the Police Department due
to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from
the registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified
notice will not be required.
   (B)   (1)   When the identity of the registered owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle
of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for
in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in
the manner authorized by this chapter without notice to the registered owner or
other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
      (2)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is
impounded as specified by this chapter, it will be kept in custody for a
minimum of ten days for the purpose of determining ownership, the contacting of
the registered owner by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a
determination of disposition and an examination of the Illinois State Police
stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration
of the ten-day period, without the benefit of disposition information being
received from the registered owner, the Chief of Police will authorize the
disposal of the vehicle as junk only.
      (3)   A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique vehicle
is excluded from this chapter.
(Ord. 70-15, passed 6-8-70)
§ 94.08 REPORT OF TRANSACTIONS.
   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the Police
Department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled
person or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as
provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the
Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or
disposal.
(Ord. 70-15, passed 6-8-70)
§ 94.09 PROCEEDS TO BE DEPOSITED IN CITY TREASURY.
   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of this city is
authorized to be towed away by the Chief of Police and disposed of as set forth
in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the
deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the
City Treasury.
(Ord. 70-15, passed 6-8-70)
§ 94.10 POLICE OFFICER AND TOWING SERVICE NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES.
   Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be
held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner or his or her legal representative or any other
person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle
when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this
chapter.
(Ord. 70-15, passed 6-8-70)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not
exceeding $750. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable hereunder as such.
(Ord. 70-15, passed 6-8-70)
CHAPTER 95: AIRPORTS
Section
Leasing Standards and Requirements
   
95.01   Title
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   General information
   
95.04   Commercial activity
   
95.05   Flying clubs
   
95.06   Leasing information
   
95.07   Liability
   
95.08   Indemnity
   
95.09   Revisions
Airport Rules and Regulations
   
95.20   Title
   
95.21   Definitions
   
95.22   Scope
   
95.23   Lost articles
   
95.24   Liability
   
95.25   Accident reports
   
95.26   Aircraft operation
   
95.27   Fueling and inflammables
   
95.28   Public and tenant usage
   
95.29   Validity
 
   
95.99   Penalty
LEASING STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 95.01 TITLE.
   The standards and requirements hereinafter set forth be and the same are
approved and enacted as “The Leasing Standards and Requirements of the City of
Paxton, Illinois, Airport.”
(Ord. 78-20, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed
for navigation of or flight in the air.
   AIRPORT. All property and improvements within the boundary lines of the
Paxton Airport - Ford County, Illinois, in the west half of Section 13,
Township 23 North, Range Nine East of the Third Principal Meridian.
   AVIATION OPERATOR. Any person or organization engaged in business of an
aviation nature under authority of a lease or permit from the city.
   FIXED BASE OPERATOR. Those aviation operators who furnish and engage in a
full range of aeronautical services and activities for the public, including
sale of aviation fuel and lubricants, lane service, sale of aircraft parts and
supplies, maintenance and repair of airframes and engines, aircraft charter and
rental.
   MANAGER. That representative of the city who is responsible for making
recommendations on airport policies and has general supervision of the
operation and activities of the airport.
   OPERATION OF AIRCRAFT or AIRCRAFT OPERATION. Any use or movement of
aircraft.
   OWNER AND OPERATOR OF AIRPORT. The City of Paxton, Illinois.
(Ord. 78-20, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.03 GENERAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Location. One-half mile west of Paxton, Illinois in Section 13,
Township 23 North, Range Nine East of the Third Principal Meridian, Ford
County, Illinois.
   (B)   Identification.
   (C)   Elevation. Seven hundred seventy feet.
   (D)   Telephone. None as of the date of this subchapter.
   (E)   ADF facility. None as of the date of this subchapter.
   (F)   Unicom. None as of the date of this subchapter.
   (G)   WX/FP services. DEC FSS AC 217-359-5005.
   (H)   Fuel. 80-100.
   (I)   Runways. 18 and 36; 3,400 x 50; runway surface bituminous.
   (J)   Landing pattern. Left 800 feet.
   (K)   Landing fees. None.
   (L)   Ground transportation. None as of the date of this subchapter.
   (M)   Repairs. Yes.
   (N)   Lights. Yes.
   (O)   Storage. Tie downs and hangar space for lease.
   (P)   Hours attended. Normal operating business hours of the day, holidays
excepted.
   (Q)   Rules are supplemental. These rules are supplemental, subordinate and
complementary to the Federal Aviation Administration and the Illinois
Department of Aeronautics.
(Ord. 78-20, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.04 COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Any commercial activity which involves, makes possible or is required
for the operation of aircraft or which contributes to or is required for the
safety of such operations shall be known as an aeronautical activity.
   (B)   Any aircraft operating under one or more of the categories below is to
be considered a commercial aircraft and must comply with the rules established
for a commercial activity:
      (1)   Carrying passengers for hire;
      (2)   Available for rental, hire or charter;
      (3)   Student instruction and its kindred operations;
      (4)   Any commercial purpose not above mentioned.
   (C)   No person shall engage in any business or commercial activity of any
nature whatsoever on the airport without the prior written approval of and
under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed in writing in a lease
agreement with the city.
   (D)   Lease agreements for aeronautical activities will not grant any power,
privilege or other right excluding or debarring another from enjoying or
exercising a like power, privilege or right.
   (E)   No person shall post, distribute or display signs, advertisements,
circulars, printed or written matter at the airport without the written
permission of the Manager.
   (F)   The soliciting of fares, alms or funds for the purpose of the airport
without the permission of the Manager is prohibited.
(Ord. 78-20, passed 8-14-78)
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.05 FLYING CLUBS.
   (A)   All flying clubs desiring to base their aircraft and operate on the
airport must comply with the applicable provisions of these standards and
requirements. However, they shall be exempt from regular commercial activity
requirements upon satisfactory fulfillment of the conditions contained herein.
   (B)   Each club must be a non-profit corporation or partnership. Each member
must be a bonafide owner of the aircraft or a stockholder in the corporation.
The club may not derive greater revenue from the use of its aircraft than the
amount necessary for the actual use of operation, maintenance and replacement
of its aircraft. The club will file and keep current with the Manager a
complete list of the club’s membership and investment share held by each
member. At any time the Manager has reason to believe a club aircraft is being
so operated that it falls under the commercial classification, he or she shall
so notify the club, and if they fail to remedy these conditions, they shall be
reclassified and must comply with the requirements for any other commercial
activity.
   (C)   The club’s aircraft will not be used by other than bonafide members
for rental and by no one for commercial operations. Student instruction can be
given in club aircraft to club members.
   (D)   In the event that the club fails to comply with these conditions, the
Manager will notify the club in writing of such violations. If the club fails
to correct the violations with 15 days thereafter, the Manager may recommend to
the city any action deemed advisable, including cancellation of lease.
(Ord. 78-20, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.06 LEASING INFORMATION.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Any person offering any services or combination thereof on the
airport shall do so under written lease or operating agreement with the city.
In accordance with stipulations contained in the grants of federal funds from
the Federal Aviation Administration, all leases will be considered to contain
the following clauses and be subject thereto.
         (a)   Lessee agrees to operate the premises leased for the use and
benefit of the public:
            1.   To furnish good, prompt and efficient services adequate to
meet all the demands for its service at the airport;
            2.   To furnish the service on a fair, equal and nondiscriminatory
basis to all users thereof; and
            3.   To charge fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory prices for
each unit of sale or service, provided that the lessee may be allowed to make
reasonable and nondiscriminatory discounts, rebates or other similar types of
price reductions to volume purchasers.
         (b)   The lessee, his or her agents and employees will not
discriminate against any person or class of persons by reason of race, color,
creed or national origin in providing any services or in the use of any of its
facilities provided for the public in any manner prohibited by Part 21 of the
Regulations of the Office of the Secretary of Transportation which implements
Title VI of the Civil Right Act of 1964. The lessee further agrees to comply
with such enforcement procedures as the United States might demand that the
lessor take in order to comply with the sponsor’
         (c)   It is clearly understood by the lessee that no right or
privilege has been granted which would operate to prevent any person, firm or
corporation operating aircraft on the airport from performing any services on
its own aircraft with its own regular employees (including, but not limited to,
maintenance and repair) that it may choose to perform.
         (d)   It is to be specifically understood and agreed that nothing
herein contained shall be construed as granting or authorizing the granting of
an exclusive right within the meaning of Section 308 of the Federal Aviation
Act.
         (e)   Lessor reserves the right to further develop or improve the
landing area of the airport as it sees fit, regardless of the desires or view
of the lessee and without interference or hindrance.
         (f)   Lessor reserves the right, but shall not be obligated to lessee,
to maintain and keep in repair the landing area of the airport and all publicly
owned facilities of the airport, together with the right to direct and control
all activities of lessee in this regard.
         (g)   During the time of war or national emergency lessor shall have
the right to lease the landing area or any part thereof to the United States
government for military or naval use, and, if such lease is executed, the
provisions of this instrument insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of the lease to the government shall be suspended.
         (h)   Lessor reserves the right to take any action it considers
necessary to protect the aerial approaches of the airport against obstruction,
together with the right to prevent lessee from erecting or permitting to be
erected any building or other structure on or adjacent to the airport which, in
the opinion of the lessor, would limit the usefulness of the airport or
constitute a hazard to aircraft.
         (i)   This lease shall be subordinate to the provisions of any
existing or future agreement between lessor and the United States, relative to
the operation or maintenance of the airport, the execution of which had been or
may be required as a condition precedent to the expenditure of federal funds
for the development of the airport.
      (2)   All lessees shall furnish satisfactory evidence of the following
insurance coverage and conditions:
         (a)   Where applicable, hangarkeeper's liability, products liability,
aircraft liability, liability for flight tests and ferrying of aircraft,
contractual liability, non-owner liability (for students and renter pilots) and
passenger seat liability in at least the sum of $1,000,000;
         (b)   Worker’s compensation insurance as required by the State of
Illinois;
         (c)   Policies shall also name the city as a named insured and shall
contain a clause which shall provide that in the event lessee’s insurance
coverage, or any part thereof, should be canceled or materially changed, the
city shall receive at least 15 days' prior written notice of such change.
      (3)   All lease agreements shall be for a minimum of 1 year and a maximum
of 40 years, except that longer periods will be authorized when new
construction is to be amortized.
      (4)   The city will not accept or take action on a request to lease
building space or land area or in any way permit the installation of a
commercial activity until after the proposed lessee, in writing, submits a
proposal which sets forth the scope of operation he or she proposes, including
the following:
         (a)   The amount of land the lessee desires to lease;
         (b)   The building space to be constructed or leased;
         (c)   The services to be offered;
         (d)   The hours of proposed operation;
         (e)   The number of persons he or she will employ;
         (f)   The number of aircraft to be based at the airport;
         (g)   Certificate of insurance or other satisfactory evidence
indicating the ability to obtain coverages as required;
         (h)   Evidence of his or her financial capability to perform and
provide the above services and facilities for a minimum of one year. The City
Council shall be the sole judge of what constitutes adequate financial
capacity.
      (5)   Building space requirements may be provided in one building,
attached buildings or in separate buildings.
      (6)   All lessee personnel required to hold Federal Aviation
Administration certificates and ratings shall maintain such certificates and
ratings.
      (7)   All lessees are responsible for strict compliance with all state
and federal laws pertaining to employees, including but not limited to Social
Security, unemployment compensation and wages and hours.
      (8)   Building plans and exterior designs and landscaping must be
approved by lessor.
      (9)   All lessees on the airport shall keep the floors of the hangars,
hangar areas and terminal apron and ramp areas leased by them respectively or
used in their operation, clean and clear of oil, grease and other materials or
stains, except as may be provided to the contrary in any specific leases or
contracts.
      (10)   No tenant or lessee on the airport shall store or stack materials
or equipment in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to personnel or
property.
      (11)   All tenants shall be required to maintain their leased property in
a condition of repair, cleanliness and general maintenance in a manner
agreeable to the Airport Manager and shall minimize all fire hazards; all
equipment and facilities must at all times be kept in a good, safe and
workmanlike manner, neat, orderly and in good, safe, workable condition.
      (12)   All tenants or lessees shall supply and maintain such adequate and
readily accessible fire extinguishers as are approved by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. for the particular hazard involved.
      (13)   No tenants, lessees or grantees will be permitted to install any
type of direct line or radio communications without prior permission of the
Airport Manager.
      (14)   No tenants, lessees or grantees will be permitted to effect
structural or decorative changes or additions of any type without prior
permission of the Airport Manager with the approval and supervision of the
Airport Engineer.
      (15)   No person shall engage in the sale or rental of any commodities,
supplies or services or any business or commercial activity whatsoever within
the limits of the airport without a current operating agreement, contract,
lease or other written agreement with the city.
      (16)   No person shall use the airport as a base or terminal for the
carrying on of commercial aviation, including, but not limited to, fixed-base
operations; aircraft maintenance; scheduled or non-scheduled air carrier
carrying passengers, freight, express or mail; or student instruction,
communications or any other commercial flying, without a current lease or
operating agreement authorizing such activity with the city.
      (17)   No person shall engage or employ any person to provide commercial
aviation services as defined above except from those persons officially
authorized by the city to conduct such commercial activities on the airport.
      (18)   Any person engaging in commercial aviation operations shall have a
full-time employee managing and promoting the operation. Such management shall
endeavor to have a profitable business while supplying safe, efficient services
for the users of the Paxton Airport and shall also serve the promotion and
advancement of the Paxton Airport.
      (19)   All tenants contracting for any type of service shall pay for its
own electric, heating, water, sewer and all other utility charges.
      (20)   Any tenant having a valid and current contract with the city shall
not have the right of assigning or subletting the contract.
      (21)   All tenants shall provide full-time management to manage and
promote their specific type of operating privilege.
      (22)   The city reserves the right to have its duly authorized agents
enter upon the premises occupied by any tenant at reasonable times for the
purpose of making inspections to determine if the conditions and requirements
of this subchapter are being fully complied with.
      (23)   All tenants shall maintain accounting records that shall be open
for inspection by the city at any time.
   (B)   Basic requirements.
      (1)   Aircraft sales.
         (a)   Land. The leasehold shall contain a minimum area of 15,000
square feet to provide space for required buildings, display and storage of
aircraft and private automobile parking.
         (b)   Buildings. Lease or construct a minimum of 5,000 square feet of
properly lighted and heated space for display of aircraft, office and public
lounge facilities and public use telephone. Indoor restrooms will be provided
unless reasonably available from existing facilities.
         (c)   Personnel. One person having a current commercial pilot
certificate with ratings appropriate for the types of aircraft to be
demonstrated. Provide for office to be attended during the operating hours.
         (d)   Dealerships. New aircraft dealers shall hold an authorized
factory or subdealership. All aircraft dealers shall hold a dealership license
or permit.
         (e)   Aircraft. A dealer of new aircraft shall have available or on
call two current model demonstrators.
         (f)   Services. Provide for adequate servicing of aircraft and
accessories during warranty periods (new aircraft).
      (2)   Airframe and/or power plant repair facilities. Any lessee desiring
to engage in airframe and/or power plant repair service must obtain the
appropriate rating from the Federal Aviation Administration and must provide as
a minimum the following:
         (a)   Land. The leasehold shall contain a minimum area of 3,750 square
feet to provide space for building and storage or parking of aircraft.
         (b)   Buildings. Lease or construct a building sufficient to provide a
minimum of 2,000 square feet of shop space meeting local and state industrial
code requirements plus adequate office space.
         (c)   Personnel. One person currently certified by Federal Aviation
Administration with ratings appropriate for work being performed who may hold
an airframe and/or power plant ratings.
         (d)   Hours of operation. The minimum operating hours shall be 14
hours a week.
         (e)   Equipment. Sufficient equipment, supplies and availability of
parts to perform maintenance in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations
or equivalent, including a minimum of $1,000 in machinery, tools and parts.
      (3)   Aircraft rental. Any lessee desiring to engage in the rental of
aircraft to the public must provide as a minimum the following:
         (a)   Land. The leasehold shall contain a minimum area of 3,750 square
feet to provide space for building and storage or parking of aircraft.
         (b)   Buildings. Lease or construct building which will provide a
minimum of 300 square feet of properly heated and lighted office space,
including adequate space for the public, including restrooms and public use
telephone.
         (c)   Personnel. One person having a current commercial pilot
certificate with appropriate ratings.
         (d)   Aircraft. One airworthy aircraft owned or leased in writing to
the lessee, plus an additional four airworthy aircraft owned or leased in
writing to the lessee available within 30 minutes of the Paxton Municipal
Airport.
         (e)   Hours of operation. The minimum operating hours will be from 8:
00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., five days a week, holidays excepted.
      (4)   Flight training. Any lessee desiring to engage in pilot flight
instruction shall provide as a minimum the following:
         (a)   Land. The leasehold shall contain a minimum area of 3,750 square
feet of land to provide space for building and storage or parking of aircraft.
         (b)   Buildings. Lease or construct a building having a minimum of 800
square feet of properly lighted and heated floor space to provide classroom,
briefing room, pilot’s lounge, office space and indoor restrooms and public use
telephone.
         (c)   Personnel. One full-time employee properly certificated by
Federal Aviation Administration as flight instructor to cover the type of
training offered.
         (d)   Aircraft. The lessee shall own or have leased to him or her in
writing one properly certificated aircraft equipped for flight instruction.
         (e)   Hours of operation. The hours of operation shall be eight hours
a day, five days a week, holidays excepted.
         (f)   School. Maintain F.A.A. approved flight school, both for flight
and ground school training.
      (5)   Aircraft fuel and lubricant dispensing. Lessees desiring to
dispense aviation fuels and lubricants and to provide other related services
such as tie down and parking shall provide as a minimum the following services
and facilities.
         (a)   Land. The leasehold shall contain a minimum area of 20,000
square feet to provide for building, dispensing equipment and storage or
parking area equipped with five tie downs.
         (b)   Buildings. Construct or lease a building providing a minimum of
800 square feet of properly lighted and heated floor space for office,
restrooms, public lounge and public use telephone.
         (c)   Personnel. One properly trained person shall be on duty during
operating hours for fuel dispensing. The office shall be attended at all times
during required operating hours.
         (d)   Aircraft service equipment. Emergency starting equipment and
adequate fire extinguishers shall be provided.
         (e)   Services. Fuel, park and tie down aircraft. Wash aircraft,
inflate tires, change aircraft engine oil, provide minor repairs and services
not requiring certificated mechanic rating. Rental car service.
         (f)   Requirements for public dispensing.
            1.   All aircraft fuel sold retail at the Paxton Airport will be
dispensed by fixed base operators under specific agreement authorizing the
operation. The agreement, lease or contract will specify basic land, building
and personnel requirements, hours of operation, equipment to be used, services
to be provided and markup authorized. Servicing, dispensing or sale of aircraft
fuels and lubricants without written approval of the city is prohibited.
Failure to obtain this written approval prior to any operations is basis for
cancellation of any existing lease agreement.
            2.   A minimum of two metered filter equipped dispensers, fixed or
mobile, for dispensing 100/115 octane fuel is required. Mobile dispensing
trucks shall have a 300 gallon minimum capacity. Dispensing units for fuel,
especially constructed for dispensing aviation fuel and having all safety
devices specified by Rules and Regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration, Illinois Division of Aeronautics and National Board of Fire
Underwriters will be required.
            3.   All equipment used must be approved by the State Fire Marshal.
            4.   Both 80 octane and 100 octane fuel shall be dispensed.
            5.   In addition to the general insurance requirements of the
tenants' lease, special coverages of products and motor vehicle liability and
property damage will be required.
         (g)   Requirements for private dispensing.
            1.   Fixed base operators, aviation operators and other lessees
owning and operating aircraft based at Paxton Airport, whose requirements for
aviation fuel makes operation of the specified fueling equipment economical,
may be given permission to service their leased or owned aircraft with aviation
fuel and lubricants subject to the safety standards and conditions contained
herein.
            2.   Permission to privately dispense fuel and lubricants will be
authorized in a specific agreement which will contain basic land, building,
personnel and equipment requirements for the type of operation being planned.
Failure to obtain this written permission in advance of any operation is basis
for cancellation of any existing lease agreement.
            3.   Fueling will be done only from fueling dispensers, fixed or
mobile, especially constructed for dispensing aviation fuel and having all
safety devices specified by Rules and Regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration, Illinois Division of Aeronautics or National Board of Fire
Underwriters. Under no circumstances will fueling or aircraft from drums be
permitted. In addition to the general insurance requirements of the tenant’s
lease, special coverages of products and motor vehicle liability and property
damage will be required. Dispensing vehicles and bulk lubricants will be stored
in or upon approved facilities under lease to the tenant. Storage within
aircraft hangars is prohibited.
            4.   All equipment must be approved by the State Fire Marshal.
         (h)   Hours of operation. The minimum operating hours shall be from 8:
00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., five days a week, holidays excepted.
      (6)   Radio, instrument or propeller repair service. Lessees desiring to
provide a radio, instrument or propeller repair service must hold a Federal
Aviation Administration repair station certificate and ratings for same and
provide as a minimum the following.
         (a)   Land. The leasehold shall contain a minimum area of 3,750 square
feet of land to provide space for building and storage or parking of aircraft.
         (b)   Buildings. Construct or lease a building providing a minimum of
2,000 square feet of properly lighted and heated space to house office and
minimum shop and hangar space as required for Federal Aviation Administration
repair shop certification. Public use telephone.
         (c)   Personnel. One Federal Aviation Administration certificated
repairperson qualified in accordance with the terms of the repair station
certificate.
         (d)   Hour of operation. The hours of operation shall be from 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., five days a week, holidays excepted.
      (7)   Air taxi service. Lessees desiring to engage in air taxi service
must hold a Federal Aviation Administration taxi commercial operator
certificate with ratings appropriate to the functions to be accomplished and
they shall provide as a minimum the following:
         (a)   Land. The leasehold shall contain a minimum of 3,750 square feet
of land to provide space for building and storage or parking of aircraft.
         (b)   Buildings. Lease or construct a building providing a minimum of
500 square feet of properly heated and lighted space for office and customer
lounge, public use telephone and restrooms.
         (c)   Personnel. One Federal Aviation Administration certificated
commercial pilot who is appropriately rated to conduct air taxi service
offered.
         (d)   Aircraft. One four-place aircraft meeting all the requirements
of the air taxi commercial operator certificate held. Note: aircraft shall be
owned or leased by agreement in writing and meet all the relevant requirements
of Part 135 of the Federal Aviation Administration regulations. In addition
thereto, airworthy aircraft owned or leased in writing to lessee available
within 30 minutes of Paxton Municipal Airport.
         (e)   Hours of operation. The hours of operation shall be from 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., five days a week, holidays excepted.
         (f)   Certificate. Maintain a State of Illinois charter air carrier
certificate.
      (8)   Multiple services. Lessees desiring to engage in two or more
commercial aeronautical activities must provide as a minimum the following.
         (a)   Land. The leasehold for multiple activities shall contain a
minimum of 15,000 square feet of land to provide space for specific use area
requirements established for the service to be offered. Specific use spaces
need not be additive where combination use can be reasonably and feasiblely
established.
         (b)   Buildings. Lease or construct a building containing a minimum of
2,000 square feet to provide properly lighted and heated space for office,
public lounge, pilot briefing room and restrooms. Repair stations must provide
minimum shop and hangar space as required by Federal Aviation Administration
repair shop certification.
         (c)   Personnel. Multiple responsibilities may be assigned to
personnel to meet personnel requirements for all activities.
         (d)   Aircraft. All requirements for aircraft for the specific
activities to be engaged in must be provided; however, multiple uses can be
made of all aircraft. In order to meet these requirements, however, a minimum
of five aircraft must be owned or under the direct control of the lessee and
one based on the lessor leasehold, plus four airworthy aircraft owned or leased
in writing to the lessee available within 30 minutes of Paxton Municipal
Airport.
         (e)   Equipment. All equipment specifically required for each activity
must be provided.
         (f)   Services. All services specifically required for each activity
must be provided during the hours of operation.
         (g)   Hours of operation. The lessee will adhere to the operating
schedule as required for each activity.
(Ord. 78-20, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.07 LIABILITY.
   The city assumes no responsibility for loss, injury or damage to persons or
property by reason of fire, theft, vandalism, wind, flood, earthquake,
collision, strikes or acts of God or of the public enemy, nor does it assume
any liability for injury to persons while on the airport or while using the
facilities of same or for property damage.
(Ord. 78-20, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.08 INDEMNITY.
   The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be upon the
condition that any person using same shall assume the full responsibility and
risk for the use thereof and shall release and hold harmless and indemnify the
city, its officers, employees and authorized representatives from any and all
liability or loss resulting from such use.
(Ord. 78-20, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.09 REVISIONS.
   The city reserves the right to at any time without notice revise, modify,
change or waive any or all of the foregoing leasing standards and requirements.
(Ord. 78-20, passed 8-14-78)
AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 95.20 TITLE.
   The rules and regulations hereinafter set forth be and the same are approved
and enacted as “The Rules and Regulations of the City of Paxton, Illinois,
Airport.”
(Ord. 78-19, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. All property belonging to the city including areas not used for
aeronautical purposes, located in the west half of Section 13, Township 23
North, Range Nine East, Ford County, Illinois.
   AIRPORT MANAGER. The Manager of the Paxton Airport as appointed by the City
Council.
   AIRPORT TRAFFIC AREA. As defined in current Federal Aviation Regulation Part
1.
   PUBLIC AIRCRAFT FACILITIES. The following facilities as they are from time
to time provided and made available by the City Council for public use by all
aircraft and their operators:
      (1)   Public runways for the purpose of landing and taking-off of
aircraft;
      (2)   Public taxiways for the purpose of ground movement of aircraft;
      (3)   Public aircraft parking space for the purpose of parking and
storing aircraft, loading and unloading passengers, baggage, freight, mail and
other cargo upon and from aircraft, performing operations incidental to the
immediate arrival and departure of aircraft and servicing with fuel and for
parking mobile equipment actively used in connection with the foregoing;
      (4)   The area in the vicinity of the terminal building known as ramp or
apron space (and any future additions thereto and improvements thereto), which
space is provided for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers, baggage
and mail to or from aircraft for the purpose of performing operations
incidental to the immediate preparation of aircraft for departure such as
servicing with fuel and inspection and for the purpose of parking mobile
equipment actively used in connection with the foregoing;
      (5)   Any other space provided by the City Council for public use by
aircraft operators at the airport.
(Ord. 78-19, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.22 SCOPE.
   All persons on any part of the property comprising the airport shall be
governed by the rules and regulations prescribed herein and by others and
instructions of the Airport Manager relative to the use or occupation of any
part of the property comprising the airport. These rules and regulations are
subject to amendment.
(Ord. 78-19, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.23 LOST ARTICLES.
   All lost articles shall be turned in to the Airport Manager’s Office by the
finders. Any such articles not claimed in 60 days will be disposed of as
determined by the Airport Manager.
(Ord. 78-19, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.24 LIABILITY.
   The city assumes no responsibility for loss, injury or damage to persons or
property by reason of fire, theft, vandalism, wind, flood, earthquake or
collision damage, nor does it assume any liability for injury to persons while
on the airport or while using the facilities of same.
(Ord. 78-19, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.25 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   All persons involved in any accident, personal, aircraft or automotive
occurring on the premises of the Paxton Airport shall make a report to the
Airport Manager as soon as possible, giving all pertinent information as
requested by the officer in charge.
(Ord. 78-19, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.26 AIRCRAFT OPERATION.
   (A)   Aeronautical activities. All aeronautical activities at this airport
and all flying of aircraft departing from or arriving in the airspace above
this airport shall be conducted in conformity with the current pertinent
regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, Civil Aeronautics Board,
State of Illinois and the city.
   (B)   Closing of field. In the event the Airport Manager believes the
conditions of the airport or any part of the airport to be unsafe for landing
or take-offs, it shall be within his or her authority to issue a NOTAM closing
the entire airport or any part thereof. This shall be filed with the F.A.A.
Flight Service Station. The same procedure will be followed when the field is
again usable.
   (C)   Disabled aircraft.
      (1)   All disabled aircraft and parts thereof on the airport shall be
promptly removed from public view by the owners, except for crashed aircraft
which shall be promptly removed when authorized by appropriate federal or state
authorities.
      (2)   If any person refuses to move an aircraft as directed by the
Airport Manager, the aircraft may be towed away or otherwise removed by the
Airport Manager at the owner or operator’s expense and without liability for
damage which may result in the course of or after such moving. The same shall
apply to removal of a wrecked or damaged aircraft and its parts.
   (D)   Repairing of aircraft. No person or firm shall repair an aircraft,
aircraft engine, propeller or other aeronautical equipment or apparatus, nor
employ a certificated aircraft mechanic in any area of the airport other than
that specifically designated for such purposes; except that minor adjustments
may be made while the aircraft is on a loading ramp preparatory to take-off,
and when such adjustment is necessary to prevent a delayed departure; further
except that owners of aircraft based at the Paxton Airport may perform
preventive maintenance on their own airplane only in and on hangar or leased
tie down space.
   (E)   Engine starting and run-up.
      (1)   Aircraft run-up or other engine test operations at Paxton Airport
shall not be performed in any area that would result in a hazard to other
aircraft, persons or property and in no case closer to the terminal building
than 500 feet.
      (2)   No person shall start or run any engine in any aircraft unless a
competent person is in the aircraft attending the engine controls. Blocks shall
always be placed in front of wheels before starting the engine or engines,
unless the aircraft is provided with adequate parking brakes. No persons shall
run the engine or engines of any aircraft at any location on the airport in
such manner as to cause damage to other aircraft or property or in such manner
as to cause damage to other aircraft or property or in such a manner as to blow
paper, dirt or other materials across taxiways or runways in such manner as to
endanger the safety of operations on the airport.
   (F)   Aircraft parking.
      (1)   No person shall park aircraft in any area on the airport other than
that prescribed by the Airport Manager.
      (2)   At least three tie down positions will be available at all times
for parking of business aircraft while discharging or loading passengers and
cargo, and two hours of free parking will be allowed in this area.
      (3)   Users of tie down spaces shall be solely responsible for securing
users airplane to tie downs and for the effectiveness of their tie down
procedures.
   (G)   Airport facility damage. Any person damaging any light, fixture or
other airport facility by means of contact with aircraft shall report such
damage to the Airport Manager's office immediately and shall be fully
responsible for any costs required to repair or replace the damaged facility.
   (H)   Taxiing.
      (1)   No aircraft shall be operated in a careless or reckless manner or
taxied except at a safe and reasonable speed.
      (2)   Aircraft shall be taxied in accordance with prescribed taxiing
patterns at all times.
      (3)   No airplane shall be operated on the airport unless it is equipped
with a tailwheel or a nosewheel and wheel brakes, except with the permission of
the Airport Manager. When any pilot of an airplane that is not equipped with
adequate brakes receives permission from the Airport Manager to taxi such
airplane, the pilot shall not taxi the airplane near buildings or parked
aircraft unless an attendant is at the wing of the airplane to assist the
pilot; provided, that an airplane with wings and tail higher than five feet
from the ground that does not have adequate brakes shall be not taxied on the
airport but shall be towed if it is necessary to move such an airplane.
   (I)   Landing and take-offs.
      (1)   Unless otherwise authorized or directed, pilots approaching to land
an airplane must circle the airport to the left and pilots approaching to land
in a helicopter must avoid the flow of fixed-wing traffic.
      (2)   Procedures to be used when landing: all pilots shall follow the
established traffic pattern and landing procedures as provided by the Illinois
Department of Transportation and the Federal Aviation Administration.
      (3)   Procedures to be used when taking off: all pilots shall follow the
established traffic pattern and taking off procedures as provided by the
Illinois Department of Transportation and the Federal Aviation Administration.
      (4)   Fixed-wing aircraft shall take off or land on runways only.
      (5)   Take-offs and landings over populated areas shall be kept to a
minimum in the interest of public safety and convenience, and pilots using the
Paxton Airport shall conform to any applicable noise abatement procedures
established by the city.
      (6)   Prior authorization is required before air ships, dirigibles,
motorless aircraft or aircraft with a total gross weight in excess of 12,500
pounds land or take off at Paxton Airport.
      (7)   The above procedures will apply in every case except when emergency
conditions exist.
   (J)   Landing fees. The owner or operator of each aircraft used as a common
carrier or other transient aircraft carrying passengers or cargo for hire that
shall land at the Paxton Airport shall pay to the city such landing fees as are
established by this subchapter.
(Ord. 78-19, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.27 FUELING AND INFLAMMABLES.
   (A)   Cleaning of aircraft. No person shall use inflammable, volatile
liquids having a flash point of less than 100°F in the cleaning of aircraft,
aircraft engines, propellers, appliances or for any other purpose, unless such
operations are conducted in open air or in a room specifically set aside and
approved for that purpose, which room must be properly fireproofed and equipped
with adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishing apparatus.
   (B)   Storage.
      (1)   No person shall keep or store any inflammable liquids, gases,
signal flares or other similar material in the hangars or in any building on
the airport, except that such materials may be kept in an aircraft in the
proper receptacles installed in the aircraft for such purpose or in rooms or
areas specifically approved for such storage by the Airport Manager or in
safety cans approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc.
      (2)   No person shall keep or store lubricating or waste oil in or about
the hangars, except in sealed cans or in containers of a design and type that
meets the approval of the Airport Manager.
      (3)   Lessees shall provide suitable metal receptacles with self-closing
covers for the storage of waste, rags and other rubbish. All used waste and
rags or other rubbish shall be removed by the lessee daily or in regular
scheduled pick-ups, but not later than once each week.
      (4)   Gasoline, oil and solvent drums or receptacles shall not be stored
on apron and ramp areas in excess of amounts actually needed as current stock.
Any material of this type that is kept in subject areas shall be kept enclosed
and covered in a housing of a design and type that meets the approval of the
Airport Manager.
   (C)   Doping and painting.
      (1)   Doping processes will be permitted only in certificated repair
shops approved areas.
      (2)   Painting will not be permitted except in certificated repair shops
and in approved areas.
   (D)   Liquid disposal. No fuels, oils, dopes, paints, solvents or acids
shall be disposed of or duped in drains, on the ramp areas, catch basins or
ditches or elsewhere on the airport.
   (E)   Fueling operations.
      (1)   No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the engine is running
or being waned by applications of exterior heat or while such aircraft is in a
hangar or enclosed space.
      (2)   No person shall smoke within 100 feet of an aircraft being fueled
or defueled.
      (3)   No person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver or switch
electrical appliances off or on in an aircraft during fueling or defueling.
      (4)   During refueling the aircraft and the fueling dispensing apparatus
shall both be grounded to a point or points of zero electrical potential.
      (5)   No person shall use any material or equipment during fueling or
defueling of aircraft which is likely to cause a spark or ignition.
      (6)   Adequate fire extinguishers shall be within ready reach of all
persons engaged in fueling or defueling aircraft.
      (7)   No person shall start the engine of any aircraft when there is any
gasoline on the ground under such aircraft.
      (8)   Fueling hoses and equipment shall be maintained in a safe, sound
and non-leaking condition and shall be approved by National Board of Fire
Underwriters in all respects and parts.
      (9)   All hoses, funnels and appurtenances used in fueling and defueling
operations shall be equipped with a grounding device to prevent ignition of
volatile liquids.
      (10)   No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while passengers are on
board the aircraft unless a passenger loading ramp is in place at the cabin
door of the aircraft, the aircraft door is in open position and a cabin
attendant is present at or near the cabin door.
      (11)   Persons engaged in the fueling and draining of aircraft shall
exercise care to prevent overflow of fuel. Persons responsible will take proper
measures to remove volatile liquids when spilled during transfer.
(Ord. 78-19, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.28 PUBLIC AND TENANT USAGE.
   (A)   Disorderly conduct. No person shall be or become intoxicated or drunk,
commit any disorderly, obscene or indecent act or commit any act of nuisance,
nor conduct or engage in any form of gambling on the airport.
   (B)   Sanitation. No person shall dispose of garbage, papers, refuse or
other material on the airport except in the receptacles provided for that
purpose; nor use a comfort station other than in a clean and sanitary manner;
nor eat food or drink beverages in the terminal building lobby, other than the
soft drink and candy normally sold in the building; nor expectorate on the
floors, walls or other surfaces of any airport building.
   (C)   Preservation of property. No person shall destroy, injure, deface or
disturb in any way any building, sign, equipment, marker or other structure,
trees, flowers, lawn or other property on the airport; nor alter, make
additions to or erect any building or sign or make any excavations on the
airport; nor wilfully abandon any personal property on the airport.
   (D)   Weapons, explosives and inflammable materials. No person except peace
officers, duly authorized post office, airport and air carrier employees or
members of the Armed Forces of the United States on official duty shall carry
any weapons, explosives or inflammable material on the airport except cases
sporting guns carried for transhipment.
   (E)   Interfering or tampering with aircraft. No person shall interfere or
tamper with any aircraft or put in motion the engine of such aircraft or use
any aircraft, aircraft parts, instruments or tools without permission of the
owner or by specific direction of the Airport Manager.
   (F)   Restricted areas. No person shall enter upon the field area, control
tower, utilities and service rooms or areas or other areas as may be designated
restricted, except:
      (1)   Persons assigned to duty therein;
      (2)   Persons authorized by the Airport Manager;
      (3)   Passengers, under appropriate supervision, entering the apron for
the purpose of embarkation or debarkation.
   (G)   Use of roads and walks.
      (1)   No person shall travel on the airport other than on the roads,
walks or places provided for the particular class of traffic.
      (2)   No person shall occupy the roads or walks in such a manner as to
hinder or obstruct their proper use.
   (H)   Animals. Animals will not be permitted in any building or other areas
of the Paxton Airport, with the exception of seeing-eye dogs or animals
properly confined for transportation, without the approval of the Airport
Manager.
   (I)   Loitering. No person shall loiter on any part of the airport or in any
building on the airport; nor shall any person come upon or use the airport,
except while traveling through as a passenger on an interstate bus or taxicab
or while enplaning or deplaning as a passenger on an aircraft operating on the
airport, after such person has been denied the use of the airport by the
Airport Manager. Any person or persons who shall refuse to comply with these
applicable rules and regulations, after proper request to so do by the Airport
Manager or other authorized representative, shall be requested to leave the
airport; and in the event of his or her failure to comply with a proper request
to abide by the rules and regulations of the city shall be regarded as a
trespasser.
   (J)   Use of shop areas. All shops, garages, equipment and facilities are
expressly for the conduct of the owner’s or lessee’s business and operations.
No persons other than employees of the owner or lessee shall make use of these
facilities or loiter around such premises without individual and specific
permission of the owner or lessee. This section applies to the city premises as
well as all others.
   (K)   Open flame operations. No person shall conduct any open flame
operations except at certified repair shops and approved areas.
   (L)   Smoking. No person shall smoke on the airport apron in any hangar or
shop, service station area, gasoline storage area or in any building, room or
place on the airport where smoking is specifically prohibited or within 100
feet of any fueling or defueling operation.
   (M)   Trash containers. No person shall keep uncovered trash containers in
any area. No vehicle used for hauling trash, dirt or any other material shall
be operated on the airport unless such vehicle is constructed so as to prevent
the contents thereof from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Areas to be used for trash or garbage containers shall be designated
by the Airport Manager, and no other areas shall be used. Such areas shall be
kept clean and sanitary at all tires.
   (N)   Solicitation. The soliciting of fares, alms or funds for the purpose
of the airport without the permission of the Airport Manager is prohibited.
   (O)   Damages. Tenants, lessees and grantees shall be fully responsible for
all damages to buildings, equipment, real property and appurtenances in the
ownership or custody of the city caused by their negligence, abuse or
carelessness or caused by the negligence, abuse or carelessness on the part of
their employees, agents, customers, visitors, suppliers or persons with whom
they may do business.
   (P)   Default of obligations.
      (1)   All billings are payable upon presentation, unless otherwise noted
thereon.
      (2)   When any tenant, user or grantee is formally notified that he or
she is held in default of any written or implied obligation to the city whether
it be for breach of performance or service covenants or nonpayment, he or she
will thereafter be billed for all losses of revenue, expenses incurred to
reestablish performance or service and other costs unless the tenant, user or
grantee files with the Airport Manager with ten days of receipt of the formal
notification a statement that corrective or preventative measures have been
initiated and will diligently be carried to completion. If the promises
contained in the statement are not fulfilled, the tenant, user or grantee will
be considered in absolute default and appropriate lawful steps will be taken by
the city.
   (Q)   Use of automobiles and vehicles on airstrip parking ramp. Automobile
parking in any aircraft use area shall be restricted to emergency vehicles and
certain authorized vehicles of airport personnel, as determined by the Airport
Manager. Temporary usage will be permitted for purposes of unloading and
loading passengers and baggage.
   (R)   Commercial activities. No person shall use the airport as a base or
terminal for the carrying on of commercial aviation, including but not limited
to fixed-base operations; aircraft maintenance; scheduled or nonscheduled
aircraft carriers carrying passengers, freight, express or mail; or student
instruction, communications or any other commercial flight without a current
lease or operating agreement authorizing such activities with the city. No
person shall engage or employ any person to provide commercial activity
services as defined in the preceding sentences except from those persons
officially authorized by the city to conduct such commercial activities on the
airport.
(Ord. 78-19, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.29 VALIDITY.
   Voiding of any particular rule or regulation contained herein shall not
affect the validity of the remainder of these airport rules and regulations.
(Ord. 78-19, passed 8-14-78)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The Airport Manager or the City Council may remove or evict from the
airport premises any person who knowingly or wilfully violates any rule or
regulation prescribed herein or any rule or regulation in effect by the Federal
Aviation Administration or the State of Illinois and may deny the use of the
airport and its facilities to any such person if it is determined that such
denial is in the public interest.
(Ord. 78-19, passed 8-14-78)
CHAPTER 96: ANIMALS
Section
Dogs
   
96.01   Running at large prohibited
   
96.02   Impoundment of dogs running at large
   
96.03   Female dogs in estrus confined
   
96.04   Minors as owner of dog
   
96.05   All cats and dogs to be registered
   
96.06   Collection of cat and dog license fees by City Treasurer; registrar of
license fees paid
   
96.07   All cats and dogs must be equipped with collar and license tag or
microchip identification
   
96.08   Regulations
   
96.09   Dog waste removal
Licensing of Dangerous Animals
   
96.20   Definitions
   
96.21   License required
   
96.22   Application
   
96.23   Federal license required
   
96.24   License fee
   
96.25   Public information
Regulations
   
96.35   Cruelty
   
96.36   Dangerous animals
   
96.37   Noises
   
96.38   Strays
   
96.39   Killing dangerous animals
   
96.40   Diseased animals
   
96.41   Housing
   
96.42   Housing animals and poultry
   
96.43   Animal waste
Administration and Enforcement
   
96.55   Animal Control Officer
   
96.56   Impoundment of dogs
 
   
96.99   Penalty
DOGS
§ 96.01 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person who owns, keeps or harbors any animal shall permit the
animal to run at large within the city.
   (B)   Dogs and/or cats which are on any public place or private property,
other than the property of the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog and/or cat,
without being held securely on a leash or by other means, shall be deemed to be
running at large; provided, however, this shall not apply when the dog is under
the immediate and direct command or control of a responsible individual.
(Ord. 2000-12, passed 6-12-00; Am. Ord. 20-31, passed 12-8-20) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.02 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   Dogs which are running at large, in violation of the foregoing
section, may be impounded by the Police Department.
   (B)   Dogs impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be impounded, redeemed
or disposed of as provided by § 96.56.
(Ord. 2000-12, passed 6-12-00)
§ 96.03 FEMALE DOGS IN ESTRUS CONFINED.
   Female dogs while in estrus shall be confined in a kennel or on the property
of the dog’s owner, keeper or harborer. Any person violating this section
shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $15 and not more than $100 for
each offense.
(Ord. 2000-12, passed 6-12-00)
§ 96.04 MINORS AS OWNER OF DOG.
   In the event an unemancipated minor is the owner, keeper or harborer of a
dog, the parent with whom the unemancipated minor resides, in addition to the
minor, shall be deemed an owner, keeper or harborer of such dog for the
purposes of this chapter and shall be held responsible for all fines and court
costs which may be imposed under the terms of this chapter. PARENT includes a
natural or adoptive parent, stepparent, person in loco parentis or legal
guardian of the person of the minor.
(Ord. 2000-12, passed 6-12-00)
§ 96.05 ALL CATS AND DOGS TO BE REGISTERED.
   (A)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess,
keep or harbor any cat or dog within the city without having first obtained a
license or appropriate permit therefore by application to the City Treasurer.
   (B)   Application. Written application for a license shall be made annually
by the owner on a form provided by the city. The owner shall be identified by
name, address and telephone number and the cat or dog shall be identified by
sex, age, breed, color and call name and the rabies inoculation certificate
number, date and administering veterinarian given.
   (C)   Rabies inoculation required. It shall be the duty of every owner of a
cat or dog kept or harbored in the city to have such cat or dog inoculated
against rabies. The owner or keeper or harborer of such cat or dog shall at all
times keep in his or her possession evidence of rabies inoculation consisting
of a certificate signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the vaccine.
A copy of the certificate of rabies inoculation shall be presented with the
application for license as herein required. No license shall be issued unless
such certificate bears a date within one year to the date of license
application if a one year immunization vaccines was used, or within three years
prior to the date of license application if a three year immunization vaccine
was administered.
   (D)   Expiration; fees. The license for any cat or dog shall expire on the
April 30 following the date of its issuance. The annual license fee is payable
within 30 days after April 30 or within 15 days after the date on which such
cat or dog is acquired, whichever is later. The annual license fee for each cat
or dog, until April 30, 2004, is $2 for each cat or dog so owned, possessed,
kept or harbored. The annual license fee for each cat or dog, commencing on and
after May 1, 2004, is $3 for each cat or dog so owned, possessed, kept or
harbored.
(Ord. passed 4-22-59; Am. Ord. 03-33, passed 7-14-03; Am. Ord. 03-36, passed 9-
8-03)
§ 96.06 COLLECTION OF CAT AND DOG LICENSE FEES BY CITY TREASURER; REGISTRAR OF
LICENSE FEES PAID.
   It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to collect all cat and dog
license fees and to issue receipts therefore, and the City Treasurer shall keep
a register of all cats and dogs upon which a license fee shall have been paid
in a register provided by the city for that purpose, which shall include a
brief description of the cat or dog, including sex, age, breed, color and call
name, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner, the date upon
which the license fee was paid and the number of the license tag issued
thereon. A suitable metal license tag furnished by the city (numbered
consecutively) shall be issued by the city along with the receipt to each of
the licenses. The receipt and license, so issued, shall be valid only until
April 30 next following the issuance thereof.
(Ord. passed 4-22-59; Am. Ord. 03-33, passed 7-14-03; Am. Ord. 03-36, passed 9-
8-03)
§ 96.07 ALL CATS AND DOGS MUST BE EQUIPPED WITH COLLAR AND LICENSE TAG OR
MICROCHIP IDENTIFICATION.
   Every cat or dog kept within the city shall be equipped with a collar which
must be worn by such cat or dog and to which shall be securely fastened the
metal license tag furnished, or, in lieu thereof, every cat or dog kept within
the city shall have embedded in the cat or dog a microchip capable of
identifying the cat or dog and the owner thereof.
(Ord. passed 4-22-59; Am. Ord. 03-33, passed 7-14-03)
§ 96.08 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor, by proclamation, shall declare that danger from
rabies is great, it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to go upon any public
street, alley or sidewalk or other public place, unless such dog is securely
muzzled.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a vicious dog.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a dog, for any reason,
within the corporate limits of the city.
   (D)   If any dog shall become vicious or shall attempt to bite or injure any
officer while performing the duties herein required of him or her, such officer
may immediately kill such dog. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder,
delay or obstruct any police officer in the execution of the duties herein
required or to aid or abet in hindering, delaying or obstructing such officer.
(Ord. passed 4-22-59)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.09 DOG WASTE REMOVAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control or having
custody of any dog to permit the dog to defecate upon the public property of
this city or upon the private property of another unless the person immediately
removes the feces and properly disposes of it in a sanitary manner; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained authorizes such person to enter upon the
private property of another without permission.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to walk a dog on public property
of the city or upon the private property of another without carrying at all
times a suitable container or other suitable instrument for the removal and
disposal of dog feces.
   (C)   Persons under a disability who use seeing-eye dogs are exempt from
this section. Persons whose dogs are participating in dog shows or direct
command obedience classes are exempt from this section while their animals are
actually participating in such shows or classes, but all feces must be removed
and disposed of immediately upon the conclusion of the show or class.
(Ord. 03-10, passed 2-10-03) Penalty, see §
96.99
LICENSING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS
§ 96.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. A lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay,
mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, bear, hyena, wolf or coyote or any
poisonous or life threatening reptile.
   OWNER. Any person who:
      (1)   Has a right of property in a dangerous animal;
      (2)   Keeps or harbors a dangerous animal;
      (3)   Has a dangerous animal in his care; or
      (4)   Acts as custodian of a dangerous animal.
(Ord. 95-33, passed 7-10-95)
§ 96.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a traveling circus, to own
or harbor any dangerous animal in the city without having first obtained a
license or appropriate permit therefore by application to the City Clerk. Only
persons who comply with the provisions of this subchapter shall be entitled to
receive an retain such license.
(Ord. 95-33, passed 7-10-95)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.22 APPLICATION.
   Written application for a license shall be made annually by the owner on a
form provided by the city. The owner shall be identified by name, address and
telephone number and the dangerous animal by sex, age, breed, color and call
name.
(Ord. 95-33, passed 7-10-95)
§ 96.23 FEDERAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
   The owner or harborer of a dangerous animal shall at all times keep in his
or her possession evidence of the license issued to him or her by the Secretary
of Agriculture of the United States or his or her representative who shall be
an employee of the United States Department of Agriculture pursuant to the
Animal Welfare Act, as amended (7 USC 2131 et seq.). A copy of the license
shall be presented with the application for license as required by §
96.22. No license shall be issued by the city unless the applicant has been
issued a license by the Secretary of Agriculture of the United States or his or
her representative who shall be an employee of the United States Department of
Agriculture pursuant to the terms of the Animal Welfare Act.
(Ord. 95-33, passed 7-10-95)
§ 96.24 LICENSE FEE.
   The license issued by the city for any dangerous animal shall expire on
December 31 following the date of its issuance. The annual license fee is
payable within the first one month of the calendar year or within one week
after the date on which the dangerous animal is acquired, whichever is later.
The annual license fee for each dangerous animal $5.
(Ord. 95-33, passed 7-10-95)
§ 96.25 PUBLIC INFORMATION.
   All information obtained by the city pursuant to the terms of this
subchapter shall be made available by the City Clerk to any person who shall
request the same.
(Ord. 95-33, passed 7-10-95)
REGULATIONS
§ 96.35 CRUELTY.
   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any way; any person
who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
(Ord. 67-29, passed 9-25-67)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.36 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous animal or vicious animal of any
kind to run at large within the city.
(Ord. 67-29, passed 9-25-67)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.37 NOISES.
   It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animals which disturb the peace
by loud noises at any time of the day or night.
(Ord. 67-29, passed 9-25-67)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.38 STRAYS.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any horse, cattle, swine, sheep, goats or
poultry to run at large in the city. It shall further be unlawful to picket or
tie any such animal in any of the streets of the city for the purpose of
grazing or feeding.
(Ord. 67-29, passed 9-25-67)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.39 KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   The members of the Police Department are authorized to kill any dangerous
animals of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or
property.
(Ord. 67-29, passed 9-25-67)
§ 96.40 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall
be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby the
health of man or beast may be affected.
(Ord. 67-29, passed 9-25-67)
§ 96.41 HOUSING.
   (A)   No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is
or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome. The presence of any rats in
any such stable or place shall be prima facie evidence that the same is
maintained in violation of the provisions of this section.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep or have any goats anywhere in the city or
any horses, ponies, colts, swine, pigs, cattle, calves, ducks, geese or
chickens within 150 feet of any residence, other than the residence of the
person so keeping or having such animals, anywhere in the city.
(Ord. 67-29, passed 9-25-67)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.42 HOUSING ANIMALS AND POULTRY
   It shall be unlawful to maintain in the city any poultry or animal yard,
lot, pen or other enclosure, any part of which is within 150 feet of any
building used for residence purposes by anyone other than the one maintaining
the same or his or her immediate family or within 150 feet of any public way
other than an alley or within 150 feet of any church or school building. This
section shall not apply to enclosures used solely for dogs.
(Ord. 67-29, passed 9-25-67)
Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.43 ANIMAL WASTE.
   The accumulation of animal feces on any private property is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance. Every person who is the owner or occupant of private
property or the agent in charge of such property is hereby charged with the
duty of keeping the private property free of any accumulation of animal feces.
Each owner, occupant or agent having charge of such property who is notified in
accordance with the provisions set forth herein by the duly authorized agent of
the city to remove such animal feces shall be, and hereby is, charged with the
duty of removing such animal feces and the sanitary disposal of the same within
24 hours of the notice to do so.
(Ord. 03-09, passed 2-10-03)
Penalty, see § 96.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 96.55 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   (A)   Office created. There is created the position of Animal Control
Officer for the City of Paxton, Illinois.
   (B)   Appointment. The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may
appoint an Animal Control Officer.
   (C)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to see to
the enforcement of all of the ordinances of the city and all statutes
applicable therein as pertain to animals within the city and to prevent
infractions of the laws and arrest violators thereof and to perform such
additional duties as may be assigned to the Animal Control Officer by the Chief
of Police or by the Mayor.
   (D)   Supervision. The Animal Control Officer shall be under the direct
control and supervision of the Chief of Police.
   (E)   Fees and expenses. The Animal Control Officer shall receive an annual
salary of $4,800 in the performance of duties as required under the terms of
this chapter. The city shall furnish to the Animal Control Officer a motor
vehicle to assist in the performance of the duties of the office and shall pay
all expenses incurred in the operation and maintenance of the motor vehicle.
The Animal Control Officer shall not be entitled to any other compensation or
benefits that may be furnished by the city to any other employee of the city.
(Ord. 81-6, passed 2-9-81; Am. Ord. 2000-9, passed 5-8-00; Am. Ord. 15-04,
passed 4-13-15)
§ 96.56 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS.
   (A)   Any dog or cat found to be running at large within the city, without a
valid license tag, shall be deemed a stray and may be impounded by any member
of the Police Department at any time. After the second time any dog or cat is
picked up running at large within the city, the subsequent time an animal is
picked up running at large within the city such dog or cat will be required to
be spayed or neutered at the owner's expense.
   (B)   Upon a complaint being made, in writing, by any resident of the city,
that any dog or cat, whether licensed or unlicensed, has committed any one or
more of the following acts shall be picked up and impounded by the Police
Department; provided, however, no such written complaint shall be necessary
where any of the acts mentioned below are committed in the presence of any
officer of the Police Department:
      (1)   Fighting;
      (2)   Bitten or attempted to bite any individual;
      (3)   Damaged or destroyed any vegetables, flowers or shrubbery,
clothing, bedding, household goods, footwear or any other personal property of
any kind or character; or
      (4)   Has jumped upon, knocked down or injured any child or adult.
      (5)   Violation of any portion of the Animal Control Act (510 ILCS 5/)
   (C)   Any dog or cat which is impounded, as herein provided, shall be kept
in an enclosure established as the city pound until redeemed or otherwise
disposed of, as herein provided. The Pound shall be under the charge of the
Chief of Police, who shall be responsible for the care and custody of the same.
Dogs and cats so impounded shall be humanely treated and fed.
   (D)   Any person seeking to redeem any impounded dog or cat shall pay a fee
of $25 and an additional fee for each day during which such animal has been
impounded by the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to release any dog
or cat impounded by the city without the consent of the Chief of Police.
   (E)   If any dog or cat bearing a valid license tag be impounded, it shall
be the duty of the Chief of Police, within 48 hours, to notify the registered
owner of such dog or cat, in writing, of such impounding. The notice shall be
mailed to the registered owner at the address shown on the registration record.
   (F)   If any dog or cat impounded, as aforesaid, shall not be redeemed
within seven days thereof, in the manner herein provided, then the Police
Department is authorized to place, euthanize, or to otherwise destroy or
dispose of such dog or cat, in such manner as the Chief of Police may deem
best.
   (G)   If the owner of any dog or cat shall request the Police Department to
euthanize or dispose of any dog or cat belonging to such owner, the owner shall
first pay a fee before being entitled to the services of the City in disposing
of the dog or cat.
   (H)   The Chief of Police may, when deemed necessary by him or her, impound
any dog or cat which for any reason may appear to be afflicted with rabies and
may have such dog or cat examined or tested for rabies at the owner's expense
and may immediately euthanize or otherwise destroy any dog or cat so found to
be afflicted with rabies.
(Ord. passed 5-22-59; Am. Ord. 77-18, passed 7-11-77; Am. Ord. 17-34, passed 8-
8-17; Am. Ord. 17-48, passed 12-12-17)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any dog owner, keeper or harborer violating §
96.01 shall be fined as follows:
         (a)   Not less than $25 nor more than $100 for the first offense;
         (b)   Not less than $50 nor more than $250 for the second offense
within a consecutive 12-month period;
         (c)   Not less than $100 nor more than $500 for the third offense
within a consecutive 12-month period; and
         (d)   Not less than $500 nor more than $750 for the fourth offense
within a consecutive 12-month period.
      (2)   A separate offense shall be held to have been committed each day
that the violation shall occur or continue.
      (3)   The violation of §
96.01 shall be considered a malum prohibitum offense not requiring the dog
owner, keeper or harborer to have knowledge of the offense or negligent
conduct.
(Ord. 2000-12, passed 6-12-00; Am. Ord. 2000-26, passed 9-25-00)
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§
96.20 et seq. shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 95-33, passed 7-10-95)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
96.35 et seq. shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each
offense. (Ord. 67-29, passed 9-25-67)
   (D)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision
of §
96.08 shall be fined as follows:
         (a)   Not less than $25 nor more than $100 for the first offense;
         (b)   Not less than $50 nor more than $250 for the second offense
within a consecutive 12-month period;
         (c)   Not less than $100 nor more than $500 for the third offense
within a consecutive 12-month period; and
         (d)   Not less than $500 nor more than $750 for the fourth offense
within a consecutive 12-month period.
      (2)   A separate offense shall be held to have been committed each day
that such violation shall occur or continue.
   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
96.09 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense.
   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
96.05 or
96.07 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(Ord. passed 4-22-59; Am. Ord. 2000-27, passed 9-25-00; Am. Ord. 03-10, passed
2-10-03; Am. Ord. 03-33, passed 7-14-03; Am. Ord. 17-34, passed 8-8-17)
CHAPTER 97: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Public Sidewalks and Curbs
   
97.001   Definitions
   
97.002   Permit required to construct sidewalk
   
97.003   Plans and specifications for construction
   
97.004   Reserved
   
97.005   Conditions for installing curbs
   
97.006   Inspection
   
97.007   Construction contract with landowner
Encroachments on Public Right-of-Way
   
97.020   Definitions
   
97.021   Encroachments prohibited
Driveways
   
97.035   Permit required
   
97.036   Specifications
   
97.037   Tile installation; road right-of-way
Excavations
   
97.050   Permit required
   
97.051   Applications
   
97.052   Manner of excavating
   
97.053   Sidewalks
   
97.054   Restoring surface
   
97.055   Supervision
   
97.056   Tunneling required
   
97.057   Protective measures and routing of traffic
   
97.058   Clearance for vital structures
   
97.059   Protection of traffic
   
97.060   Relocation and protection of utilities
   
97.061   Abandonment of substructures
   
97.062   Protection of adjoining property
   
97.063   Care of excavated material
   
97.064   Clean up
   
97.065   Protection of watercourses
   
97.066   Breaking through pavement
   
97.067   Depth of structures
   
97.068   Backfilling
   
97.069   Trenches in pipe laying
   
97.070   Prompt completion of work
   
97.071   Urgent work
   
97.072   Noise, dust and debris
   
97.073   Preservation of monuments
   
97.074   Inspections
   
97.075   Location records
   
97.076   Emergency action
Use of Streets and Alleys
   
97.090   Using streets for showing or displaying merchandise prohibited
   
97.091   Hauling merchandise on streets regulated
   97.092   Solicitation of donations on public streets and highways
 
   
97.999   Penalty
PUBLIC SIDEWALKS AND CURBS
§ 97.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Public sidewalks and curbs within the following area of
the City of Paxton, Ford County, Illinois:
      (1)   Market Street from Orleans Street to Holmes Street;
      (2)   Center Street from the alley between Market Street and Railroad
Avenue to the alley between Market Street and Taft Street;
      (3)   Pells Street between the alley between Market Street and Railroad
Avenue to Taft Street;
      (4)   State Street from the alley between Market Street and Railroad
Avenue to Taft Street.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. All other public sidewalks and curbs within the city
not lying within the above-described Business District.
(Ord. 85-1, passed 1-14-85)
§ 97.002 PERMIT REQUIRED TO CONSTRUCT SIDEWALK.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct, reconstruct,
establish or maintain any public sidewalk without first having obtained a
written permit to do so from the Building Inspector. No such permit shall be
issued for construction, reconstruction, establishment or maintenance of any
such public sidewalk, except in accordance with the provisions herein
contained.
   (B)   Application for permit must be made in writing upon forms furnished by
the city. The application shall contain the name and address of the person,
firm or corporation making the application, the name of the contractor or
person who is to construct the public sidewalk and the proposed location and
dimensions of such public sidewalk. Complete plans and specifications shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector in accordance with the ordinances of the
city and shall be inspected upon completion by the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 85-1, passed 1-14-85)
§ 97.003 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION.
   All plans and specifications must conform to the following minimum
requirements before the permit for construction, reconstruction, establishment
or maintenance shall be issued:
   (A)   Public sidewalks and curbs for both the Business District and
Residential District, as defined in § 97.001, shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications of the subdivision regulations, as amended;
   (B)   Where a public sidewalk is constructed either across or adjacent to a
driveway, the public sidewalk shall conform to the driveway grade as
established by the Building Inspector;
   (C)   Where existing meter pits are in the area of a proposed public
sidewalk the existing cast iron top shall be removed and turned in to the Water
Department. A heavier cover shall be furnished and set by the Water Department,
and the additional cost thereof shall be paid by the property owner.
(Ord. 85-1, passed 1-14-85)
§ 97.004 RESERVED.
§ 97.005 CONDITIONS FOR INSTALLING CURBS.
   The installation of curbs shall be subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   Where there is existing curbing in the block, the new curbing must
match and conform to the existing curbing;
   (B)   Where there is no existing curbing in the block, the new curbing must
comply with the specifications set forth in the subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 85-1, passed 1-14-85)
§ 97.006 INSPECTION.
   No payment for such construction, reconstruction, establishment or
maintenance will be made unless the same is approved, in writing, by the
Building Inspector, certifying that the work has been completed in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 85-1, passed 1-14-85)
§ 97.007 CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT WITH LANDOWNER.
   The Superintendent of Streets of the City of Paxton is hereby authorized to
enter into a written contract with the owner of residential real estate located
within the city authorizing the city to construct a sidewalk for public use or
a street curb at the residence provided the landowner shall reimburse the city
for all the cost of all materials plus an administration fee of $25. All labor
and equipment for the project shall be furnished by the city.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 9-8-08)
ENCROACHMENTS ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 97.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA. Area lying between the project right-of-way
limits and the platted street limits within which the city, by concurrence in
the establishment of the project right-of-way lines will permit the state to
enter to perform all necessary construction operations.
   ENCROACHMENT. Any building, fence, sign or any other structure or object of
any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is
placed, located or maintained in, on, under or over any portion of the project
right-of-way or the roadway right-of-way where no project right-of-way line has
been established.
   PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT. Any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign or
similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to
the limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the
building lane and which does not impair the free and safe flow of pedestrian
traffic and traffic on the highway. The permissive retention of overhanging
signs is not to be construed as being applicable to those signs supported from
poles constructed outside the project right-of-way line and not confined by
adjacent buildings.
   PROJECT RIGHT-OF-WAY. Those areas within the project right-of-way lines
established jointly by the city, state and the Federal Highway Administration
which will be free of encroachments except as hereinafter defined.
   ROADWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY. Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by
fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement
during the time the easement is in effect.
(Ord. 93-52, passed 12-13-93)
§ 97.021 ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or cause
to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any encroachment within the
limits of the project right-of-way or roadway right-of-way where no project
right-of-way lines have been established.
(Ord. 93-52, passed 12-13-93)
Penalty, see § 97.999
DRIVEWAYS
§ 97.035 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct, reconstruct,
establish or maintain any driveway over, across or upon any portion of the
public sidewalk or public parkway without first having obtained a written
permit to do so from the Superintendent of Streets. Permit shall be obtained
from the City Council where the driveway is for other than residence or
dwelling house use or where it is necessary to elevate or depress the
established grade of public sidewalks or parkways. No such permit shall be
issued for construction or establishment of any such driveway except in
accordance with the provisions herein contained.
   (B)   Application for a permit must be made in writing upon forms furnished
by the city. The application shall contain the name and address of the person,
firm or corporation making the application, the name of the contractor or
person who is to construct the driveway and the proposed location and
dimensions of such driveway. Complete plans and specifications shall be
submitted to the Superintendent of Streets and in accordance with the
ordinances of the city and shall be inspected upon completion by the
constituted member of such department.
(Ord. 78-38, passed 9-11-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.036 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All plans and specifications must conform to the following minimum
requirements before permit for construction or reconstruction shall be
permitted.
      (1)   Driveways for other than residential or dwelling house use shall be
constructed of Portland cement concrete at least six inches in thickness.
Concrete shall be as specified by ordinance for sidewalks and in accordance
with sketches on file in the office of the Superintendent of Streets at all
times.
      (2)   Driveways for residential or dwelling house use shall be
constructed of gravel, concrete or macadam, or in a manner and of a material
equal at least to that existing for the paving in the public street adjacent
thereto, except that where concrete pavement exists in the public street and
bituminous concrete surface is desired for the driveway, such surface shall be
permitted provided it shall have a minimum thickness of two inches placed upon
a compacted stone base at least six inches thick..
      (3)   Where a driveway of any kind of material is constructed across the
sidewalk space, it shall conform to the sidewalk grade as established by the
City Engineer.
      (4)   Where a driveway of any kind of material is constructed across an
existing sidewalk, the sidewalk shall be removed and replaced with Portland
cement concrete for the full width of the driveway and for a distance of at
least 12 inches on both sides of the driveway. This portion shall be not less
than six inches in thickness and constructed in accordance with sketches on
file in the office of the Superintendent of Streets.
      (5)   Macadam, gravel, and other types of driveways where permitted
herein shall be not less than six inches compacted thickness including the
base. A base of at least four inches of CA 5 two inch stone shall be installed.
If the driveway is to be constructed of gravel, then, in that event, two inches
of CA 10 road pack stone shall be installed over the base.
      (6)   Where paving in the public street is of concrete and a concrete
driveway is constructed, a one-inch bituminous premolded expansion joint with a
load transmission unit shall be placed approximately three feet from the edge
of the concrete paving and normal to the center line of the driveway, in
accordance with sketches illustrating such construction on file with the
Superintendent of Streets.
      (7)   The width of the driveways for other than residential or dwelling
house use shall not exceed 30 feet at the outer or street edge of the sidewalk.
Where two driveways are provided for the same or adjoining property, a safety
island of not less than 10 feet at the outer or street side of the sidewalk
shall be provided. Not more than two such driveways shall be allowed to any one
owner for any one piece of property on any one street for each 100 feet of
continuous frontage thereof.
      (8)   The width of the driveways for residential or dwelling house use
shall be not less than 9 feet or more than 14 feet at the outer or street edge
of the sidewalk.
      (9)   The width of the driveway opening at the curb line shall not exceed
the width of the driveway at the inner or property edge plus 20 feet, nor be
less than the width of the driveway at the inner or property edge of the
sidewalk plus 10 feet. In no instance should the radius be less than 3 feet at
curb corners, and this only when the driveway is flared or more than 10 feet
when the driveway is at right angles to the street line. The center line of all
driveways must be approximately at right angles to the curb line of the
pavement in the public street for a distance of at least 10 feet from said curb
line.
      (10)   All driveways shall be so graded between the gutter and the
sidewalk that it will not be necessary to change the established grade of
either and will not elevate or depress any portion of either. No part of the
driveway shall extend beyond the curb line in such a manner as to change the
grade of the gutter or obstruct the free flow of water in the gutter. Where
elevations or depressions are necessary in the parkway strip between the curb
and walk, the parkway shall be graded on both sides of the driveway to a
distance sufficient to create a gradual ascent or descent. At no time shall the
gradient exceed one foot vertical to ten feet horizontal.
      (11)   Combined curb and gutter and separate curbing shall be entirely
removed for the full width of the driveway opening at the curb line. If an
existing joint in said curb is within five feet of the end of the driveway
opening, remove the existing curbing and the like to the joint, otherwise cut
the combined curb and gutter or separate curbing, making a neat edge truly at
right angles to the edge of the pavement and truly vertical. Integral curbing,
which is that type placed with the pavement and molded as an integral part of
it, must be removed for the full depth from the top of curb to the bottom of
the pavement. The edge must be cut as above described. No combined curb and
gutter, straight curb or integral curb shall be removed within five feet of a
public crosswalk.
      (12)   The curb cut shall be made only by city employees or a contractor
approved by the Superintendent of Streets.
      (13)   At the request of the homeowner, the city will excavate the area
to be used as a residential driveway that lies within the street right of way.
All dirt excavated by the city shall be the property of the city and shall be
removed by the city at no charge to the homeowner.
      (14)   In the event at a homeowner desires to construct a residential
driveway of gravel and purchases all materials for the construction of the
driveway, then at the request of the homeowner, the city will provide the labor
necessary to construct that part of the driveway that lies within the street
right of way.
   (B)   Where driveways cross open ditches in the parkways, culverts shall be
installed. The culverts shall be of such length and shall be constructed of
such diameter and shall be constructed of such material as determined by the
Department of Public Works, depending on the conditions existing. In no
instance shall the size of opening be less than that obtained by a 12-inch
diameter pipe. The length of culvert shall be determined by the following
method; for ditch depth of 2 feet or less the culvert shall extend not less
than 5 feet beyond both edges of the driveway where it crosses the ditch. For
each additional foot depth of ditch add 2 feet to the above figure, except that
no culvert shall be less than 20 feet long and except that where headwalls are
constructed at the ends of the culvert the length shall be as determined by the
Department of Public Works.
   (C)   Where existing meter pits are in the area of a proposed driveway, the
existing cast iron top shall be removed and turned in to the Water Department.
A heavier cover shall be furnished and set by the Water Department, and the
additional cost thereof shall be paid by the property owner.
   (D)   All driveways constructed or reconstructed over, across or upon any
public street or public parkway in the city shall be kept and maintained at all
times in accordance with the provisions hereof by the persons so constructing,
reconstructing or using the same as an adjunct or appurtenance to lands or
properties immediately adjacent thereto.
(Ord. 78-38, passed 9-11-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 03-19,
passed 4-28-03)
§ 97.037 TILE INSTALLATION; ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   In an area zoned residential, either R1, R2 or R3, wherever a street
or roadway has been furnished with a ditch or waterway for drainage the
adjacent property owner may request the Superintendent of Streets to determine
whether or not a tile may be installed in the ditch or waterway which tile will
provide for adequate continuation of the drainage through the road right-of-
way.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter the
grade of the ditch in a road right-of-way without having obtained a permit as
herein required, or without complying with the provisions of this section or in
violation of or variance from the terms of any such permit.
   (C)   Application for such permits shall be made by the adjacent property
owner with the Superintendent of Streets, and shall describe the location of
the intended alteration of the grade of the ditch in the road right-of-way, and
the person, firm or corporation doing the actual work and the name of the
person, firm or corporation for whom or which the work is being done, and shall
contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and
laws relating to the work to be done.
   (D)   No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant
therefore has deposited with the city, a cash deposit in the sum of $500 to
insure payment of the cost of the tile, to insure the proper restoration of the
ground and to insure the compliance with all ordinance and laws relating to the
work to be done. From this deposit should be deducted the expense to the city
for the purchase of any tile installed pursuant to the terms of the permit.
Also, from this deposit shall be deducted the expense to the city of relaying
the surface of the ground and of making the refill if this is done by the city
or at its expense. The balance shall be returned to the applicant without
interest after the work has been completed and the surface is restored.
   (E)   In an area zoned residential, either R1, R2 or R3, and if the
Superintendent of Streets determines that a tile may be installed, the city
shall install, at the request of the adjacent property owner, the tile in the
road right-of-way. The cost of the tile (but not the installation thereof)
shall be paid by the adjacent land owner to the city. The city will provide the
labor to install the tile at its sole expense.
   (F)   If any sidewalk or driveway is damaged or must be reconstructed as a
result of the work undertaken the cost thereof shall be paid by the applicant.
   (G)   The applicant shall, within 30 days of the installation of the tile,
back fill the portion of the road right-of-way that is not paved with dirt,
free from lumps and stone, thoroughly compacted around the tile. Such back fill
shall be done in a manner that will permit the restoration of the surface with
grass. Thereafter the applicant will seed the restored area with grass.
   (H)   The Superintendent of Streets shall from time to time and inspect or
cause to be inspected the work area to see to the enforcement of the provisions
of this section. The Superintendent of Streets shall have the authority to
promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be
reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this section.
   (I)   (1)   All work covered under this section to be accomplished by the
applicant shall be accomplished expeditiously until completion, in order to
avoid unnecessary inconvenience to traffic, to pedestrians, and for the
protection of other public interests. The applicant shall state, in his or her
application for the permit time, the number of days which he or she estimates
will be required to complete his or her work. Upon review of the application,
the Superintendent of Streets shall have the right to amend the time requested
and issue the permit so as to allow the minimum amount of time which he or she
determines will reasonably be required for such work. The time allowed for
completion shall be extended as necessary if it is found that it is not
possible to complete the work within the time allowed.
      (2)   In the event the work is not being accomplished expeditiously and
accordance with the time period set forth in the permit, or if work has ceased
or is abandoned without due cause, the Superintendent of Streets may, after 24
hours written notice to the applicant of the city's intention to do so, have
city forces correct said work, backfill the ditch in the road right-of-way, and
effect all restoration as required by this section.
      (3)   In the event that city forces accomplish work in accordance with
this division, the entire cost of such work, including any materials used
therefor, shall be paid to the city by the applicant upon demand or, at the
request of the applicant, can be deducted from the deposit made by the
applicant. If the deposit made by the applicant is not sufficient to pay said
costs the city may proceed to collect any of said cost due and owing in any
manner allowed by law.
   (J)   (1)   By reason of the grant of the permit, the city does not assume
any liability:
         (a)   For injuries to person, damage to property, or loss of service
claims; or
         (b)   For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance or operation of equipment by applicant.
      (2)   By accepting a permit, the applicant is required to defend,
indemnify, and hold the city whole and harmless from all costs, liabilities,
and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the construction, presence,
installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its equipment, or out of any
activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether or not any act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the permit. The
applicant further agrees that the applicant will not bring, nor cause to be
brought, any action, suit or other proceeding claiming damages, or seeking any
other relief against the city for any claim nor for any award arising out of
the presence, installation, maintenance or operation of applicant's equipment,
or any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether nor not the act
or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the permit.
The foregoing does not indemnify the city for its own negligence except for
claims arising out of or alleging the city's negligence where such negligence
arises out of or is primarily related to the presence, installation,
construction, operation, maintenance or repair of said equipment by the
applicant or on the applicant's behalf, including, but not limited to, the
issuance of permits and the inspection of plans or work. This section is not,
as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to
the applicant or to the city; and the applicant, in defending any action on
behalf of the city shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or
immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf.
(Ord. 03-35, passed 9-8-03)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 97.050 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to tunnel under or
to make any excavation in any street, alley or other public place in the city
without having obtained a permit as is herein required or without complying
with the provisions of this subchapter or in violation of or variance from the
terms of any such permit.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.051 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Clerk and shall describe
the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the
purpose therefor and the person, firm or corporation doing the actual
excavating work and the name of the person, firm or corporation for whom or
which the work is being done and shall contain an agreement that the applicant
will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
§ 97.052 MANNER OF EXCAVATING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way
contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper
bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground, and in
excavations the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any
portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface.
   (B)   No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making
of such excavations or tunnels, and notice shall be given to the persons
maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the city department or
officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or
affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes,
cables or conduits shall be disturbed.
   (C)   No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or
the roots thereof.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.053 SIDEWALKS.
   If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
§ 97.054 RESTORING SURFACE.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation making any excavation or tunnel in or
under any public street, alley or other public place in the city shall restore
the surface to its original condition if there is no pavement there. Refills
shall be properly tamped down and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation
shall be left in the ground.
   (B)   Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be
repaired and the surface relaid by the applicant, and the surface shall be
restored to its original condition and under the supervision of the
Superintendent of Streets.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.055 SUPERVISION.
   The Superintendent of Streets shall from time to time inspect or cause to be
inspected all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street,
alley or other public place in the city to see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this subchapter. Notice shall be given to him or her at least ten
hours before the work of refilling any such tunnel or excavation commences.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.056 TUNNELING REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to make any excavation in any portion of a street or
sidewalk in the city which is paved with a concrete or asphalt paving. Where
necessary, and where a proper permit has been secured, tunnels may be driven or
excavated under any such pavement, provided that upon completion of the work
involved the tunnel shall be backfilled with compacted sand.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.057 PROTECTIVE MEASURES AND ROUTING OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an excavation
in or upon any public place to place and maintain barriers and warning devices
necessary for safety of the general public.
   (B)   Barriers, warning signs, lights and the like shall conform to the
requirements of the City Council. Warning lights shall be flares, torches,
lanterns, electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic
from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day. Torches shall be open wick
or flame flares or bombs generally used in connection with roadway repairs or
construction and operating on kerosene or similar fluid.
   (C)   Lanterns shall burn kerosene or a similar fluid and have clear red or
ruby globes. Electrical markers or flashers shall emit light at sufficient
intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety.
Reflectors or reflecting material may be used to supplement, but not replace,
light sources. The City Council may restrict the use of lanterns or open flame
devices in fire hazard areas.
   (D)   The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near normal as
possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to
the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public.
   (E)   When traffic conditions permit, the Superintendent of Streets may, by
written approval, permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a
period of time prescribed by him or her, if in his or her opinion it is
necessary. The written approval may require that the permittee give
notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In such
cases, such written approval shall not be valid until such notice is given.
   (F)   Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the
construction operation to alert traffic within a public street and cones or
other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with
the instructions of the Superintendent of Streets.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.058 CLEARANCE FOR VITAL STRUCTURES.
   The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere
with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water gates,
underground vaults, valve housing structures and all other vital equipment as
designated by the Superintendent of Streets.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.059 PROTECTION OF TRAFFIC.
   The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicle traffic
at all street intersections where possible and safe crossings for pedestrians
at intervals of not more than 300 feet. If any excavation is made across any
public street, alley or sidewalk, adequate crossings shall be maintained for
vehicles and for pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold the
excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at
least one-half of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along such sidewalk
line.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
§ 97.060 RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES.
   The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility without the
written consent of the Superintendent of Streets and the owner of the facility.
If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility this shall be done by
its owner. No facility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The cost of
moving privately owned facilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee
unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the facility. The
permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by
the excavation work and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect
them under, over, along or across the work. The permittee shall secure approval
of method of support and protection from the owner of the facility. In case any
of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, and for
this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered
as part of a substructure, the permittee shall promptly notify the owner
thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired by the agency or person
owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee.
It is the intent of this section that permittee shall assume all liability for
damage to facilities and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of
such facility damage and such assumption of liability is a contractual
obligation of the permittee. The only exception will be such instances where
damage is exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility. The city
shall not be made a party to any action because of this section. The permittee
shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground
facilities and protect the same against damage.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.061 ABANDONMENT OF SUBSTRUCTURES.
   Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the abandonment of
service lines designed to serve single properties, the person owning, using,
controlling or having an interest therein shall within 30 days after such
abandonment file with the Superintendent of Streets a statement in writing
giving in detail the location of the substructure so abandoned. If such
abandoned substructure is in the way, or subsequently becomes in the way, of an
installation of the city or any other public body, which installation is
pursuant to a governmental function, the owner shall remove such abandoned
substructure or pay the cost of its removal during the course of excavation for
construction of the facility by the city or any other public body.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.062 PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY.
   The permittee shall at all times and at his, her or its own expense preserve
and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations
and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of
such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of
taking appropriate protecting measures, the permittee shall obtain consent from
the owner of such private property for such purpose and if he or she cannot
obtain such consent, the Superintendent of Streets may authorize him or her to
enter the private premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe.
The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings,
walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the
excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private
property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry
out the work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through
any lawn area the area shall be reseeded or the sod shall be carefully cut and
tolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as required in this
section. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner
calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition
as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The
permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist
in parking strip areas without first obtaining the consent of the appropriate
city department or city official having supervision of such property.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.063 CARE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL.
   (A)   All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench
or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to
endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets and
so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets
and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too
narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as
might be the case in a narrow alley, the Superintendent of Streets shall have
the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a
storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling.
It shall be the permittee’s responsibility to secure the necessary permission
and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal
sites.
   (B)   All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the
trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as reasonably
possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic or as specified by the
Superintendent of Streets. Whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow of
traffic or to abate the dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be
required by the Superintendent of Streets to prevent the spreading of dirt into
traffic lanes.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.064 CLEAN UP.
   As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned
of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work.
All clean up operations at the location of such excavation shall be
accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent of Streets. From time to time, as may be
ordered by the Superintendent of Streets and in any event immediately after
completion of the work, the permittee shall, at his, her or its own expense,
clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from
the work, and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified
to do so by the Superintendent of Streets, the work may be done by the
Superintendent of Public Works and the cost thereof charged to the permittee
and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.065 PROTECTION OF WATERCOURSES.
   The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the full
depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the face of
such curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting street,
an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. The
permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, mulk, silt,
slickings or other run-off pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing
or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its
failure to so provide.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
§ 97.066 BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT.
   (A)   Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the Superintendent
of Streets when the use endangers existing substructures or other property.
   (B)   Saw cutting or Portland cement concrete may be required when the
nature of the work or the condition of the street warrants. When required, the
depth of the cut shall be not less than one inch in depth; however, depths
greater than one inch may be required by the Superintendent of Streets when
circumstances warrant. Saw cutting may be required by the Superintendent of
Streets outside of the limits of the excavation over cave-outs, overbreaks and
small floating sections.
   (C)   Approved cutting of bituminous pavement surface ahead of excavations
may be required by the Superintendent of Streets to confine pavement damage to
the limits of the trench.
   (D)   Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest score line or
joint.
   (E)   Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and overbreaks and
the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
   (F)   Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned
with the center line of the trench.
   (G)   Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the
trench line.
   (H)   Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be
required by the Superintendent of Streets.
   (I)   Permittee shall not be required to repair pavement damage existing
prior to excavation unless his or her cut results in small floating sections
that may be unstable, in which case the permittee shall remove and pave the
area.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.067 DEPTH OF STRUCTURES.
   No person shall, without written permission of the Superintendent of
Streets, install any substructure, except manholes, vaults, valve casings,
culverts and catch basins at a vertical distance less than:
   (A)   Streets:   24 inches below the established flow line of the nearest
gutter. If the flow line is not established, then the depth shall be at a
minimum of 24 inches below the surface of the nearest outermost edge of the
traveled portion of the street;
   (B)   Parkway:
      (1)   The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 16 inches below
established gutter grade when the substructure parallels the parkway;
      (2)   The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 12 inches below the
top of the established sidewalk or curb when such substructure is at right
angles to the parkway;
   (C)   Other public places: the minimum depth of any substructure in any
other public place shall be 12 inches below the surface. Nothing in this
section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to maintain the specifications
as required herein upon subsequent changes of grade in the surface unless the
grade in the substructure interferes with the maintenance of, or travel on, a
public street.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.068 BACKFILLING.
   Fine material, free from lumps and stone, selected from the spoil shall be
thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the upper level of
such substructure. Above the upper level of the substructure, backfill material
shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavement in lifts consistent with the
type of soil involved and the degree of consolidation specified by the City
Council. Broken pavement, large stones, roots and other debris shall not be
used in the backfill. The number and size of each lift shall be dependent upon
the type of soil involved. Such backfill shall be done in a manner that will
permit the restoration of the surface to a density condition not less than that
existing prior to excavation unless otherwise specified. The Superintendent of
Streets may require soil tests to be furnished by a recognized soil testing
laboratory or registered professional engineer specializing in soil mechanics
when, in his or her opinion, backfill or any excavation is not being adequately
compacted. In order for the resurfacing to be permitted, such tests must show
that the backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the
City Council. All expense of such tests shall be borne by the permittee.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.069 TRENCHES IN PIPE LAYING.
   The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be in
accordance with existing ordinances or regulations.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
§ 97.070 PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK.
   After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with
diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit
and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original
condition, or as near as may be, so as not to obstruct the public place or
travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
§ 97.071 URGENT WORK.
   When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public
or the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as
emergency work, the Superintendent of Streets shall have full power to order,
at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities
be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the end that such excavation
work may be completed as soon as possible.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.072 NOISE, DUST AND DEBRIS.
   Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such manner as
to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and
occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate
measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the
excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris and between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and shall not use, except in case of emergency as herein
otherwise provided, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of
sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the
neighboring property.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
§ 97.073 PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS.
   Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any
street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or a
permanent survey bench mark within the city, shall not be removed or disturbed
or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in
writing from the City Council so to do. Permission to remove or disturb such
monuments, reference points or bench marks shall only be granted upon condition
that the person applying for such permission shall pay all expenses incident to
the proper replacement of this monument by the city.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
§ 97.074 INSPECTIONS.
   The Superintendent of Streets shall make such inspections as are reasonably
necessary in the enforcement of this subchapter. The Superintendent of Streets
shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and
regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
§ 97.075 LOCATION RECORDS.
   Every public utility after the enactment of this subchapter shall maintain
records showing the location of all of its underground facilities, except
relatively minor facilities which connect a particular premises or building to
a facility serving more than one premises or building, and except oil or gas
gathering or field lines. Every public utility shall maintain equipment which
can locate such facilities in the field.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78)
§ 97.076 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the making of such
excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for
the location of trouble in conduit or pipe or for making repairs, provided that
the person making such excavation shall apply to the Superintendent of Streets
for such a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced.
(Ord. 78-30, passed 8-31-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
USE OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
§ 97.090 USING STREETS FOR SHOWING OR DISPLAYING MERCHANDISE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to use any part or portion of any of the streets or
alleys within the city for showing, displaying, storing, parking or placing of
any materials or merchandise held for sale or trade.
(Ord. passed 7-7-47)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.091 HAULING MERCHANDISE ON STREETS REGULATED.
   No person shall haul, transport or convey any grain, coal, cobs or any other
materials or merchandise of any kind or character in, upon or over any of the
streets within the city in any wagon, truck or trailer, unless such materials
or merchandise are so enclosed, covered, tied or guarded in such a manner as
will prevent such materials or merchandise or any part thereof from dropping or
falling to or on the streets and from being blown or brushed from the wagon,
truck or trailer to or on the streets.
(Ord. passed 7-7-47)
Penalty, see § 97.999
§ 97.092 SOLICITATION OF DONATIONS ON PUBLIC STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. Any patriotic, philanthropic, social service,
welfare, athletic, political, benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal
organization that was organized and exists as a not-for-profit entity.
      PUBLIC WAYS. All streets, highways, and/or roadways within the city,
which shall include the entire right-of-way.
      SOLICITATION. The method by which any person, business entity, firm, or
corporation requests contributions or donations within the city.
   (B)   Street solicitation permission required. Any charitable organization
that desires to conduct street solicitation within the city shall ask the City
Council for permission subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   The charitable organization shall ask permission at least 30 days,
but not more than 180 days, in advance of the date that the organization wishes
to conduct a street solicitation.
      (2)   Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of
age or more and shall wear a high visibility vest.
      (3)   The charitable organization shall specify a maximum of two
intersections where street solicitations are sought to be conducted.
      (4)   No charitable organization may receive permission for no more than
two street solicitations in any given calendar year.
      (5)   Solicitations shall only be allowed at intersections where traffic
is required to come to a complete stop.
      (6)   Solicitations shall not interrupt the flow of traffic, nor endanger
any of the persons soliciting funds, pedestrians, and the drivers and
passengers of the vehicles.
   (C)   Fraud. It shall be unlawful for any charitable organization to cheat,
deceive, or fraudulently misrepresent whether through himself or herself, or
through an employee or agent, while soliciting funds, or to solicit funds other
than those specified to the City Council.
   (D)   Revocation. Any permission issued under this section may be revoked by
the Mayor because of any violation of this section.
(Ord. 15-02, passed 1-12-15)
§ 97.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
97.001 et seq. or §§
97.035 et seq. or §§
97.037 et seq. shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each
offense.
(Ord. passed 7-7-47; Ord. 78-38, passed 9-11-78; Ord. 85-1, passed 1-14-85; Am.
Ord. 03-35, passed 9-8-03)
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
97.021 shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense, and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day during
which a violation continues or exists.
(Ord. 93-52, passed 12-13-93)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating of the provisions of §§
97.050 et seq. shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each
offense; a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   Any person, business entity, or association of persons violating the
provisions of §
97.092 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each violation,
and each day such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 15-02, passed 1-12-15)
CHAPTER 98: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
98.01   Declaration of policy
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Prohibited acts
 
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   In furthering the policy of the State of Illinois as expressed in its
Constitution and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare,
peace and health of all the inhabitants of the city may be ensured, it is
hereby declared the policy of the city to assure equal opportunity to all
residents, regardless or race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or physical disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful,
standard living quarters.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city that no owner, lessee, sub-lessee,
assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm or corporation having the right
to sell, rent, lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation and/or
real property within the city, or any agent of these shall refuse to sell,
rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of
persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such
person or persons or discriminate against any person or persons because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability in
the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities and/or
services in connection therewith.
   (C)   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that shall promote maximum
choice within the community's total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities.
(Ord. 02-01, passed 2-11-02)
§ 98.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS. Housing which is in
sound, clean, and weather-tight condition in conformance with applicable local,
state, and national codes.
   DISCRIMINATE. The terms DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION mean any difference
expressed in any way toward a person or persons in the terms of the sale,
exchange, lease, rental or financing for housing accommodation and/or real
property in regard to sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the
person.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person, institution or business entity of any
kind that loans money to persons and receives as security for loans a secured
interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Includes any building, structure, or portion thereof
which is used or occupied, maintained, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, or
any real estate so used, designed or intended for such use.
   OWNER. Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or own any
beneficial interest in any real property or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or
agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 02-01, passed 2-11-02)
§ 98.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sub-lessee,
real estate broker or salesman, financial institutional or employee of the
financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to
discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with regard to
the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing
accommodation and/or real property.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real
estate broker or employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial
institution dealing with housing or real property in the city:
      (1)   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the
price, terms, condition, or privileges of any kind relating to the sale,
rental, lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in
the city or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection
therewith.
      (2)   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated,
any notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any
form of application, for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real
property, or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective
purchase, rental or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or
indirectly any discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed or disability of any person.
      (3)   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing
loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for
the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance
of any housing accommodation and/or real property.
      (4)   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease, of
any housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, or disability.
      (5)   To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or
statements designed to induce any owner or any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood.
      (6)   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or
the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/
or real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale
or listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
      (7)   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or
otherwise deal with such owner's housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability.
      (8)   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the proposed buyer or
tenant.
(Ord. 02-01, passed 2-11-02)
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,500. Each
day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. This section
shall in no way abrogate or impair the right of the city to specifically
enforce, by any legal means, any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 02-01, passed 2-11-02)
CHAPTER 99: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
General Provisions
   
99.01   Purpose and scope
   
99.02   Definitions
   
99.03   Annual registration required
   
99.04   Permits required; applications and fees
   
99.05   Action on permit applications
   
99.06   Effect of permit
   
99.07   Revised permit drawings
   
99.08   Insurance
   
99.09   Indemnification
   
99.10   Security
   
99.11   Permit suspension and revocation
   
99.12   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status
   
99.13   General construction standards
   
99.14   Traffic control
   
99.15   Location of facilities
   
99.16   Construction methods and materials
   
99.17   Vegetation control
   
99.18   Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities
   
99.19   Clean-up and restoration
   
99.20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
99.21   Variances
   
99.22   Enforcement
Wireless Facilities Deployment
   
99.30   Purpose and scope
   
99.31   Definitions
   
99.32   Regulation of small wireless facilities
   
99.33   Dispute resolution
   
99.34   Indemnification
   
99.35   Insurance
   
99.36   Severability
 
   
99.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 99.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the city’s
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city
rights-of-way and the city as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this chapter, the city intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the city and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
city's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the city's residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities subject to this chapter. This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The city, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
chapter.
   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict. Without limiting the foregoing, §§ 97.105 through
97.126 are hereby repealed.
   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The city shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the city so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city
to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08)
§ 99.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term not
defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CITY. The City of Paxton, Illinois.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE. The Municipal Code of the City of Paxton, Illinois.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   DIRECTIONAL BORING/HORIZONTAL DIRECTIONAL BORING. A trenchless method of
installing underground utilities such as pipe, conduit, or cables in a
relatively shallow arc or radius along a prescribed underground path using a
surface-launched drilling rig.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The City of Paxton Director of Public Works or his
or her designee, or if no Director of Public Works has been appointed by the
city, then, in that event, the City of Paxton Superintendent of Streets or his
or her designee.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The City Engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but
not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this chapter.
For purposes of this chapter, FACILITY shall not include any facility owned or
operated by the city.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
City Engineer or the Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION.  The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT.  The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
99.04 and
99.05.
   PRACTICABLE.  That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the city. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any
real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right-of-way.
   ROADWAY. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to § 99.10.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter
amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the Rules of
the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. § 76.1500 and following), as
now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.  Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in the Illinois Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v).
   WATER LINES.  Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. 23-19, passed 7-11-23)
§ 99.03 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the city shall register on
January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-
way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in §
99.08, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.04 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. 
      (1)   No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any city right-of-way
which:
         (a)   Changes the location of the facility,
         (b)   Adds a new facility,
         (c)   Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter), or
         (d)   Materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the
facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way,
without first filing an application with the Director of Public Works and
obtaining a permit from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
      (2)   No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way.
      (3)   No person shall conduct directional boring or horizontal
directional boring on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any
city right-of-way unless approved, in writing, by the Mayor or his or her
designee, or unless otherwise required by law or easement. Any party desiring
to conduct directional boring or horizontal directional boring on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within any city rights-of-way shall be required
to obtain a permit from the city.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as proprietary or
confidential by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
99.08;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in §
99.10;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see §
99.21); and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
city.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District (other local or state entities with jurisdiction), have been
satisfied;
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed;
      (6)   In the case of directional boring or horizontal directional boring,
the permit application must include a declaration from the permittee that the
permittee has authorized the city to incur any and all necessary expenses to
obtain third-party review of the permit application as the city, in its sole
and exclusive discretion, deems necessary, and that the permittee agrees to
reimburse the city for its actual cost of such review.
   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the city within 30 days after the change
necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. 
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of $750. No application fee is required to
be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act.
      (2)   The permit fee for any permit to conduct directional boring or
horizontal directional boring shall be $100 plus the cost of any third-party
review that the city, in its sole and exclusive discretion, may deem necessary.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. 23-19, passed 7-11-23) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.05 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   City review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Director of
Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the Director of Public Works shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Director of Public Works is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter
and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Director of
Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that the construction proposed
under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Additional city review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 65, § 4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it
intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the
provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the city not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work
requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of
work requiring excavation. The Director of Public Works shall specify the
portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and
constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide
such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either
ten days after service of notice to the city by the telecommunications retailer
in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or 25 days
after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may
commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
99.04 the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city an application
for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to
the requirements of division (A) of this section.
   (C)   Additional city review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided the
holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-05)
§ 99.06 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on city rights-of-way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the city with
such city representatives in attendance as the city deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08)
§ 99.07 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within 90 days after the
completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with §
99.21. If the city denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall
either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that
it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.08 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits. 
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in
the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the City of Paxton,
and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as
additional insureds on the policies listed in subdivisions (a) and (b) below:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
            1.   $5,000,000 for bodily injury or death to each person;
            2.   $5,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
            3.   $5,000,000 for all other types of liability;
         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
         (c)   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies.  The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies required.  The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the city within ten days following receipt
of a written request therefor from the city.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. 
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the City of Paxton, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice addressed to the City of Paxton Mayor of such
intent to cancel or not to renew."
      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no
event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A) of this section, or the requirements of divisions
(B), (C) and (D) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to
self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
division (A) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a private
self insurer under the Workers Compensation Act.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
(All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.)
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.09 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08)
§ 99.10 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this chapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the city must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the city in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this division
shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
city and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the city of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the
State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Director of
Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this division for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The city, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this division, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the
permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the 14-day notice
period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the city
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
city that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee
shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division (C) of this
section.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the city,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the city with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.11 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   City right to revoke permit. The city may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      (3)   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The city shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension. 
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the city, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the city within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal
to the city within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
      (2)   The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this division.
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A) of this
section.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of division (C) of this section, the city or its
designee may, at the option of the city:
      (1)   Correct the deficiencies;
      (2)   Upon not less than 20 days notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or
      (3)   After not less than 30 days notice to the permittee of failure to
cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the city. The
permittee shall be liable in all events to the city for all costs of removal.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08)
§ 99.12 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the city no less than
30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way
or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the
facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former
owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in
the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right-of-
way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.13 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform. Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      (7)   Flagger's Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles.  If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required
by this chapter, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise
of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall
be final. If requested, the Director of Public Works shall state which standard
or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08)
§ 99.14 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The city's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this code.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
99.20, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the city.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.15 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this division.
      (1)   No interference with city facilities. No utility facilities shall
be placed in any location if the Director of Public Works determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
city's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the city's utility facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility.  No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage
facilities.
      (3)   Ninety degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines (83 Ill.
Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The city may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. § 192.707
(1989)).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The city may
require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The city may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.16 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Director
of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations
and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by
barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Director of Public Works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility,
place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
Director of Public Works.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subdivision
permitted under §
99.21, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Director of Public Works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
city.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair and
            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility                        Minimum Cover
Electric lines                          30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service   18 to 24 inches (0.6 m. as determined
lines                                   by city)
Gas or petroleum products               30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                              Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                        protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                    protection
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within city rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled Rules for Construction
of Electric Power and Communications Lines, and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities. 
            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of moles, whip augers,
or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or
               b.   The installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of moles, whip augers, or other approved methods which
compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city-approved
manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline
Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 - Transportation of
Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR §
192), IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, and all
other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
      (6) Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the approval of
the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Director of Public
Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be
obtained from the city.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the city
shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction
are from 7:00 o’clock a.m. to 8:00 p.m. of each day, except no construction on
any Sunday.
      (4)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no directional
boring or horizontal directional boring, shall be permitted at any time on
Saturday or Sunday, nor on any legal holiday, unless approved by the Mayor or
his or her designee, in their sole and exclusive discretion.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the city shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and
location of existing above ground and underground facilities within the rights-
of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by
J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground
facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with
the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act
50, §§ 1 et seq.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08; Am. Ord. 23-19, passed 7-11-23) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.17 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities – compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the city as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utilities – tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The city may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use.
      (1)   Except as provided in the division (D)(2) below, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the only practicable
method of vegetation control.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.18 REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the
rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior
to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within 90 days.
Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to remove all
or any portion of the facility if the Director of Public Works determines that
such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that abandoned
the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the city, the
abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of
all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08)Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.19 CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the Director of Public Works. Such cleanup
and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the
Director of Public Works for good cause shown.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08)Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.20 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the city a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08)
§ 99.21 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Director of
Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Director of Public Works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Director of Public Works may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Director
of Public Works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to
appeal to the City Council, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the City
Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or
determination. The City Council shall commence its consideration of the appeal
at the Council's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days
after the filing of the appeal. The City Council shall timely decide the
appeal.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08)
§ 99.22 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08)
WIRELESS FACILITIES DEPLOYMENT
§ 99.30 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the city’s jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the city exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act.
   (B)   Conflicts with other ordinances. This subchapter supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
subchapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
subchapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state
laws or regulations.
(Ord. 2018-O-20, passed 7-19-18)
§ 99.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the city for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(33), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VID.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance
adopted by the city pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no  longer than 11 inches.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the city in
public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the city to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or  complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include city-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and
      (2)   All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole
associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included
in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including:
         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
         (b)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration.
      (2)   WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities.
      (3)   WIRELESS FACILITY does not include:
         (a)   The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or
         (b)   Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that
is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber
optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the city.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 2018-O-20, passed 7-19-18)
§ 99.32 REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
division (C)(9) below regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject
to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any
zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively
for commercial or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the city to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      (1)   Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the city, together with the city’s small cell
facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act
of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application
as it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s
knowledge.
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the city, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      (2)   Application process. The city shall process applications as
follows:
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the city fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the city in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75
days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
ninetieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day
after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the city. The receipt of the
deemed approved notice shall not preclude the city’s denial of the permit
request within the time limits as provided under this subchapter.
         (c)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the city fails to approve or
deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the city in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
105 days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one
hundred twentieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth
day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the city. The receipt of
the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the city’s denial of the permit
request within the time limits as provided under this subchapter.
         (d)   1.   The city shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this subchapter.
            2.   If the city determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
            3.   The city shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
city denies an application.
            4.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city
and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial
is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The city
shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the
application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the city’s review period.
            5.   The applicant must notify the city in writing of its intention
to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
            6.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         (e)   Pole attachment agreement.
            1.   Within 30 days after an approved permit to collocate a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the city and the applicant shall
enter into a master pole attachment agreement, provided by the city for the
initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by the application.
            2.   For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the city and the applicant shall
enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
      (3)   Completeness of application.
         (a)   Within 30 days after receiving an application, the city shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an
application is incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing
information.
         (b)   An application shall be deemed complete if the city fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents,
information and fees specifically enumerated in the city’s permit application
form are submitted by the applicant to the city.
         (c)   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the city sends the
notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
      (4)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the city;
or
         (b)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      (5)   Consolidated applications.
         (a)   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the city shall be allowed, at the applicant’s
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure.
         (b)   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities,
the city may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application
and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The city may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      (6)   Duration of permits.
         (a)   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than
five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the
city makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified
utility pole do not comply with the applicable city codes or any provision,
condition or requirement contained in this subchapter.
         (b)   If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein,
renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable city code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
      (7)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the city by personal
delivery at the city’s designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked
on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
   (C)   Collocation requirements and conditions.
      (1)   Public safety space reservation. The city may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the city’s electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the city reasonably determines
that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      (2)   Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
subchapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      (3)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies.
         (a)   The wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless
facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications.
         (b)   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency’s communications equipment.
         (c)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
         (d)   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
         (e)   The city may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with
the Code of Federal Regulations cited in division (C)(3)(d) above. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      (4)   (a)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless
facilities on city utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or
the electric supply zone of the pole. However, the antenna and support
equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications
space on the city utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise
unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work
involving the top of the pole.
         (b)   For purposes of this division (C)(4), the terms “communications
space”, “communication worker safety zone”, and “electric supply zone” have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      (5)   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and
local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
      (6)   The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards
that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable
stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a city
ordinance, written policy adopted by the city, a comprehensive plan or other
written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      (7)   Alternate placements.
         (a)   Except as provided in this division (C), a wireless provider
shall not be required to collocation small wireless facilities on any specific
utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate
multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an
application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a
new utility pole, the city may propose that the small wireless facility be
collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure
within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept
if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
         (b)   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the city, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this division (C)(7).
      (8)   Height limitations.
         (a)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the
small wireless facility is collocated.
         (b)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures
on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
            1.   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the city, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
city, provided the city may designate which intersecting right-of-way within
300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall
control the height limitation for such facility; or
            2.   Forty-five feet above ground level.
      (9)   Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a special use permit or variance all as may apply in
conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in the city zoning
ordinance.
      (10)   Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall
comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the city and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      (11)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      (12)   Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply
with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of
existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests
to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do
not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.
      (13)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the city and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is
caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the city grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:
      (1)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application
to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed
in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless
facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
      (2)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this subchapter shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      (4)   The city shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the city at least ten days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with division (B)(1) above; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the city to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (E)   Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this subchapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      (1)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled
by the city or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      (2)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      (3)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 18c-7201), Metra Commuter Rail or
any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in §
16-102 of the Public Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-102), without the
consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility.
The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to an electric or gas public
utility or such utility’s wireless facilities if the facilities are being used,
developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of §
16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-108.5(i)). For
the purposes of this division (E)(3), “public utility” has the meaning given to
that term in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-
105). Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to relieve any person from
any requirement (a) to obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to
offer cable service or video service or (b) to obtain any required permission
to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than
small wireless facilities subject to this subchapter.
   (F)   Pre-existing agreements.
      (1)   Existing agreements between the city and wireless providers that
relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on city utility poles,
that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless
facilities collocated on the city’s utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the city before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination
provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall
comply with this subchapter.
      (2)   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the city on
the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the
city makes available under this subchapter for the collocation of small
wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application
submitted two or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying
the city that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing
agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for
the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the
city’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the city before the
wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this
division (F)(2).
   (G)   Annual recurring rate.
      (1)   A wireless provider shall pay to the city an annual recurring rate
to collocate a small wireless facility on a city utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per year or (ii) the actual, direct and
reasonable costs related to the wireless provider’s use of space on the city
utility pole.
      (2)   If the city has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct
costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first annual
anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and
on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (H)   Abandonment.
      (1)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of
written notice from the city notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
      (2)   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the city to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days
of such notice, the city may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
      (3)   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the city if it
sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
city. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
(Ord. 2018-O-20, passed 7-19-18)
§ 99.33 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Champaign County, Illinois shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for
collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the
right-of-way, the city shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its
poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole,
with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 2018-O-20, passed 7-19-18)
§ 99.34 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the city harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the city
improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted under this subchapter and the Act. A wireless provider has
no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses
as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the city or its employees
or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may
have against the city with respect to consequential, incidental, or special
damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. 2018-O-20, passed 7-19-18)
§ 99.35 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      (1)   Property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all
risks;
      (2)   Workers’ compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      (3)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the city improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of city
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
   (B)   The wireless provider shall include the city as an additional insured
on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the city in a commercial general liability policy
prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
   (C)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirement required by the city. A wireless provider that
self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply
with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage limits required by the city.
(Ord. 2018-O-20, passed 7-19-18)
§ 99.36 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this subchapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this subchapter that can
be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this subchapter is severable.
(Ord. 2018-O-20, passed 7-19-18)
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in an amount of
not less than $50 nor more than $750 per day that such violations exists. There
may be times when the city will incur delay or other costs, including third
party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under
its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation
of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility
shall bear the city’s costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the
subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review
or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be
imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Ord. 08-05, passed 3-10-08)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      
111.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
      
112.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
113.   TAXICABS
      
114.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
      
115.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
116.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS
      
117.   RAFFLE REGULATIONS
      
118.   CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
      
119.   CRANES AND HOISTING EQUIPMENT
      
120.   CONSTRUCTION AND INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, TRUCKS AND TRAILERS
      
121.   REGULATION OF BOUNCE HOUSES ON CITY PROPERTY
      
122.   TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
      
123.   SIDEWALK CAFÉ LICENSE
      
124.   VIDEO GAMING
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
   
110.01   Coin-operated amusement devices
   
110.02   Automatic dry cleaning machines
§ 110.01 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   (A)   Definition. The term COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE means any
mechanical instrument or device, played for amusement, including pinball,
bowling, shuffleboard, billiard and pool tables, instruments or devices, which
are played or controlled by the depositing of a coin or token, but the term
does not include coin-operated musical devices nor video gaming terminals as
authorized by the State of Illinois in accordance with the Video Gaming Act,
ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.
   (B)   License required. No person, firm or corporation shall keep or permit
to be kept for gain or profit from operation within the city any coin-operated
amusement device without first having obtained a license as herein provided.
   (C)   Application. Application for the license shall be made to the City
Clerk, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, a description of
the coin-operated amusement device to be licensed and a description of the
premises where such device will be located.
   (D)   Issuance. No such license shall be issued to any person, firm or
corporation, unless such person, firm or corporation is the owner or proprietor
of the premises in which such coin-operated amusement device is to be
installed.
   (E)   License fee. The annual fee for such license shall be $50 for each
such device or instrument for the first five, and $25 for each such device or
instrument in excess of five kept or installed in such licensed premises. The
fee paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have
expired in the year prior to the issuance of the license. Any licensee under
this section holding valid, unexpired licenses, upon voluntary disposition of
the business to which such licenses were issued, shall be entitled to a refund
of an amount equal to 75% of the unexpired pro rata portion of the year for
which the licenses were issued. The Mayor or his or her designee may, upon a
showing of good cause and without any action by the City Council needed, waive
or reduce any fee imposed pursuant to this section. If such a waiver or
reduction is granted, the City Council may, upon application by a person with
standing and a majority vote of those members then holding office, override any
such waiver or reduction of fees, either in whole or in part.
   (F)   Transfer of license. No license issued to any person, firm or
corporation shall be transferable.
   (G)   Regulations. No licensee hereunder shall permit the operation of any
coin-operated amusement device at any place or in any manner which will disturb
the peace and quiet of persons outside the licensed premises. No licensee
hereunder shall permit any person under the age of 15 years to play or operate
any such coin-operated amusement device.
(Ord. passed 3-12-56; Am. Ord. passed 4-13-59; Am. Ord. 82-30, passed 11-8-82;
Am. Ord. 99-19, passed 7-12-99; Am. Ord. 12-35, passed 7-16-12; Am. Ord. 2024-
11-05, passed 9-10-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.02 AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINES.
   (A)   Compliance required. It shall be unlawful to install, operate or
maintain any automatic dry cleaning machine as hereinafter defined except in
compliance with the provisions of this section, or without complying with all
of the provisions pertaining to the installation and operation of such machine
herein contained or in violation of any laws, rules or regulations of the
Illinois Department of Public Health relating thereto.
   (B)   Definition. An AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINE, as the term is used
herein, shall be construed to include and mean any device or apparatus for the
cleaning of clothes or fabrics and designed to be used or operated by any but
the owner or an employee of the owner thereof, which machine or device makes
use of or contains perchlorethylene or any other chemical solvent or substance
which may cause harm to human beings by reason of inhalation or contact.
   (C)   Permit. It shall be unlawful to install any automatic dry cleaning
machine without first having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such
permit shall contain full information as to mechanical equipment of the machine
and provisions for ventilation for both the machine and the room in which the
machine will be located.
   (D)   Installation regulations.
      (1)   Each machine shall be completely enclosed by a cabinet and shall be
vented with intake at the top and the outlet at or near the bottom of such
machine. Groups of machines may be entirely enclosed or supported on all open
sides by an enclosure topped with a hood vented as provided for each individual
machine.
      (2)   The exhaust system must maintain a minimum flow of 100 cubic feet
per minute face velocity through the loading door whenever the door is open.
      (3)   The discharge stack for the machines and for the room in which the
machines are located shall extend at least two feet above the level of any
window which can be opened located within 50 feet of the outlet of the stack
and shall be at least 50 feet away from any fresh air intake leading to any
premises.
      (4)   The machines must be so constructed as to prevent the loading door
from being opened during the normal cycle of operation. Each machine shall be
equipped with a transparent door or port to allow visual examination of the
status of the cleaning cycle.
      (5)   Any connection of the machine with the water supply system must be
equipped with an air gap or vacuum breaker in the line upstream from the
condenser with no control valves downstream from such gap or breaker.
Wastewater shall be discharged through an air gap.
      (6)   The room in which such machine is installed shall be ventilated so
that there shall be a minimum flow of air per machine from the area to which
the public is admitted of at least 500 cubic feet per minute in a room where
there are no more than 3 machines installed; 400 cubic feet per minute where
there are no more than 8 machines installed; 375 cubic feet per minute where
there are no more than 16 machines installed; and 360 cubic feet per minute
where there are more than 17 machines installed. For this purpose, each
cleaning cell shall be considered as 1 machine.
      (7)   Each machine must be so designed and constructed as to prevent the
leakage of the liquids, gases or vapors.
   (E)   Operation regulations.
      (1)   No such automatic dry cleaning machine shall be operated unless all
the equipment described in division (D) is properly installed and in good
operating working condition.
      (2)   No establishment shall be open for business, and it shall be
unlawful to admit the public or customers into the room where such machines are
located unless there is on duty in the establishment at all times a competent
person in charge of the establishment and in charge of the operation of the
machines. There shall be warning signs posted in places of easy observation
warning of the dangers in the event of leakage of liquid, gas or vapor occurs.
It shall be unlawful to permit any residue containing solvent to flow into the
sewer system of the city; tightly covered metal containers may be used for
temporary storage of such waste outside the building. The containers shall bear
labels indicating the contents and dangers involved in handling and shall be
locked if in an unenclosed place.
      (3)   At least one legible sign shall be maintained in a place available
to customers giving the name, address and phone number of the owner of the
establishment and of the service department or agency responsible for the
proper maintenance of the machines.
   (F)   Inspections. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to cause such
inspections to be made as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 61-11, passed 9-11-61)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 111: TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed
   
111.03   Collection of tax by retailers
   
111.04   Returns to department
   
111.05   Resellers
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
   DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Revenue.
   GROSS CHARGE. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS
CHARGES for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
point within this municipality, charges for the channel mileage between each
channel point within this municipality, and charges for that portion of the
interstate inter-office channel provided within Illinois. However, GROSS CHARGE
shall not include:
      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
         (a)   The tax imposed by this chapter;
         (b)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, ILCS
Ch. 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.;
         (c)   The tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (d)   911 surcharges; or
         (e)   Charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of
ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §§ 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended,
or any similar charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are not
subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose
of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those
provisions of the Public Utilities Act;
      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of
the municipality;
      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein charges are disaggregated
and separately identified from other charges;
      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under the
Public Utilities Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222.1 to the extent of such
exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce
and Community Affairs;
      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
      (7)   Bad debts (“bad debt” means any portion of a debt that is related
to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices; or
      (9)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 630, §§
1 et seq.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside this state.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the Federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political
subdivision of this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER. Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment
of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the
Department at its discretion.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE, or any like term.
Any retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a
subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales
office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer
or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or
other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether
such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the Federal and state
governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, SERVICE ADDRESS means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 638,
§§ 1 et seq. For air-to-ground systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean
the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where
bills are sent.
   TAXPAYER. A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees,
or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by the chapter.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, PRIVATE LINE means a
dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-
company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered TELECOMMUNICATIONS
subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this section,
“prepaid telephone calling arrangements” means that term as defined in the
Retailers' Occupations Tax Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, § 2-27.
(Ord. 02-35, passed 9-9-02)
§ 111.02 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
   (A)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6%
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail.
   (B)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6%
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that
is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the
taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the
extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state
which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local
tax in this state.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality.
(Ord. 02-35, passed 9-9-02; Am. Ord. 07-15, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 10-18,
passed 6-14-10)
§ 111.03 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A)   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall
be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect
the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in
the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
Department in the manner provided by the Department.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
(Ord. 02-35, passed 9-9-02)
§ 111.04 RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT.
   On or before the last day of February 2003, and on or before the last day of
every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication
retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required
by the Department pursuant to the Illinois Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq. and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to implement the
Act.
(Ord. 02-35, passed 9-9-02)
§ 111.05 RESELLERS.
   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the Department may reasonably require.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   (C)   Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege
of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made
tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such
person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.
(Ord. 02-35, passed 9-9-02)
CHAPTER 112: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Classification
   
112.03   Applicability to existing businesses
Licensing
   
112.15   License required
   
112.16   Issuance of license
   
112.17   Fees
   
112.18   Inspection
   
112.19   Expiration of license
   
112.20   Suspension
   
112.21   Revocation
   
112.22   Hearing; judicial review
   
112.23   Transfer of license
Regulations
   
112.35   Additional regulations for adult motels
   
112.36   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or
videos
   
112.37   Loitering and exterior lighting and monitoring requirements
   
112.38   Regulations pertaining to sexually oriented businesses featuring
nudity or live performances
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-
producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per
machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment:
      (1)   Which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or
rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter which
depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
or
         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities, excluding condoms and other
birth control and disease prevention products;
      (2)   Which regularly excludes all minors from the premises or a section
thereof because of the sexually explicit nature of the items sold, rented or
displayed therein.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, restaurant or similar commercial establishment
or any other commercial establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   EMPLOYEE. An individual working or performing services for any sexually
oriented business, including any independent contractor who provides services
on behalf of any sexually oriented business to the patrons of such business.
   ENTERTAINER. Any person who provides adult entertainment within a sexually
oriented business, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for
entertainment.
   ESTABLISHED or ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Paxton or a designee.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an
applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license.
   NONPOROUS. Excludes any wood, plywood, composition board or other porous
material.
   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY.
      (1)   The appearance of the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male genitals,
female genitals or areola of the female breast; or
      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover the cleft of the
buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals or areola of the female breast.
   OPERATE or CAUSES TO BE OPERATED. To cause function or to put or keep in
operation.
   OPERATOR. Any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is
authorized to exercise overall operational control of the business or who
causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business. A person may
be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business
whether or not that person is an owner, part owner or licensee of the business.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret,
adult motel or any combination of such businesses.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal;
      (2)   The appearance of the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male or female
genitals or areola of the female breast; or
      (3)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover the cleft of the
buttocks, anus, male or female genitals or areola of the female breast.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities
set forth in subsections (1) through (3) above.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any of the
following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
   VIEWING ROOM. The room, booth or area where a patron of a sexually oriented
business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, video cassette
or other video reproduction.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
§ 112.02 CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually oriented businesses shall be classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcades;
   (B)   Adult bookstores;
   (C)   Adult cabarets;
   (D)   Adult motels; and
   (E)   Any combination of classifications set forth in subsections (A)
through (D) above.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
§ 112.03 APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING BUSINESSES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the activities of all persons
and sexually oriented businesses described herein, whether such businesses or
activities were established or commenced before, on or after the effective date
of this section.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
LICENSING
§ 112.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented
business without a valid license issued by the city for the particular type of
business or to employ a person who is not licensed as a sexually oriented
business employee as provided by division (B) of this section or who is not
authorized to work or perform services pursuant to division (C) of this
section.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to be an employee of a sexually oriented business
without a valid license. The provisions of this division shall not apply to an
employee of an adult bookstore, unless such bookstore is operated in
combination with one or more businesses classified in §
112.02(A), (C) and (D) or to such adult bookstore’s operator if the operator is
not required to comply with §
112.36. It is unlawful for an entertainer to perform in a sexually oriented
business unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license
from the city to do so.
   (C)   An applicant, upon receipt by the City Clerk of his or her application
for a sexually oriented business employee license, may work or perform services
without an employee license until such time as the license is granted or the
decision to deny the license becomes final pursuant to §
112.22. Upon receipt of the applicant’s completed application for an employee
license, the City Clerk shall issue the applicant a temporary work permit. The
applicant shall keep the temporary work permit on his or her person or on the
premises where the applicant is then working or performing services and produce
such permit for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other
authorized city official.
   (D)   An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually
oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the
City Clerk an application made on a form prescribed and provided by the City
Clerk. The applicant shall be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application shall be signed under oath by the applicant and
notarized. The application shall include but not be limited to the information
called for in the following subsections:
      (1)   The full true name and any other names used in the preceding five
years;
      (2)   Current residential mailing address and telephone number;
      (3)   If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the
name, business location, business mailing address and phone number of the
proposed sexually oriented business;
      (4)   Written proof of age, in the form of a birth certificate, current
driver’s license with picture or other picture identification document issued
by a governmental agency;
      (5)   A photograph of the applicant and two sets of the applicant’s
complete fingerprints. The photograph and fingerprints shall be taken within
the preceding one month. The fingerprints, if not taken by the Police
Department shall be taken within the preceding one month by a law enforcement
agency and accompanied by a notarized verification by that agency;
      (6)   The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or
permit relating to a sexually oriented business, whether any such license or
permit has been denied, revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason or reasons
therefore;
      (7)   All criminal charges, complaints, information or indictments in the
preceding five years which resulted in a conviction or a plea of guilty or no
contest for any offense described in §
112.16(A)(7) and committed in this state or any offense committed outside this
state which if committed in this state would constitute an offense described in
§
112.16(A)(7);
      (8)   If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the
name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive
service of process.
      (9)   The information provided pursuant to subsections (1) through (8)
shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the City Clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which
would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete.
   (E)   The application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who are
required to comply with §
112.36 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of §
112.36.
   (F)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, that individual shall sign the application for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, each officer, director, general partner or other
person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management of the
business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant
must be qualified under §
112.16 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
   (G)   The information provided by an applicant in connection with the
application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the City
Clerk on a confidential basis, except that such information may be disclosed to
other governmental agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public
safety function.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.16 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an
applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented
business employee license within 30 days after receipt of an application. The
City Clerk shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the
following is found to be true:
      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is delinquent in the payment
to the city of taxes, fees, charges, fines or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon the applicant or the applicant’s spouse;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
      (4)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of a
violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating a
sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately
preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect;
      (5)   The license application fee required by this chapter has not been
paid;
      (6)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance of the
city;
      (7)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse:
         (a)   Has been convicted of any offense if committed in this state or
any offense committed outside this state which if committed in this state would
constitute an offense as described in Article XI of the Illinois Criminal Code
of 1961 (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-6 et seq.);
         (b)   For which:
            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24- month
period;
      (8)   The applicant’s premises is located within 1,000 feet of any
school, church or licensed child care center. Measurements shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest point on the property line of the applicant's enterprise to the nearest
point on the property line of such school, church or licensed day care center;
      (9)   The applicant’s premises is located within 1,000 feet of any other
sexually oriented business for which there is a license issued. Measurements
shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant’s
enterprise to the nearest point on the property line of such other sexually
oriented business;
      (10)   The applicant’s premises has been issued a license to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor under the terms of an ordinance entitled “An Ordinance
to Regulate the Sale of Alcoholic Liquor,” passed and adopted by the City
Council, March 5, 1934, as amended.
   (B)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant or applicant’s spouse.
   (C)   An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted
of an offense stated in subsection (A)(7)(a) of this section may qualify for a
sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by
subsection (A)(7)(b) of this section has elapsed.
   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to
that applicant, the expiration date and, if the license is for a sexually
oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. A sexually
oriented business employee license shall contain a photograph of the licensee.
The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be
easily read at any time. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the
employee’s license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee
is then working or performing and shall produce such license for inspection
upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
§ 112.17 FEES.
   The annual nonrefundable application fee for a sexually oriented business
license is $1,200. The annual application fee for a sexually oriented business
employee license is $120.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
§ 112.18 INSPECTION.
   (A)   An applicant, operator or licensee shall permit law enforcement
officers and any other federal, state, county or city agency in the performance
of any function connected with the enforcement of this chapter, normally and
regularly conducted by such agency, to inspect the premises of a sexually
oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter at
any time it is occupied or open for business.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee, operator or employee of a
sexually oriented business to refuse to permit a law enforcement officer or any
agency enumerated in division (A) of this section to inspect the premises at
any time the premises is occupied or open for business.
   (C)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel
which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or
temporary habitation.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.19 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Each license shall expire on September 30 and may be renewed only by making
application as provided in §
112.15. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date and, when made less than 30 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license will not be affected.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
§ 112.20 SUSPENSION.
   The City Clerk shall suspend a sexually oriented business license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if the City Clerk determines that the licensee or
an employee of the licensee has:
   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with the applicable provisions of the
zoning ordinance of the city;
   (B)   Has been on the sexually oriented business premises while in an
intoxicated or disorderly condition;
   (C)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises;
   (D)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
§ 112.21 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall revoke a sexually oriented business license if a
cause of suspension in §
112.20 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall revoke a sexually oriented business license if
the City Clerk determines that:
      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the application;
      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;
      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense stated in §
112.16(A)(7)(a) for which the time period required in §
112.16(A)(7)(b) has not elapsed;
      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or
persons while in or on the licensed premises committed an offense stated in §
112.16(A)(7)(a), for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or
persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the
offenses were committed;
      (7)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, oral sexual contact or sexual contact, including masturbation, to
occur in or on the licensed premises; or
      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
charges, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or
the applicant’s spouse.
   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the revocation of the license.
   (D)   Division (B)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a
ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly
allowed the act of sexual intercourse, oral sexual contact or sexual contact to
occur in a public place or within public view.
   (E)   When the City Clerk revokes a license, the revocation shall continue
for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business
license for one year from the date revocation becomes effective. If, subsequent
to revocation, the City Clerk finds that the basis for the revocation has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days
have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was
revoked under subsection (B)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be
granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under §
112.16(A)(7)(b) has elapsed.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
§ 112.22 HEARING; JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (A)   If the City Clerk determines that grounds exist for denial, suspension
or revocation of a license under this chapter, the City Clerk shall notify the
applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or
revoke, including a summary of the grounds therefor. The notification shall be
by certified mail to the address on file with the City Clerk. Within ten
working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the City
Clerk in writing a response which shall include a statement of reasons why the
license or permit should not be denied, suspended or revoked and may include a
request for a hearing. If a response is not received by the City Clerk in the
time stated, the denial, suspension or revocation shall be final and notice of
such will be sent to the applicant or licensee. Within 5 working days after
receipt of a response, the City Clerk shall either withdraw the intent to deny,
suspend or revoke and so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail or
shall schedule a hearing before the Mayor and shall notify the respondent in
writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. The
hearing shall be scheduled not less than 15 nor more than 20 working days after
receipt by the City Clerk of the request for a hearing. The hearing shall be
conducted in an informal manner. The respondent may be represented by counsel.
The rules of evidence shall not apply. The Mayor shall render a written
decision within 5 working days after completion of the hearing and shall mail a
copy of the decision by certified mail to the address of the respondent on file
with the City Clerk. In no event shall more than 45 days elapse between receipt
by the City Clerk of a request for a hearing and mailing by the Mayor of a
final decision to the respondent. An applicant or licensee may continue to work
or perform services under his or her temporary work permit or license pending
receipt of the final decision of the Mayor. The decision shall be final at the
end of 5 working days after it is mailed and shall constitute final
administrative action.
   (B)   When the decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final,
the applicant or licensee whose application for a license has been denied or
whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to seek
judicial review of the decision by way of administrative review or other
available procedure in the Circuit Court of Ford County, Illinois.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
§ 112.23 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
REGULATIONS
§ 112.35 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.
   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time
that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is in control of a sleeping room
in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a
sexually oriented business license to rent or subrent a sleeping room to a
person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rent or subrent
the same sleeping room again.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the terms RENT or
SUBRENT mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.36 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR
VIDEOS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall
contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all manager’s
stations, viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, video cameras and monitors
installed for monitoring purposes and restrooms and shall designate all
portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms
shall not contain video reproduction equipment. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches. The City Clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared;
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant;
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station or viewing room may be made without the prior approval of the City
Clerk;
      (4)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this division;
      (5)   The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured
at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees
present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is
maintained at all times that the premises is occupied or open for business;
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no act of sexual intercourse, oral sexual
contact or sexual contact, including masturbation, occurs in or on the licensed
premises;
      (7)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that not more than one person is present in a
viewing room at any time. No person shall enter a viewing room that is occupied
by another person;
      (8)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no openings of any kind exist between viewing
rooms. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between
viewing rooms;
      (9)   It shall be the duty of the operator or of any employee who
discovers two or more patrons in a viewing room or discovers any person making
or attempting to make an opening of any kind between viewing rooms to
immediately escort such persons from the premises;
      (10)   It shall be the duty of the operator or of any employee who
discovers an opening of any kind between viewing rooms to immediately secure
such rooms and prevent entry into them by any patron until such time as the
wall between the rooms has been repaired to remove the opening. Removal and
repair of openings between viewing rooms shall be in a manner that is as
structurally substantial as the original wall construction;
      (11)   It shall be the duty of the operator during each business day to
regularly inspect the walls between viewing rooms for openings of any kind;
      (12)   It shall be the duty of the operator and of any employee on the
premises to initiate and enforce a no loitering policy in viewing rooms;
      (13)   It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in
well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following:
         (a)   That no loitering is permitted in viewing rooms;
         (b)   That the occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person;
         (c)   That sexual intercourse, oral sexual contact and sexual contact,
including masturbation, on the premises is prohibited;
         (d)   That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited;
         (e)   That violators will be required to leave the premises;
         (f)   That violations of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this division
are unlawful;
      (14)   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that floor
coverings in viewing rooms are nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no
rugs or carpeting;
      (15)   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that all wall
surfaces and seating surfaces in viewing rooms or any room or area providing
patron privacy are constructed of or permanently covered by nonporous, easily
cleanable material;
      (16)   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that premises are
clean and sanitary at all times. Cleaning procedures shall include all of the
following:
         (a)   The operator shall maintain a regular cleaning schedule,
documented by appropriate logs and shall employ sufficient personnel to assure
the establishment is clean;
         (b)   The operator shall provide an employee to check an areas for
garbage, trash, body fluids and excrement and to remove and clean all areas
with a disinfectant. All solid waste generated by the business shall be
collected from the premises for disposal at a lawful solid waste disposal
facility at least once each week. Prior to collection solid waste shall be
stored in a manner that prevents access by animals or members of the public and
which will not facilitate the creation of a health nuisance;
         (c)   Thorough cleaning of the entire interior of any room providing
patron privacy shall be done using a disinfectant. Cleaning shall include
floors, walls, doors, seating, monitors, video cameras and windows and other
surfaces;
      (17)   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure any seating within
a viewing room is designed so as to accommodate one person only.
      (18)   It shall be the duty of the operator to provide in a conspicuous
place on the premises free information relating to the prevention of sexually
transmitted diseases, including AIDS;
      (19)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is no unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of
the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding
restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. A manager’s
station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two
or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall
be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area
of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at
least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this section must be
by direct line of sight from the manager’s station. It is the duty of the
operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each
manager’s station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be
the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees
present on the premises to ensure that the view area specified in this section
remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks
or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the
premises.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.37 LOITERING AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING AND MONITORING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business
to:
      (1)   Initiate and enforce a no loitering policy within the external
boundaries of the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is
located;
      (2)   Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on
such property;
      (3)   Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of
persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once
every 30 minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and
monitors; and
      (4)   Provide adequate lighting of the exterior premises to provide for
visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. The video cameras
and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises is open
for business. The monitors shall be installed within a manager’s station.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.38 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES FEATURING
NUDITY OR LIVE PERFORMANCES.
   (A)   A sexually oriented business which features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified, anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities shall be operated
in accordance with the following regulations. It is unlawful for a licensee or
operator to knowingly fail to ensure compliance with the regulations:
      (1)   A person shall not appear in a state of nudity or engage in a live
performance which is characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical
areas or by specified sexual activities except upon a stage elevated at least
18 inches above floor level. All parts of the stage, or a clearly designated
area thereof within which the person appears in a state of nudity or performs
shall be a distance of at least six feet from all parts of a clearly designated
area in which patrons may be present. The stage or designated area thereof
shall be separated from the area in which patrons may be located by a barrier
or railing the top of which is at least three feet above floor level. No
person, appearing in a state of nudity or engaging in such live performances,
or patron may extend any part of his or her body over or beyond the barrier or
railing;
      (2)   No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public
shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or
clothing, nor shall any male employee or entertainer at any time appear with
his genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered, or wear or use any device or covering which simulates the same;
      (3)   No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public
shall wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the
breast below the top of the areola, vulva, genitals, anus, any portion of the
pubic region or buttocks;
      (4)   No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public
shall conduct any dance, performance or exhibition in or about the nonstage
area of the adult cabaret;
      (5)   An employee may not touch the breast, buttocks or genitals of a
patron, nor may a patron touch the breast, buttocks or genitals of an employee;
      (6)   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any employee
or entertainer;
      (7)   No employee or entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from
any patron;
      (8)   A person below the age of 18 years may not observe or appear in a
state of nudity or in such live performances on the premises of a sexually
oriented business;
      (9)   A sign at least two feet by two feet, with letters at least one
inch high and summarizing the provisions of subsections (1), (5), (6) and (7)
of this division shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented
business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any adult cabaret to be operating or otherwise open
to the public between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any violation of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the
operation of a sexually oriented business without a valid license, is declared
to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this chapter, the
City Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction
to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this chapter. Such application
for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary
injunction and permanent injunction.
(Ord. 99-37, passed 12-14-99)
CHAPTER 113: TAXICABS
Section
   
113.01   Definition
   
113.02   License required
   
113.03   Character of applicant
   
113.04   Fee
   
113.05   Vehicles
   
113.06   Drivers
   
113.07   Insurance
   
113.08   Traffic rules
   
113.09   Unlawful use
   
113.10   Passengers
   
113.11   Rates of fare
   
113.12   Cab stands
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITION.
   The term TAXICAB as used in this chapter shall mean and include any vehicle
used to carry passengers for hire but not operating on a fixed route.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to a engage in the
business of operating a taxicab or taxicabs in the municipality without first
having secured a license for each taxicab operated. Applications for such
licenses shall be made in writing to the Clerk and shall state thereon the name
of the applicant, the intended place of business and the number of cabs to be
operated. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the
President and Secretary thereof shall be given; provided, however, that no more
than two such licenses shall be currently issued by the Clerk, without the
prior consent and approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.03 CHARACTER OF APPLICANT.
   No such license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a person
of good character or who has been convicted of felony; nor shall such license
be issued to or held by any corporation if any officer thereof would be
ineligible for a license under the foregoing conditions.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78)
§ 113.04 FEE.
   (A)   The annual fee, payable in advance, for such licenses shall be $50 for
each taxicab operated. The Clerk shall issue suitable tags or stickers for each
taxicab covered by each license. The tag or sticker shall be displayed in a
prominent place on each taxicab while it is in use and may be transferred to
any taxicab put into service to replace one withdrawn from service.
   (B)   The licensee shall notify the Clerk of the kind of car, serial number
of each cab operated and of the corresponding municipal tag or sticker number.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78; Am. Ord. 16-13, passed 6-14-16)
§ 113.05 VEHICLES.
   (A)   No taxicab shall be operated unless it bears a state license duly
issued; and no such cab shall be operated unless it is equipped with proper
brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror and windshield wiper
in good condition. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his or her
agent to inspect every taxicab so often as may be necessary to see to the
enforcement of the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on it the word “Taxi,” or the
word “Cab,” in letters readable from a distance of 50 feet.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78)
§ 113.06 DRIVERS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a taxicab or be hired or permitted to do so
unless he or she is duly licensed as a motor vehicle operator.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab while on duty to
drink any intoxicating liquor, to use any profane car obscene language, to
shout or call to prospective passengers or to disturb the peace in any way.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.07 INSURANCE.
   No taxicab shall be operated unless it is covered by a bond or public
liability policy as required by statute.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78)
§ 113.08 TRAFFIC RULES.
   It shall be the duty of every driver of a taxicab to obey all traffic rules
established by statute or ordinance.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78)
§ 113.09 UNLAWFUL USE.
   It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the
perpetration of a crime or misdemeanor.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.10 PASSENGERS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a
passenger any person who seeks to so use the taxicab, provided such person is
not intoxicated and conducts himself or herself in an orderly manner. No person
shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of
the passenger.
   (B)   The driver shall take his or her passenger to his or her destination
by the cost direct available route from the place where the passenger enters
the cab.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.11 RATES OF FARE.
   (A)   The charges for taxicab services shall be prominently displayed in the
taxicab.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a passenger to fail or refuse to pay the
lawful fare at the termination of a trip.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a passenger to fail or refuse to pay for
willful damage to the taxicab.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78; Am. Ord. 16-13, passed 6-14-16) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.12 CAB STANDS.
   (A)   Each such licensee shall be entitled to one cab stand, the same to be
selected by the Mayor and the Superintendent of Streets; provided, however,
that if such licensee shall desire such a cab stand within the parking meter
zone of the city, he or she shall pay an annual fee, payable in advance, of $75
for the use or rental of such cab stand, which shall be in addition to the
taxicab licenses above mentioned; provided, further, however, that not more
than one such cab stand, within the parking meter zone, shall not be currently
rented, without the consent of the City Council. The annual fee of $75 will be
payable only in the event that timed parking is being enforced by the city at
the time the fee is payable.
   (B)   Each cab stand shall be appropriately marked by signs erected under
the supervision of the Chief of Police.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for such licensee to use such cab stand for any
purpose except for the parking of his, her or its duly licensed taxicab and
while the same is on or available for taxicab service.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any other person to park any vehicle in any
such cab stand after and while the same has been appropriately marked as above
provided.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 1-13-03)
Penalty, see § 113.99
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each offense; and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 78-10, passed 4-10-78)
CHAPTER 114: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Exceptions to provisions
Permits
   
114.15   Permit required
   
114.16   Application for massage establishment
   
114.17   Inspections
   
114.18   Termination of permits
   
114.19   Revocation or suspension of massage establishment or masseur/masseuse
permits
   
114.20   Masseur/masseuse permit required
   
114.21   Application form for masseur/masseuse permit
   
114.22   Issuance of masseur/masseuse permit
   
114.23   Revocation of masseur/masseuse permit
Regulations
   
114.35   Facilities necessary
   
114.36   Operating requirements
   
114.37   Advertising
   
114.38   Inspections
   
114.39   Employment of person under 18 prohibited
   
114.40   Identification card
   
114.41   Transfer of permits
   
114.42   Display of permit
   
114.43   Employment of masseurs/masseuses
   
114.44   Time limit for filing application for permit
 
   
114.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEES. Any and all persons other than the masseurs or masseuses, who
render any service to the permittee, who receive compensation directly from the
permittee and who have no physical contact with customers and clients.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Ford County Nurse.
   MASSAGE or PRACTICE OF MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on or friction
against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or
stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the
aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without
such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in, carries on or
permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities of the practice of
massage.
   MASSEUR or MASSEUSE. Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever,
engages in the practice of massage.
   PERMITTEE or LICENSEE. The operator or owner (if an individual) of a massage
establishment.
   PERSON. Any individual, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA. The genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any
person and the breasts of a female.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.02 EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitarians or
persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the
laws of the State of Illinois or persons working under the direction of any
such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this chapter apply to
barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or
business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration
issued by the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
PERMITS
§ 114.15 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or
carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon
any premises in the city, the operation of a massage establishment, without
first having obtained a permit.
   (B)   Filing of application. Every applicant for a permit to maintain,
operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application with the
City Clerk.
   (C)   Fee. Every such applicant shall pay a non-refundable application fee
of $100 to the City Treasurer at the time of the filing of the application for
massage establishment. Upon approval of the application, but before issuance of
the permit, as hereinafter provided, the applicant shall pay an additional fee
for such permit of $900. This fee shall be an annual fee for the permit.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.16 APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   The applicant for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall furnish
the following information:
   (A)   Name (including any alias) and address;
   (B)   Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age;
   (C)   All residential addresses for the past three years;
   (D)   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the four
years immediately preceding the date of application;
   (E)   The massage or similar business license or permit history of the
applicant, whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city
or state under a license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation
subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;
   (F)   All criminal or city ordinance violation convictions, including
forfeiture of bond and pleadings of nolo contendere on all federal, state and
local charges, except minor traffic violations;
   (G)   A recent photograph of the applicant;
   (H)   If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of a partnership is a
corporation, the name of the corporation exactly as shown in its articles of
incorporation;
   (I)   A drawing or written description which adequately describes the space
in the building where the massage business of the applicant is to be conducted;
   (J)   The information required above in divisions (A) through (I) for the
following individuals:
      (1)   The operator, manager or owner;
      (2)   Any partner or limited partner of a partnership application;
      (3)   Any officer, director or greater than 10% stockholder of a
corporate applicant or corporate partner of a partnership.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.17 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall issue no permit or permit renewal for the
conduct, operation or maintenance of the massage establishment proposed in the
application until the following officers, after inspection or investigation,
report favorably as to the matters indicated below.
      (1)   Health Officer. The Health Officer shall inspect and report in
connection with the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease.
      (2)   Plumbing Inspector, Building Inspector and Electrical Inspector.
The Plumbing, Building and Electrical Inspectors shall inspect and report in
connection with full compliance with respective city plumbing, building and
electrical codes.
      (3)   Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall investigate and report
in connection with the accuracy of the information required above in §
114.16:
         (a)   The Chief of Police shall report favorably if he or she finds no
substantial inaccuracies in the information furnished and shall not report
favorably if investigative findings show substantial inaccuracies;
         (b)   The Chief of Police shall not report favorably if investigative
findings show that, within four years of the date of the application, the
applicant or any other person who will be directly or indirectly engaged in the
management or operations of a massage establishment has been convicted of:
            1.   A felony;
            2.   An offense involving sexual misconduct with children;
            3.   Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping
or residing in a place of prostitution, pimping or any other offense involving
moral turpitude in relation to sexual conduct;
         (c)   The Chief of Police may delegate the investigative, inspecting
and reporting responsibilities imposed by this chapter.
   (B)   Upon receipt of favorable reports from the offices as indicated above,
the City Clerk shall issue a massage establishment permit to the applicant.
Reports shall be submitted or deemed favorable with 30 days after the
applicant’s submission of an application.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.18 TERMINATION OF PERMITS.
   Every massage establishment permit will terminate at the expiration of one
year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.19 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT OR MASSEUR/MASSEUSE
PERMITS.
   (A)   Any license issued to an owner or operator of a massage establishment
or any permit issued to a masseur or a masseuse may be revoked or may be
suspended for any length of time during the remaining period of validity of the
license or permit for any one or more of the following reasons: for any
violation by the licensee or permittee of the ordinance provisions relating to
the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit or to the
premises occupied by the massage establishment.
   (B)   No license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked
or suspended without first giving the licensee or permittee notice of such
action and an opportunity to be heard in accordance with the provisions of this
code.
   (C)   Before any license or permit is revoked or suspended, at least five
days' written advance notice shall be given to the licensee or permittee by
certified mail, return receipt requested. In the case of a revocation or
suspension of a massage establishment license, notice shall be sent to the
licensee at the business address indicated on the licensee’s application for a
massage establishment license. In the case of a revocation or suspension of a
masseur or a masseuse permit, notice shall be sent to the masseur or masseuse
at the residence address indicated in the application for the permit. The
notice shall set forth the date, time and place of the hearing and shall state
the facts which constitute the reasons for the hearing on the revocation or
suspension of the license or permit.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of all licensees and permittees to inform the
City Clerk of any changes in address which are needed to inform them of any
hearing conducted pursuant to this section. All changes in address shall be
reported to the City Clerk within ten days of any such change. Failure by any
licensee or permittee to inform the City Clerk of any change in address
required pursuant to this section shall not prevent or preclude the bringing of
any action or the holding of any hearing pursuant to this section for a
revocation or suspension of the license or permit.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.20 MASSEUR/MASSEUSE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, including an applicant for a massage
establishment license for any legal consideration, to massage any person or
engage in the practice of massage without having first obtained a masseur or
masseuse permit. The application for a masseur or a masseuse permit shall be
filed with the City Clerk, and the applicant shall pay to the City Treasurer a
non-refundable filing fee of $50 for an original application and $20 for a
renewal application. No application shall be processed by any department until
the application fee is paid in full.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.21 APPLICATION FORM FOR MASSEUR/MASSEUSE PERMIT.
   The applicant for a masseur or masseuse permit shall furnish the following
information:
   (A)   Name (including any alias) and address;
   (B)   Social Security number and driver’s license number, if any;
   (C)   Applicant’s weight, height, color of hair and eyes;
   (D)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the four years
immediately preceding the date of application;
   (E)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, pleaded nolo
contendere to or suffered a forfeiture on a bond in relation to charges of
committing any federal, state or local crime, except minor traffic violations.
If the answer is in the affirmative, a statement must be made giving the place
and the court in which conviction plea or forfeiture was had, the specific
charges under which the conviction plea or forfeiture was obtained and the
sentence imposed;
   (F)   A recent photograph of the applicant;
   (G)   The results of a physical examination for contagious and communicable
diseases, which shall include a recognized blood test for syphilis, a culture
for gonorrhea, a test or tests which will demonstrate freedom from
tuberculosis, which is to be made and interpreted by a licensed physician
acceptable to the Health Officer and such other laboratory tests done in a
laboratory acceptable to the Health Officer, as may be necessitated by the
above examination, a certificate based upon the applicant’s physical
examination and issued within 30 days of such examination, signed by a
physician duly licensed by the State of Illinois and stating that the person
examined is either free from any contagious or communicable disease or
incapable of communicating any of such diseases to others. Applicants shall
undergo the physical examination referred to above and submit to the Health
Officer the certificate required herein prior to commencement of their
employment and at least once every 12 months thereafter.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.22 ISSUANCE OF MASSEUR/MASSEUSE PERMIT.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall issue a masseur or masseuse permit within 30 days
following application, unless an investigative report of the Chief of Police
indicates that, within four years of the date of application, the applicant for
masseur or masseuse permit has been convicted of:
      (1)   A felony;
      (2)   An offense involving sexual misconduct with children;
      (3)   Keeping or residing in a place of prostitution, solicitation for a
prostitute, prostitution, pandering or any other offense involving moral
turpitude in relation to sexual conduct.
   (B)   After reviewing the information furnished by the applicant, further
investigation is at the option of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.23 REVOCATION OF MASSEUR/MASSEUSE PERMIT.
   A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the City Clerk shall be revoked where
it appears that the masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense which
would be cause for denial of a permit upon an original application, has made a
false statement on an application for a permit or has committed an act in
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
REGULATIONS
§ 114.35 FACILITIES NECESSARY.
   (A)   No massage establishment shall be issued a permit, nor be operated,
established or maintained in the city unless an inspection by the Health
Officer reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following
minimum requirements:
      (1)   Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and
showers shall be made waterproofed with approved waterproof materials and shall
be installed in accordance with the Building Code of the city and in accordance
with the statutes of the State of Illinois;
      (2)   All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas
and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected;
      (3)   Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided
for the patrons to be served at any given time. In the event male and female
patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing, locker and
massage room facilities shall be provided;
      (4)   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected
after use on each patron;
      (5)   Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering
massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in
properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be
kept from the clean storage areas;
      (6)   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When
employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time,
separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A single water
closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or fewer employees or patrons of
that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water
closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated
as to the sex accommodated therein;
      (7)   Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running
water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories
or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary
towels;
      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
services.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall certify or report that the proposed massage
establishment complies or does not comply with all the requirements of this
section of this chapter and shall send such certification or report to the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.36 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
   (B)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
   (C)   All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and
wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital
areas. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises
with individual lockers for each employee.
   (D)   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
   (E)   The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered by towels,
cloths or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, masseur or
masseuse.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment
knowingly to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or her
body, to fondle in any manner or to massage a sexual or genital area of any
other person.
   (G)   No masseur or masseuse, employee or operator shall perform, offer or
agree to perform any act which would require the touching of a patron’s genital
area.
   (H)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and
all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or steam
or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly
cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be
thoroughly cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it
shall be kept dry.
   (I)   Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
   (J)   Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals,
except for seeing-eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work areas.
   (K)   No masseur or masseuse shall administer a massage on a patron’s skin
inflamation or skin eruption, unless a physician duly licensed by the State of
Illinois certifies in writing that such person may be safely massaged on that
area.
   (L)   Each masseur and masseuse shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering a massage to
each patron.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.37 ADVERTISING.
   No massage establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this
chapter shall place, publish or cause to be placed, published or distributed
any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would
reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any services are available other
than authorized massage services.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.38 INSPECTIONS.
   The Chief of Police and Health Officer shall from time to time and at least
twice a year, make an inspection of each establishment granted a permit under
the provisions of this chapter for the purposes of determining that there is
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The inspections shall be made
at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.39 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSON UNDER 18 PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in
charge of any massage establishment to employ any person who is not at least 18
years of age.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.40 IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   The City Clerk shall provide each masseur and masseuse granted a permit with
an identification card which shall contain a photograph of the masseur or
masseuse and the full name and permit number assigned to the masseur or
masseuse, which must be worn on the front of the outer most garment at all
times during the hours of operation of any establishment granted a permit
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.41 TRANSFER OF PERMITS.
   No permit for the operation of a massage establishment issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable. However, upon the death
or incapacity of the permittee the massage establishment may continue in
business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of
the permit, but such period shall not exceed 60 days.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.42 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Every permittee shall display a valid permit in a conspicuous place within
the massage establishment so that the same may be readily seen by persons
entering the premises.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.43 EMPLOYMENT OF MASSEURS/MASSEUSES.
   It shall be the responsibility of the permittee for the massage
establishment or the employer of any persons purporting to act as masseurs and
masseuses to insure that each person employed as masseur or masseuse shall
first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.44 TIME LIMIT FOR FILING APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   All persons who presently operate a massage establishment or who are
employed as a masseur or masseuse must file for a permit within three months of
the effective date of this chapter. Applications for renewal of permits must be
filed not more than two months nor less than one month prior to termination of
an existing permit.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $500 for each offense; a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ord. 77-36, passed 9-12-77)
CHAPTER 115: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Nonapplicability of provisions
Licenses
   
115.10   License required
   
115.11   Applications
   
115.12   Nonrefundable application fee
   
115.13   Term; pro rating fee
   
115.14   Disposition of fees
   
115.15   Bond
   
115.16   License classifications
   
115.17   Restriction on licenses
   
115.18   Number of licenses
   
115.19   Refund for licenses
   
115.20   Transfer of license; renewal
   
115.21   Location restrictions
   
115.22   Change of location
   
115.23   List
   
115.24   Revocation
   
115.25   Delivery and carry out of certain drinks permitted
Offenses
   
115.35   Closing hours
   
115.36   Selling alcohol to minors prohibited
   
115.37   Consumption on premises
   
115.38   Peddling
   
115.39   Sanitary conditions
   
115.40   Employees
   
115.41   View from street
   
115.42   Unlicensed operation of video gaming terminal on licensed premises
 
   
115.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any spirits, wine, beer, ale, or other liquid containing
more than .5% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes.
   CLUB. A nationally recognized veterans’ organization or a corporation
organized under the laws of the state, not for pecuniary profit, both the
nationally recognized solely for the promotion of the common object other than
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors kept, used and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants
and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members
and their guests; provided, that such CLUB files with the Mayor at the time of
its application for a license under this section two copies of a list of names
and residences of its members and similarly files within ten days of the
election of any additional member his or her name and address; and, provided
further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting, and that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is
paid or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or other
compensation any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to
the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond
the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by
the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the
general revenue of the club.
   HOTEL. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers
and guests, whether transient, permanent, or residential, in which 25 or more
rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of guests and having one or more
public dining rooms where meals are served to guests, the sleeping
accommodation and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or
buildings in connection therewith and the building or buildings, structure or
structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually
and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
   RETAIL SALE. The sale for use or consumption, and not for re-sale.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34; Am. Ord. 71-14, passed 7-12-71)
§ 115.02 NONAPPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums or
persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the
laws of the State of Illinois or persons working under the direction of any
such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this chapter apply to
barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or
business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate or registration
issued by the State of Illinois, nor shall this chapter apply to massage
therapists with not less than 500 hours of education from a school of massage
therapy accredited by the State of Illinois.
(Am. Ord. 95-34, passed 7-19-95)
LICENSES
§ 115.10 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the city any
alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or in
violation of the terms of the license.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
§ 115.11 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for Class A, B, C, CA, D and E licenses shall be made to
the Mayor in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly
authorized agent thereof if a club or corporation, verified by oath or
affidavit, and shall contain the following information and statement:
      (1)   The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of a co-
partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof, and in the
case of a corporation, for profit, or a club, the date of the incorporation,
the objects for which it was organized, the names and addresses of the officers
and directors, and if a majority in interest of the stock of such corporation
is owned by one person or his or her nominees, the name and address of such
person;
      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth and if
a naturalized citizen the time and place of his or her naturalization;
      (3)   The character of business of the applicant; and in case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was found;
      (4)   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued;
      (5)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made;
      (6)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license;
      (7)   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and
the disposition of such application;
      (8)   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and
is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of this state, or ordinances of this city;
      (9)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or
by the federal government had been revoked, and the reasons therefor;
      (10)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of
the state or of the United States or any ordinance of the city in the conduct
of his or her place of business.
   (B)   Applications for a Class F license shall be made to the Mayor in
writing, signed by a duly authorized agent of the political subdivision of the
state, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following
information and statement:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant and the names and addresses
of the persons comprising the governing board of the political subdivision of
the state;
      (2)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license;
      (3)   The time period (limited to one day) that the license is to be
issued;
      (4)   The nature of the fund raising event for which the license is
requested;
      (5)   The number of fund raising events held by the political subdivision
of the state during the current calendar year for which a Class F license has
previously been issued (limited to six events per calendar year);
      (6)   A statement that no member of the governing board of the political
subdivision of the state has ever been convicted of a felony and is not
disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in
this chapter, laws of this state or ordinances of this city;
      (7)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of
the state of the United States or any ordinance of the city in the conduct of
the event for which the license is being requested.
      (8)   A certified copy of the resolution or minutes of the meeting of the
governing board of the political subdivision of the state which authorizes the
filing of the application for the license and authorize the holding of the
fund-raising event.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34; Am. Ord. 04-19, passed 5-10-04; Am. Ord. 08-36, passed 10-
13-08; Am. Ord. 14-26, passed 11-10-14)
§ 115.12 NONREFUNDABLE APPLICATION FEE.
   A nonrefundable application fee covering the cost of investigating to
determine whether the applicant is eligible for a license and covering the cost
of processing the application shall be charged, except as hereafter provided.
This fee shall be in addition to the license fee. No application for a license
shall be processed until after the payment of the application fee. The
application fee shall be paid into the City Treasurer and shall be deposited in
the General Corporate Fund of the city or in such other fund as shall have been
designated by the City Council by proper action. The application fee shall not
be refunded to any applicant under any circumstance. The amount of the
application fee is $75 for all licenses except for a special use permit and a
Class F license and a Class G license. There shall be no application fee for a
special use permit and there shall be no application fee for a Class F license
and there shall be no application fee for a Class G license.
(Am. Ord. 87-23, passed 8-10-87; Am. Ord. 04-19, passed 5-10-04; Am. Ord. 07-
12, passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 08-36, passed 10-13-08)
§ 115.13 TERM; PRO RATING FEE.
   Licenses shall be issued on a semi-annual basis and each license shall
terminate on the thirtieth day of April next or on the thirty-first day of
October next following its issuance; the fee to be paid shall be reduced in
proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the six-month
period prior to the issuance of the license.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
§ 115.14 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   All fees shall be paid to the Mayor at the time application is made, and
shall be forthwith turned over to the Treasurer. In the event the license
applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant; if the
license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate
fund or in another fund as shall have been designated by the Council by proper
action.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
§ 115.15 BOND.
   Each person desiring a license from the city shall execute an individual
bond with two good and sufficient sureties in form satisfactory to the issuing
authority in the sum of $2,000 payable to the city and conditioned for the
faithful observance of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
§ 115.16 LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Classification; fees. The licenses shall be and are divided into ten
classes:
      (1)   Class A licenses, which authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified of beer only, and no other alcoholic liquor of any kind or character
whatsoever, for consumption on the premises. The semi-annual fee for such
licenses shall be $250;
      (2)   Class B licenses, which shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor but not for consumption on the premises where sold; the liquor
to be sold only in the original package in quantities of not less than one-half
pint. The semi-annual fee for such licenses shall be $200;
      (3)   Class C licenses, which shall authorize the sale of alcoholic
liquor of any character in any quantity whatsoever, for consumption on the
premises and shall also additionally allow the sale of liquor in the original
package of quantities of not less than one-half pint for the consumption off
the premises. The semi-annual fee for such license shall be $500;
      (4)   Class CA licenses, shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor by a
current holder of another type of liquor license provided for in this section,
in connection with the sale of prepared food, for service at private parties,
weddings or other similar private events which are not open to the general
public, at a location other than the premises leased, owned or otherwise
operated by the licensee. For the purpose of the application of the regulations
of this chapter, the location of the catered event shall be deemed the licensed
premises. The semi-annual fee for such license shall be $50. In addition to
compliance other requirements for licensed premises in this chapter, a Class CA
licensee shall meet and operate in compliance with the following requirements:
         (a)   Consumption of alcoholic liquor shall only be permitted on the
premises where the food is catered.
         (b)   Gross revenues from the sale of alcoholic liquor at any event
catered by a Class CA licensee shall not exceed 40% of the total gross revenues
generated from the sale of alcohol and food at that event. The Class CA
licensee shall submit an affidavit on a semi-annual basis, certifying
compliance with this requirement.
         (c)   In the event that the Class CA licensee has entered into a
contract with another individual or entity for the service of food at the
catered event, a copy of said contract shall be available for inspection on the
premises of the catered event, during said event.
         (d)   No event catered by a Class CA licensee shall exceed two days in
length, nor shall alcoholic liquor be served at such an event for more than
eight consecutive hours.
      (5)   A Class "HB" License shall entitle the licensee therein to apply
for and comply with the terms and requirements of a Homebrewer Special Event
License as provided for under the Illinois Liquor Control Act as amended for a
period not to exceed three consecutive days. The fee for an "HB" license shall
be $25. Any requirement for surety for an "HB" License is hereby waived.
      (6)   (a)   Class D licenses, which shall permit the sale of beer only
for consumption only on the premises where sold, to be issued to a regularly
organized club, as defined in §
115.01, such sales to be made only to members and guests of members of the
club. The semi-annual fee for such license shall be $25;
         (b)   The Class D license shall further be restricted in that the sale
of beer shall be limited to four days and only four days each and every
calendar month during the period of the license; provided, however, that the
Class D license shall not permit the sale of beer on any Friday, Saturday or
Sunday. Prior to the twentieth day of the preceding month, the club holding the
Class D license shall deliver to the Chief of Police, in writing, a statement
stating the days of sale of beer for the following month, the statement to be
signed by the chief executive officer of the club. It shall be unlawful for the
club holding the Class D license to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor
on any day other than the days as stated in the written notification to the
Chief of Police;
         (c)   No Class D license shall be issued until the Mayor or the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner has satisfied himself or herself that the club
applying for the license was actually and, in fact, organized for some purpose
or object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors;
      (7)   Class E licenses, which shall authorize the sale of beer and wine
only, and no other alcoholic liquor of any kind or character whatsoever, by the
drink for consumption on the premises where sold. The semi-annual fee for such
license shall be $250.
      (8)   Class F, which shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor of any
character in any quantity whatsoever, for consumption only on the premises
where sold, to be issued to a political subdivision of the state which is
granted permission to sell alcoholic liquor, at retail, under the Liquor
Control Act of 1934 of the State of Illinois. There shall be no fee for such
license. A Class F license shall be issued for a time period of only one day or
less, provided, however, that the sale of alcoholic liquor is limited to fund-
raising events and to a maximum of six events per calendar year. The sale of
alcoholic liquor must be approved by the governing board of the political
subdivision, and the governing board of the political subdivision must approve
the filing of the application for the Class F license with the city. After
obtaining a Class F license from the city, the licensee must obtain an
appropriate license from the state.
      (9)   Class CD1 license; craft distiller's license - 1.
         (a)   A Class CD1 license shall allow the manufacturing of up to
50,000 gallons of spirits per year.
         (b)   A Class CD1 licensee may make sales and deliveries to
distributors, importing distributors and to retail licensees in accordance with
the conditions set forth by Ch. 235 ILCS Act 5, § 3-12(19)(a). However, the
aggregate amount of spirits sold to non-licensees and sold or delivered to
retail licensees may not exceed 5,000 per year.
         (c)   A Class CD1 licensee may store such spirits at a non-contiguous
licensed location, but at no time shall a Class CD1 licensee directly or
indirectly produce in the aggregate more than 50,000 gallons of spirits per
year.
         (d)   A Class CD1 licensee shall maintain, in good standing, a State
of Illinois Craft Distiller's License as required and authorized under the
Liquor Control Act (ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1 et seq.) as amended.
      (10)   Class CD2 license; craft distiller's license - 2.
         (a)   A Class CD2 license shall allow the manufacturing of up to
100,000 gallons of spirits per year.
         (b)   A Class CD2 licensee may make sales and deliveries to importing
distributors and distributors, but shall not make sales or deliveries to any
other licensee.
         (c)   A Class CD2 licensee may transfer spirits to a distilling pub
wholly owned and operated by a Class CD2 distiller subject to the following
limitations and restrictions:
            1.   The transfer shall not annually exceed more than 5,000
gallons;
            2.   The annual amount transferred shall reduce the distilling
pub's annual permitted production limit;
            3.   All spirits transferred shall be subject to the Liquor Control
Act (ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1 et seq);
            4.   A written record shall be maintained by the distiller and
distilling pub specifying the amount, date of delivery, and receipt of the
product by the distilling pub; and
            5.   The distilling pub shall be located no farther than 80 miles
from the Class CD2 licensed location.
         (d)   A Class CD2 licensee shall, prior to transferring spirits to a
distilling pub wholly owned by the Class CD2 licensee, furnish a written notice
to the State Commission of intent to transfer spirits setting forth the name
and location of the distilling pub and shall annually submit to the State
Commission a verified report identifying the total gallons of spirits
transferred to the distilling pub wholly owned by the Class CD2 licensee.
         (e)   A Class CD2 licensee may store such spirits at a non-contiguous
licensed location, but at no time shall a Class CD2 licensee directly or
indirectly produce in the aggregate more than 100,000 gallons of spirits per
year.
         (f)   A Class CD2 licensee shall maintain, in good standing, a State
of Illinois Craft Distiller's License as required and authorized under the
Liquor Control Act (ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1 et seq.) as amended.
   (B)   Special use permit. A special use permit license shall allow a
licensee to transfer a portion of the licensee’s alcoholic liquor inventory
from the licensee’s retail licensed premises to the premises specified in the
license created and to sell or offer for sale at retail, only in the premises
specified in the license created, but not for resale in any form. A special use
permit license may be granted for the following time periods: one day or less;
two or more days to a maximum of 15 days per location in any 12-month period.
An applicant for the special use permit license must also submit with the
application proof satisfactory to the Liquor Commissioner that the applicant
will provide dram shop liability insurance to the maximum limits required by
the statutes of the State of Illinois. The fee for a special use permit license
shall be in the sum of $25 for one day only and the sum of $50 for two days or
more. After obtaining a special use permit license from the city, the licensee
must obtain a special use permit license from the State of Illinois.
   (C)   Beer gardens.
      (1)   A Class G license shall authorize a holder of a Class A or Class C
or Class D or Class E or Class F liquor license to sell alcoholic liquor for
consumption outside of the enclosed permanent structure containing the licensed
premises in a location designated by the Liquor Commissioner. In addition to
any other requirement, a Class G license may be denied if the applicant fails
to clearly establish to the satisfaction of the Liquor Commission:
         (a)   A site plan, blueprint, or scale drawing showing the location
for outside service of alcoholic liquor in relation to the permanent structure
on the premises, fences, emergency exits, and any other fixed objects within
that location, and a detailed description of materials to be used as fencing
and emergency exits, shall be submitted with the application for a Class G
license.
         (b)   That outdoor operations will not disturb the lawful use and
quiet enjoyment of nearby properties;
         (c)   That the Class G premises will be operated in strict accordance
with applicable health, building, fire and life safety codes;
         (d)   That no liquor served in an open container shall be removed from
the Class G premises, except to the licensed premises;
         (e)   That adequate safeguards are in place for security, crowd
control, lighting control, and the protection of minors;
         (f)   That no sales of alcoholic liquor shall be made to any person on
an adjoining property, street, sidewalk, or alley;
         (g)   That the licensee has previously maintained adequate control and
supervision of the licensed premises and has consistently operated the licensed
premises in substantial compliance with the city liquor code; and
         (h)   That the Class G premises can be made to comply with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   Conditions. A Class G license may be made subject to such
conditions as may be deemed necessary on a case-by-case basis to protect the
health, safety, and general welfare of the city and its residents, provided
that said conditions are not imposed in an arbitrary or capricious manner, nor
in a manner inconsistent with the Liquor Control Act. Such conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following conditions:
         (a)   The Class G premises shall be enclosed by a restricted view or
solid permanent fence at least six feet in height.
         (b)   Unless otherwise reasonable means of access control are required
by the Liquor Commission, access to the Class G premises shall be via the
permanent structure containing the primarily licensed premises, except for
emergency exits required by city ordinances and the Fire Department must be
provided.
         (c)   Entertainment and electronically amplified music or sound shall
not be permitted upon Class G premises.
         (d)   All fences, enclosures, or other structures required by this
section shall be located, constructed and maintained in conformance with the
zoning, building and other ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Wine sampling. Any current holder of a liquor license issued by the
city may conduct wine sampling for consumption on the licensed premises,
subject to the following:
      (1)   A consumer may be served no more than three samples consisting of
no more than one ounce of wine per sample.
      (2)   The license holder may not charge a fee for the wine sampling.
      (3)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the authority to
disallow wine sampling at license holder's premises due to violations of this
chapter.
(Am. Ord. 89-8, passed 2-13-89; Am. Ord. 99-29, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord. 04-04,
passed 2-9-04; Am. Ord. 08-36, passed 10-13-08; Am. Ord, 11-33, passed 12-12-
11; Am. Ord. 14-26, passed 11-10-14; Am. Ord. 17-36, passed 9-12-17; Am. Ord.
20-05, passed 3-18-20; Am. Ord. 21-12, passed 8-10-21; Am. Ord. 22-11, passed
8-9-22; Am. Ord. 23-26, passed 11-20-23; Am. Ord. 2024-03-02, passed 3-12-24)
§ 115.17 RESTRICTION ON LICENSES.
   No license shall be issued to:
   (A)   (This division intentionally left blank)
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the
state;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   (G)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;
   (H)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for the license upon a first
application;
   (I)   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license;
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of the corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the political
subdivision;
   (K)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee;
   (L)   A person who has convicted of a violation of any federal or state law
concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, subsequent
to the passage of this chapter, or shall have forfeited his or her bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any violation;
   (M)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued;
   (N)   Any law enforcing public official, any Mayor, alderman, or member of
the City Council or commission, any president of the village board of trustees,
any member of a village board of trustees, or any president of member of a
county board; and no such official shall be interested in any way, either
directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic
liquor;
   (O)   Any person, association, or corporation not eligible for a state
retail liquor dealer's license.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34; Am. Ord. 07-12, passed 5-14-07)
§ 115.18 NUMBER OF LICENSES. 
   (A)   By separate ordinance, the City Council shall set a limitation on the
number of liquor licenses to be issued for each classification of license under
this chapter. This restriction on the number of licenses shall not limit the
right to the renewal of any existing license nor to the issuance of a license
to the purchaser of an established licensed business as a going concern, but as
licenses are revoked, expire without renewal or for any other reason cease to
exist, then the total number of licenses for each classification shall be
reduced until the total of each such class shall not exceed the number
authorized by the City Council.
   (B)   Any person shall be able to ascertain the number of licenses permitted
for each classification under this chapter by contacting City Hall during
normal business hours: said information shall not be unreasonably withheld from
any person inquiring into same.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B), the term PERSON shall be construed
to mean individuals as well as any entity of any type, including but not
limited to corporations, LLCs, and unincorporated associations.
(Am. Ord. 89-8, passed 2-13-89; Am. Ord. 97-27, passed 12-8-97; Am. Ord. 02-41,
passed 10-17-03; Am. Ord. 04-04, passed 2-9-04; Am. Ord. 05-38, passed 11-14-
05; Am. Ord. 06-47, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 08-06, passed 5-10-08; Am. Ord.
08-14, passed 4-14-08; Am. Ord. 09-38, passed 9-14-09; Am. Ord. 13-23, passed
7-8-13; Am. Ord. 18-10, passed 5-8-18; Am. Ord. 21-12, passed 8-10-21; Am. Ord.
23-03, passed 2-14-23; Am. Ord. 23-09, passed 3-14-23; Am. Ord. 23-26, passed
11-20-23; Am. Ord. 23-27, passed 11-20-23; Am. Res. R2024-12-05, passed 12-10-
24; Am. Res. 2025-04-03, passed 4-8-25; Am. Res. 2025-07-06, passed 7-8-25; Am.
Res. 2025-07-07, passed 7-8-25)
§ 115.19 REFUND FOR LICENSES.
   Any licensee under this chapter, holding a valid unexpired license, upon
voluntary disposition of the business for which such license was issued, shall
be entitled to a refund of an amount equal to 75% of the unexpired pro-rated
portion of the year for which the license was issued, provided:
   (A)   The licensee shall have made a complete and bona fide sale and
transfer of the business for which the license shall have been issued; and
   (B)   The new owner or transferee of the business shall have promptly
applied for and obtained a new license, of the same class, for the balance of
the year, for the conduct of the same or similar business and at the same
location previously conducted by the original licensee. Application for such
refund must be made by the original licensee, in writing, within six months of
the date of such transfer of the business and shall state, under oath, that the
conditions herein mentioned have been fully met and shall be submitted to the
Mayor for approval, who shall approve the same for payment of such refund if
the conditions above mentioned have been met.
(Am. Ord. passed 7-11-60)
§ 115.20 TRANSFER OF LICENSE; RENEWAL.
   (A)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed
one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and
shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment or execution, not shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated.
The license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution,
but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors or
administrators of the state of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any
insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic
liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic
liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of
the deceased or insolvent of bankrupt licensee after the death of the decedent,
or the insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of the license but not
longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of the
licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for
any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under the
license in accordance with the provisions of this division, provided however
that if the license is revoked for the causes as in this chapter set forth,
there shall be no refund.
   (B)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration thereof,
provided he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for
which the renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and
provided, further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall be
construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Mayor from
decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within his or her jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
§ 115.21 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, home for aged or indigent
persons or the veterans, their wives, or children, or any military or navel
station; provided that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering
restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops,
or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business
carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established
for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
§ 115.22 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only in the premises described in the application and license. The location may
be changed only upon the written permit to make the change issued by the Mayor.
No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a
proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the law of this state
and the ordinances of this city.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
§ 115.23 LIST.
   The Mayor shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such
licenses issued by him or her; and shall furnish the Clerk, Treasurer, the
Chief of Police each with a copy thereof; upon the issuance of any new license,
or the revocation of any old license, the Mayor shall give written notice of
such action to each of these officers within 48 hours of such action.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
§ 115.24 REVOCATION.
   The Mayor may revoke any retail liquor dealer's license for any violation of
any provisions of this chapter, or for any violation of any state law
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
§ 115.25 DELIVERY AND CARRY OUT OF CERTAIN DRINKS PERMITTED.
   (A)   Definitions. In this section, the following terms shall have these
assigned meanings.
      COCKTAIL OR MIXED DRINK. Any beverage obtained by combining ingredients
alcoholic in nature, whether brewed, fermented, or distilled, with ingredients
non-alcoholic in nature, such as fruit juice, lemonade, cream, or a carbonated
beverage.
      ORIGINAL CONTAINER. For the purposes of this section only, a container
that is:
         (a)   Filled, sealed, and secured by a retail licensee's employee at
the retail licensee's location with a tamper-evident lid or cap; or
         (b)   Filled and labeled by the manufacturer and secured by the
manufacturer's original unbroken seal.
      RETAIL LICENSEE OR RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER. Any licensee who possesses a
Class C liquor license issued by the city.
      SEALED CONTAINER. A rigid container that contains a mixed drink or a
single serving of wine, is new, has never been used, has a secured lid or cap
designed to prevent consumption without removal of the lid or cap, and is
tamper-evident. SEALED CONTAINER includes a manufacturer's original container
as defined in this division. SEALED CONTAINER does not include a container with
a lid with sipping holes or openings for straws or a container made of plastic,
paper, or polystyrene foam.
      TAMPER-EVIDENT. A lid or cap that has been sealed with tamper-evident
covers, including, but not limited to, wax dip or heat shrink wrap.
   (B)   Delivery and carry out of certain drinks. A cocktail, mixed drink, or
single serving of wine placed in a sealed container by a retail licensee at the
retail licensee's location or a manufacturer's original container may be
transferred and sold for off-premises consumption if the following requirements
are met:
      (1)   The cocktail, mixed drink, or single serving of wine is transferred
within the licensed premises, by a curbside pickup, or by delivery by an
employee of the retail licensee who:
         (a)   Has been trained in accordance with Section 6-27.1 of the Liquor
Control Act of 1934, ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-27.1, at the time of the sale;
         (b)   Is at least 21 years of age; and
         (c)   Upon delivery, verifies the age of the person to whom the
cocktail, mixed drink, or single serving of wine is being delivered;
      (2)   If the employee delivering the cocktail, mixed drink, or single
serving of wine is not able to safely verify a person's age or level of
intoxication upon delivery, the employee shall cancel the sale of alcohol and
return the product to the retail license holder;
      (3)   The sealed container is placed in the trunk of the vehicle or if
there is no trunk, in the vehicle's rear compartment that is not readily
accessible to the passenger area;
      (4)   Except for a manufacturer's original container, a container filled
and sealed at a retail licensee's location shall be affixed with a label or tag
that contains the following information:
         (a)   The cocktail or mixed drink ingredients, type, and name of the
alcohol;
         (b)   The name, license number, and address of the retail licensee
that filled the original container and sold the product;
         (c)   The volume of the cocktail, mixed drink, or single serving of
wine in the sealed container; and
         (d)   The sealed container was filled less than seven days before the
date of sale; and
      (5)   A manufacturer's original container shall be affixed with a label
or tag that contains the name, license number, and address of the retail
licensee that sold the product.
   (C)   Third-party delivery services are not permitted to deliver cocktails
and mixed drinks under this section.
   (D)   If there is an executive order of the Governor in effect during a
disaster, the employee delivering the mixed drink, cocktail, or single serving
of wine must comply with any requirements of that executive order, including,
but not limited to, wearing gloves and a mask and maintaining distancing
requirements when interacting with the public.
   (E)   Delivery or carry out of a cocktail, mixed drink, or single serving of
wine is prohibited if:
      (1)   A third party delivers the cocktail or mixed drink;
      (2)   A container of a mixed drink, cocktail, or single serving of wine
is not tamper-evident and sealed;
      (3)   A container of a mixed drink, cocktail, or single serving of wine
is transported in the passenger area of a vehicle;
      (4)   A mixed drink, cocktail, or single serving of wine is delivered by
a person or to a person who is under the age of 21; or
      (5)   The person delivering a mixed drink, cocktail, or single serving of
wine fails to verify the age of the person to whom the mixed drink or cocktail
is being delivered.
   (F)   Violations of this section shall be subject to any applicable
penalties, including, but not limited to, the penalties specified under Section
11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-502.
   (G)   This section shall be repealed without further action of the corporate
authorities of the city upon the repeal or expiration of Section 6-28.8 of the
Liquor Control Act of 1934, ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-28.8.
(Ord. 2024-09-03, passed 9-10-24)
OFFENSES
§ 115.35 CLOSING HOURS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, at retail, or to give
away, in or upon any licensed premises, any alcoholic liquor in the city
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. of any day; subject, however,
to the following:
      (1)   That on Friday nights/Saturday mornings it shall be unlawful to
sell or offer for sale, at retail, or to give away, in or upon any licensed
premises, any alcoholic liquor in the city between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m.;
      (2)   That on Saturday nights/Sunday mornings it shall be unlawful to
sell or offer for sale, at retail, or to give away, in or upon any licensed
premises, any alcoholic liquor in the city between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon;
      (3)   That whenever New Year’s Day falls on Monday, the premises may
remain open, for business, on the preceding Sunday until 2:00 in the morning of
New Year’s Day;
      (4)   That on New Year’s Eve and on New Year’s Day the premises may
remain open, for business, until 2:00 in the morning of New Year’s Day;
      (5)   That on the fourth Wednesday of November in each year the premises
may remain open, for business, until 1:00 a.m. of the fourth Thursday in
November.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to permit the public
to remain within, or to permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor in or upon
any premises in which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours
within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited; provided, that in the case
of restaurants and hotels and grocery stores such establishments may be kept
open for business during such hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to,
given away or consumed by the public during such hours; provided, further, that
in the case of restaurants and hotels and grocery stores which are kept open
for business during such hours all alcoholic liquor shall be kept securely
locked and the key to the alcoholic liquor shall not be available to the public
during such hours.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or to consume
alcoholic liquor in or upon any premises in which alcoholic liquor is sold at
retail during the hours within which such sale of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited.
(Am. Ord. 94-4, passed 1-18-94; Am. Ord. 99-4, passed 2-8-99; Am. Ord. 03-04,
passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 05-34, passed 10-10-05; Am. Ord. 12-41, passed 8-13-
12)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.36 SELLING ALCOHOL TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
purchase, obtain or attempt to purchase any alcoholic liquor in any tavern or
other place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the city where alcoholic
liquor is sold.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21 years.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to have
alcoholic liquor in his or her possession, custody or control within the city.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
attend any bar, to sell, to draw, to pour or to mix any alcoholic liquor in any
licensed retail premises.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided herein, minors are prohibited from
service or sales of alcoholic liquor. However, while servers who are aged 18 to
20 years of age may not pour or sell liquor, they shall be allowed to carry
liquor from the pick up location and deliver it to the customer's table.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
serve, stock or arrange displays of alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail
premises.
   (H)   No person or firm licensed under this chapter shall sell any such
intoxicating liquor to any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
to any idiot, insane or otherwise incompetent person. Nor shall any licensee
permit any alcoholic liquor to be given in their place of business to any
person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or to any idiot, insane or
otherwise incompetent person.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or
have alcoholic liquor in any motor vehicle within the city except in the
original package and with the seal unbroken. Any person acting in compliance
with §
115.25 shall be deemed to be in compliance with this division.
   (J)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, posses or
have alcoholic liquor on any city street, alley or sidewalk within the city,
except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
   (K)   In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Mayor may suspend or
revoke the retail liquor dealer’s license for the violation of any provision of
divisions (A), (C), (E), (F), (G), (H) and (I).
(Am. Ord. 01-38, passed 11-12-01; Am. Ord. 22-11, passed 8-9-22; Am. Ord. 2024-
09-03, passed 9-10-24) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.37 CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for anyone having a Class B license to sell or
offer for sale any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold,
or to permit the same to be consumed on the premises where sold.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for anyone having a Class A license to sell or
offer for sale any alcoholic liquor other than beer for consumption on the
premises where sold.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for anyone having a Class D license to sell or
offer for sale any alcoholic liquor other than beer for consumption on the
premises where sold.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for anyone having a Class E license to sell or
offer for sale any alcoholic liquor other than beer or wine for consumption on
the premises where sold.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34; Am. Ord. 07-12, passed 5-14-07)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.38 PEDDLING.
   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the city.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.39 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the
storage of liquor for sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition,
and shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions regulating the
condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.40 EMPLOYEES.
   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any
contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any
person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work in or
about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of liquor.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34)
Penalty, see § 115.99
§ 115.41 VIEW FROM STREET.
   (A)   In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption
upon the premises is licensed (other than as a restaurant, hotel or club), no
screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the
windows or upon the doors of the licensed premises nor inside the premises,
which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of the licensed premises
from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen,
partition, or other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall
be permitted in or about the interior of the premises which shall prevent a
full view of the entire interior of the premises from the street, road or
sidewalk and the premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of
the entire interior of the premises from the street, road or sidewalk.
   (B)   All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall
be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial
white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly
visible. In case the view into any licensed premises required by the foregoing
provisions shall be willfully obscured by the licensee or by him or her
willfully suffered to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then the license
shall be subject to revocation in the manner herein provided.
   (C)   In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the Mayor shall
have the right to require the filing with him or her of plans, drawings and
photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this section shall be applicable to the
requirements of a Class G license.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34; Am. Ord. 08-36, passed 10-13-08; Am. Ord. 2025-07-05,
passed 7-8-25) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.42 UNLICENSED OPERATION OF VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to operate on a
licensed premises, or allow to be operated on a licensed premises, any video
gaming terminal that is not compliant with the Illinois Video Gaming Act, ILCS
Ch. 230, Act. 140, §§ 1 et seq.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to operate on a
licensed premises, or allow to be operated on a licensed premises, any video
gaming terminal that is not compliant with
Chapter 124.
(Ord. 2025-07-05, passed 7-8-25)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
chapter, except §
115.35, shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each offense;
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
115.35 shall be fined not less than $200 nor more than $500 for each offense;
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
115.42 shall, in addition to being subject to the penalties in §
124.99, be fined not less than $200 nor more than $500 for each offense; and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation
occurs or continues.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Mayor may
revoke any license conferred under this chapter for any violation of the
provisions of this chapter, or for any violation of any state law pertaining to
the sale of alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. passed 3-5-34; Am. Ord. 71-1, passed 1-11-71; Am. Ord. 2025-07-05, passed
7-8-25)
CHAPTER 116: TOBACCO REGULATIONS
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Certain acts prohibited
   
116.03   License required
   
116.04   Obligations on licensee
   
116.05   Vending machines
   
116.06   Vicarious liability for acts or omissions
   
116.07   Revocation of permit
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT-ONLY FACILITY. A facility or restricted area (whether open-air or
enclosed) where the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to believe (such
as by checking identification as required under state law, or by checking the
identification of any person appearing to be under the age of 30 that no person
under legal age is present. A facility or restricted area need not be
permanently restricted to persons under 21 years of age to constitute an adult-
only facility, provided that the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to
believe that no person under 21 years of age is present during the event or
time period in question.
   AGE RESTRICTED AREA. A signed designated area in a retail establishment to
which persons under 21 years of age are not permitted access unless accompanied
by a parent or legal guardian.
   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT. A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means. ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT does not include:
cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco
products as defined in Section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995;
TOBACCO PRODUCT and ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE as defined in this section; or any
product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE. Any device that employs a battery or other mechanism
to heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for
inhalation; any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended to
be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or any solution or
substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for use in the device.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE includes, but is not limited to, any electronic nicotine
delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe,
electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and any components
or parts that can be used to build the product or device. ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE
does not include: cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act
and tobacco products as defined in Section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act
of 1995; TOBACCO PRODUCT and ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT as defined in this
section; any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration
for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or
for other medical purposes, and page is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose; any asthma inhaler prescribed by a physician for that
condition and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; or
any therapeutic product approved for use under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
   LINE OF SIGHT. Visible to a cashier or other employee.
   LUNCH WAGON. A mobile vehicle designed and constructed to transport food and
from which food is sold to the general public.
   NICOTINE. Any form of the chemical nicotine, including any salt or complex,
regardless of whether the chemical is naturally or synthetically derived.
   OPERATOR. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who
establishes for operation by another, or leases or distributes for the purpose
of operation for another, any device or machine for the vending of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco
accessories or smoking herbs whether or not such establishment for operation,
leasing or distribution be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of the
division of the income obtained from said machine.
   OWNER. An operator who has acquired possession and control of a vending
machine by purchase, lease or otherwise.
   SMOKELESS TOBACCO. Any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or
chewing.
   SMOKING HERBS. All substances of plant origin and their derivatives,
including but not limited to broom, calea, California poppy, damiana, hops,
ginseng, lobelia, jimson weed and other members of the Datura genus, passion
flower and wild lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily for use as
smoking materials.
   TOBACCO ACCESSORIES. Cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials
of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and other items, designed primarily
for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products or of substances made illegal
under any statute or of substances whose sale, gift, barter, or exchange is
made unlawful hereunder.
   TOBACCO DEALER. Any person, at wholesale or retail, selling, offering for
sale, furnishing or offering to furnish, tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories or smoking
herbs. TOBACCO DEALER include operators of vending machines.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product containing or made from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product
which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and
intended to be placed in the oral cavity. TOBACCO PRODUCT includes any
component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold
separately. TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include: an electronic cigarette and
alternative nicotine product as defined in this section; or any product that
has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
(Ord. 23-36, passed 9-12-23)
§ 116.02 CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Unless otherwise expressly permitted by state law, no person under 21
years of age shall buy, purchase, or possess any tobacco product, electronic
cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, at retail, to give
away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away
or delivering tobacco products, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine
products, tobacco accessories or smoking herbs within the city without having
first obtained a tobacco dealer's license therefor pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   No person, including any tobacco dealer, shall sell, offer for sale,
give away or deliver any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative
nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb to any person under the age
of 21 years.
   (D)   No tobacco dealer or any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of such licensee under 16 years of age may sell any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herb in a licensed premises. This division does not apply to a sales
clerk in a family-owned business which can prove that the sales clerk is in
fact a son or daughter of the owner.
   (E)   No person, including any tobacco dealer, shall sell, offer for sale,
give away or deliver any tobacco product, that is not contained within a sealed
container, pack, or package as provided by the manufacturer, which container,
pack, or package bears the health warning required by federal law.
   (F)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver any tobacco
product or alternative nicotine product within 100 feet of any school, child
care facility or other building used for educational or recreational programs
for persons under 18 years of age.
   (G)   No person shall distribute without charge samples of any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herbs to any other person, regardless of age. This division does not
apply to the distribution of a tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb sample in any
adult-only facility.
(Ord. 23-36, passed 9-12-23)
§ 116.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any persons or entities desiring to sell or offer for sale, at retail,
to give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail,
giving away or delivering tobacco products, electronic cigarette, alternative
nicotine products, tobacco accessories or smoking herbs within the city shall
first obtain a license from the city to perform such acts.
   (B)   The annual fee for such license shall be $100. All licenses issued
hereunder shall be annual licenses, terminating on the last day of the fiscal
year of the city.
   (C)   Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by
this code.
   (D)   The Mayor or his or her designee is empowered to promulgate a specimen
permit and application therefor. At a minimum, the permit and application shall
be required to state:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   The location to be used;
      (3)   The time period covered and the fee to be paid;
      (4)   An obligation by the applicant to observe the code of the city in
relation thereto; and
      (5)   Such additional information as may be needed for the proper
guidance of the city officials in issuing said license.
   (E)   The Mayor shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such
licenses issued by him or her; and shall furnish the Clerk, Treasurer, the
Chief of Police each with a copy thereof; upon the issuance of any new license,
or the revocation of any old license, the Mayor shall give written notice of
such action to each of these officers within 48 hours of such action.
(Ord. 23-36, passed 9-12-23)
§ 116.04 OBLIGATIONS ON LICENSEE.
   (A)   Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing a tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herb to another person, the person selling, offering for sale,
giving, or furnishing the tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative
nicotine product, smoking accessory or smoking herb shall verify that the
person is at least 21 years of age by examining from any person that appears to
be under 30 years of age a government-issued photographic identification that
establishes the person to be 21 years of age or older.
   (B)   All single packs of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes,
alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories and smoking herbs must be
sold from behind the counter or in an age-restricted area or in a sealed
display case. Any other tobacco products must be sold in line of sight.
      (1)   The restrictions described in this division do not apply to a
retail tobacco store that derives at least 90% of its revenue from tobacco and
tobacco related products; does not permit persons under the age of 21 to enter
the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; and posts a sign
on the main entrance way stating that persons under the age of 21 are
prohibited from entering unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
      (2)   This division does not prohibit the sale of tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories and
smoking herbs from vending machines if the location of the vending machines are
otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   At any location where a tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb is sold,
offered for sale, given away, or delivered via a public display of said tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herb, including but not limited to vending machines which offer
those products for sale, a sign shall be conspicuously posted upon the premises
(or vending machine as the case may be), with such sign bearing red letters, at
least one inch high, on a white background, that states the following: THE SALE
OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS,
TOBACCO ACCESSORIES, AND SMOKING HERBS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE OR THE
MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
(Ord. 23-36, passed 9-12-23)
§ 116.05 VENDING MACHINES.
   (A)   No tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine
product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb may be sold through a vending
machine unless such tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine
product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb is not placed together with any non-
tobacco product, other than matches, and only if the vending machine meets the
location requirements of division (B), below.
   (B)   Location requirements. Vending machines shall only be located:
      (1)   In places where persons under 21 years of age are not permitted
access at any time; or
      (2)   In places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the
premises and vending machine operation is under the direct supervision of the
owner or manager.
(Ord. 23-36, passed 9-12-23)
§ 116.06 VICARIOUS LIABILITY FOR ACTS OR OMISSIONS.
   Every act or omission of whatever nature, that constitute a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, done by any officer, director, manager, or
other agent or employee of any vendor, shall be imputed to such vendor, meaning
such act shall be deemed and held to be the act of such vendor, thereby
subjecting such vendor to penalty in the same manner as if such act or omission
had been done or not done by the vendor personally.
(Ord. 23-36, passed 9-12-23)
§ 116.07 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Mayor or his or her designee are empowered to revoke any permit issued
under the authority of this chapter. The basis for said denial shall be
provided to the permittees in writing. Said permit shall not be revoked for
arbitrary or capricious reasons. The permittee shall have the right to appeal
the revocation to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. At
said meeting, any revocation may be overturned by a two-thirds vote of the City
Council.
(Ord. 23-36, passed 9-12-23)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined not less than $150 nor more than $750 for each offense. Each day a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   Any tobacco dealer licensee found in violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall, in addition to any fine that may be imposed, be subject to
license suspension and/or revocation proceedings.
(Ord. 23-36, passed 9-12-23)
CHAPTER 117: RAFFLE REGULATIONS
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   License; application; restrictions; persons ineligible
   
117.03   License restrictions
   
117.04   Issuance of license and fees
   
117.05   Limitations on prizes and chances
   
117.06   Conduct of raffles
   
117.07   Raffles; manager; bond
   
117.08   Records
   
117.09   Limited construction
   
117.10   Suspension or revocation of license
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the terms defined in this section have the
meanings given them.
   AGGREGATE RETAIL VALUE OF PRIZES. The total retail value of all prizes to be
raffled by any organization, licensed under this chapter.
   BONA FIDE MEMBER. A person who has been a member of an organization for a
time period greater than 30 contiguous days.
   MANAGEMENT OR OPERATION OF A RAFFLE. A person participates in the MANAGEMENT
OR OPERATION OF A RAFFLE when he or she sells admission tickets at the event;
sells, redeems, or in any way assists in the selling or redeeming of raffle
chances; participates in the conducting of any of the raffle games played
during the event, or supervises, directs or instructs anyone conducting a
raffle change; or at any time during the hours of the raffle event counts,
handles or supervises anyone counting or handling any of the proceeds or money
at the event. A person who is present to ensure that the raffle is being
conducted in conformance with the rules established by the licensee is
considered to be participating in the MANAGEMENT OR OPERATION OF A RAFFLE. A
person who is present solely to ensure the equipment is working properly is not
considered to be participating in the MANAGEMENT OR OPERATION OF A RAFFLE.
Setting up, cleaning up, selling food and drink and providing security for the
persons or property at the event does not constitute participation in the
MANAGEMENT OR THE OPERATION OF A RAFFLE. Notwithstanding anything heretofore to
the contrary, the one individual who determines the winning chance through a
drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set
of acts shall not be considered to be participating in the MANAGEMENT OR
OPERATION OF A RAFFLE.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in § 28-2(b) of the Illinois Criminal
Code of 1961, conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter in
which:
      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance;
      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 07-36, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-11-13)
§ 117.02 LICENSE; APPLICATION; RESTRICTIONS; PERSONS INELIGIBLE.
   (A)   Licenses issued by the city are subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   No person, firm, organization, or corporation shall conduct raffles
or chances without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this
chapter.
      (2)   Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle shall file an
application therefor with the City of Paxton on forms provided by the city. The
application shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The name, address, and type of organization;
         (b)   The length of existence of the organization and, if
incorporated, the date and state of incorporation;
         (c)   The name, address and telephone number of the organization’s
presiding officer, secretary and raffle manager;
         (d)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes awarded or to be
awarded;
         (e)   The maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded;
         (f)   The maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued or sold;
         (g)   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or
issued;
         (h)   The time, date or dates and location at which winning chances
will be determined;
         (i)   A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of
the applicant organization, signed by its presiding officer and secretary of
that organization;
         (j)   A sworn statement attesting to the fact that the information
contained in the application is true and correct, signed by the presiding
officer and secretary of that organization.
      (3)   The application to conduct or operate a raffle may be amended to
add or remove members responsible for the conduct, management and operation of
the raffle.
      (4)   The application for license shall be prepared in accordance with
this chapter.
      (5)   A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles as defined in
this chapter.
   (B)   The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
      (1)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
      (2)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
      (3)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      (4)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in division (B)
(1), (2) or (3) above has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in
which such a person is active or employed;
      (5)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (B)(1), (2)
or (3) above is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not;
      (6)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (B)(1), (2)
or (3) above is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as
defined in this chapter;
      (7)   Any person, firm, organization or corporation that does not
maintain a registered office or principal office or regular meeting place
within a 20-mile radius of City Hall (145 South Market Street).
(Ord. 07-08, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 07-36, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-11-13)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.03 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No raffle shall be conducted between the hours commencing at 10:30
p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the next day.
   (B)   (1)   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious,
charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans’ organizations
that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence
continuously for a period of five years immediately before making application
for a license and which have had during that entire five-year period a bona
fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a non-profit
fundraising organization that the licensing authority determines is organized
for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified
individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the
result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (B), the following definitions apply:
         BUSINESS. A voluntary organization composed of individuals and
businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of a community.
         CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to
benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
         EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common
to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax- supported schools.
         FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest, the
primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to
provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens
of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
         LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
         NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on
a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to any one as a result
of the operation.
         RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded
for the purpose of religious worship.
         VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit.
   (C)   All licenses granted under this chapter are non-transferable and may
not be assigned to any other person, firm, organization or corporation.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 07-26, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-11-13)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.04 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE AND FEES.
   (A)   Before any license is issued hereunder, the fee therefor as herein
fixed shall first be paid to the City Clerk and the application in writing made
to the city for such license by the party desiring the same is filed with the
City Clerk. If the applicant does not receive a license within 30 days of the
filing of the application or if the application is denied, the applicant shall
receive a refund of its license fees. If the applicant received a license, no
refund of any part or all of the license fee shall be made.
   (B)   (1)   If the aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise to be
awarded does not exceed $1,000, the license shall be free.
      (2)   If the aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise to be
awarded exceeds $1,000, but does not exceed $5,000, the license fee shall be
$25.
      (3)   If the aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise to be
awarded exceeds $5,000, the license fee shall be $50.
   (C)   The applicant shall make a good faith effort to estimate the aggregate
retail value of any 50/50 raffles. If said 50/50 raffle grosses more than the
aggregate retail value estimated on the application as shown by the records
required to be reported to the city, the licensee shall be liable to the city
for any further license fee that may be required under this section.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 07-36, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-11-13)
§ 117.05 LIMITATIONS ON PRIZES AND CHANCES.
   (A)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed the sum of $100,000.
   (B)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed the sum of $50,000.
   (C)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold by a licensee shall not exceed the sum of $100.
   (D)   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
by a licensee for a single raffle shall not exceed 180 days.
   (E)   The maximum number of days during which a licensee may award a prize
or merchandise shall not exceed 31 days.
   (F)   Any organization seeking to award prizes or merchandise exceeding the
limitations as set forth above, shall request and receive approval from the
City Council. Such request shall be specific as to the amount and/or number of
days above and beyond the above limitations.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 07-36, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-11-13; Am. Ord. 15-28, passed 11-9-15) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.06 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   (A)    The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted
to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
      (2)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization
may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
      (3)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit, directly or
indirectly, for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
      (4)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this chapter.
      (5)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified
on the license which area must be within the borders of the City of Paxton.
      (6)   Winning changes may be determined only at those locations specified
on the license and the location must be within the city limits.
      (7)   A person under the age of 18 years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where
winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his or her parent
or guardian.
   (B)   If a lessor rents premises where a winning chance or chances on a
raffle are determined, the lessor shall not be criminally liable if the person
who uses the premises for the determining of winning chances does not hold a
license issued by the city under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 07-36, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-11-13)
§ 117.07 RAFFLES; MANAGER; BOND.
   (A)   All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the
supervision of a single raffle manager designated by the licensed organization.
   (B)   The raffle manager must be a person who has been a member of the
licensed organization for a time period greater than 12 contiguous months,
except for an organization that has been organized for the sole purpose of
providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of
individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness,
disability, accident or disaster.
   (C)   The raffle manager for an organization that the licensing authority
determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance
to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster shall be
approved by the City Council as a part of the licensing procedure.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 07-36, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-11-13)
§ 117.08 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from the other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the Illinois Department of Revenue, and
placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of
its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report within 60
days after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership, and to the city,
its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section. The report
shall be on a cash basis, not on an accrual basis.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three years,
and organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of
raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 07-36, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-11-13)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.09 LIMITED CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting
or operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than
raffles as provided for herein.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to regulate or authorize
the conducting or operating of the game commonly known as “bingo”, when
conducted in accordance with the Illinois Bingo License and Tax Act (ILCS Ch.
230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.)
(Ord. 07-08, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 07-36, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-11-13)
§ 117.10 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   License issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked for any
violation of this chapter by the Mayor of the city.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 07-36, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-11-13)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation, or organization violating any provision of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which
a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 07-08, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 07-36, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-11-13)
CHAPTER 118: CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Short title
   
118.02   Intent and purposes
   
118.03   Definitions
Cable Television Franchises
   
118.10   Grant of authority; franchise required
   
118.11   Franchise characteristics
   
118.12   Franchisee subject to other laws, police powers
   
118.13   Interpretation of franchise terms
   
118.14   Applications for grant, renewal, modification or transfer of
franchises
   
118.15   Grant of franchises
   
118.16   Insurance; surety; indemnification
   
118.17   (Reserved)
Franchise Regulations
   
118.30   Minimum facilities and services
   
118.31   Franchise fee
   
118.32   Reports and records
   
118.33   Customer service requirements
   
118.34   Discrimination prohibited
   
118.35   Use of rights-of-way
   
118.36   Subscriber privacy; unauthorized reception
   
118.37   Technical standards
Administration and Enforcement
   
118.40   Enforcement remedies
   
118.41   Renewal of franchise
   
118.42   Transfers
   
118.43   Revocation or termination of franchise
   
118.44   Arbitration
   
118.45   Continuity of service mandatory
   
118.46   Unlawful solicitation or acceptance of gifts
   
118.47   Rates
   
118.48   Access facilities
   
118.49   Cable advisory committee
   
118.50   Performance evaluation
   
118.51   Administration
   
118.52   Applicability
Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee
   
118.60   Definitions
   
118.61   Cable/video service provider fee imposed
   
118.62   PEG access support fee imposed
   
118.63   Applicable principles
   
118.64   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
118.65   Audits of cable/video service provider
   
118.66   Late fees/payments
Cable and Video Customer Protection Law
   
118.70   Customer service and privacy protection law
   
118.71   Enforcement
   
118.72   Penalties
   
118.73   Customer credits
Cross-reference:
   For specific cable television franchises, see T.S.O. VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Paxton Cable Television
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.02 INTENT AND PURPOSES.
   It is the intent of the city to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare by providing for the grant of one or more franchises for the
construction and operation of a cable system; to provide for the regulation of
each cable system by the city; to provide for the payment of fees and other
valuable consideration by a franchisee to the city for the privilege of using
the public rights-of-way for constructing and operating a cable system; to
promote the availability of cable service to city residents; to encourage the
development of cable as a means of communication between and among the members
of the public and public institutions; to encourage the development of
competitive cable services; and to encourage the provision of diverse
information to the community over cable.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words not
defined are given their meaning in Section 602 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. §
522, and, if none, their common and ordinary meaning. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The words “must” or “shall” are mandatory and the
word “may” is permissive.
   ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel set aside for public use, educational use, or
governmental use without a charge by the franchisee for channel usage.
   APPLICATION. A proposal to construct and operate a cable system within the
city, transfer a franchise, renew a franchise, or modify a franchise. An
APPLICATION includes the initial proposal plus all subsequent amendments or
supplements to the proposal and relevant correspondence.
   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et
seq.
   CABLE SERVICE. The term as defined in item (6) of 47 U.S.C. 522 (2012), as
amended.
   CABLE SYSTEM. The term as defined in item (7) of 47 U.S.C. 522 (2012), as
amended.
   CONTROL OF A FRANCHISEE OR APPLICANT. The legal or practical ability to
direct the affairs of the franchisee or applicant either directly or
indirectly, whether by contractual agreement or majority ownership of an
economic interest.
   CITY. Paxton, Illinois, in its present incorporated form or in any form
which may subsequently be adopted.
   COUNCIL. The City Council that is the legislative body of the city.
   CITY CLERK. The administrative officer of the city or designee.
   FAIR MARKET VALUE. The price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing
seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing in the
industry at the time but with no value allocated to the franchise itself.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   FRANCHISE. The term as defined in item (9) of 47 U.S.C. 522 (2012), as
amended.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. A contract entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth
the terms and conditions under which the franchise will be exercised.
   FRANCHISEE. Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter.
   GROSS REVENUES. The term as defined on June 1, 2012, in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5,
§ 21-801(c). The repeal of the aforesaid section shall not affect this
definition.
   PERSON. The term as defined in item (15) of 47 U.S.C. 522 (2012), as
amended.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person who legally receives any one or more of the services
provided by the cable system.
   SYSTEM MALFUNCTION. An equipment or facility failure that results in the
loss of satisfactory service on one or more channels. A malfunction is major if
renders unviewable two or more channels carrying off-the-air television
signals, or a total of five channels regardless of the signals carried, and it
affects five or more subscribers.
   TRANSFER OF A FRANCHISE. 
      (1)   Any transaction in which:
         (a)   An ownership or other interest in a franchisee is transferred
from one person or group of persons to another person or group of persons so
that control of the franchisee is transferred, or
         (b)   The rights held by the franchisee under a franchise agreement
are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons.
      (2)   A transfer is pro forma if it involves no significant change in the
ultimate control of the franchisee.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89; Am. Ord. 12-49, passed 9-10-12)
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
§ 118.10 GRANT OF AUTHORITY; FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   The city may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this chapter.
No person may construct or operate a cable system in the city without a current
and valid franchise granted by the city.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.11 FRANCHISE CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   A franchise authorizes use of the public rights-of-way for installing
and maintaining cables, wires, lines, and other facilities to operate a cable
system within the city, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize the
franchisee to provide service to, or install cables, wires, lines, or any other
equipment or facilities upon private property without owner consent (except for
use of compatible easements pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2)), or to use
publicly or privately owned utility poles or conduits without a separate
agreement with the owners.
   (B)   A franchise is nonexclusive and will not expressly or implicitly
preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems within the
city or affect the city’s right to authorize use of public rights-of-way to
other persons as it determines appropriate.
   (C)   A franchise conveys no property right to the franchisee or right to
renewal other than as may be required by state or federal law.
   (D)   A franchise agreement constitutes a contract between the franchisee
and the city once it is accepted by the franchisee. A franchisee contractually
commits itself to comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of the
franchise agreement and with all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules,
regulations, and orders.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.12 FRANCHISEE SUBJECT TO OTHER LAWS, POLICE POWER.
   (A)   A franchisee is subject to and must comply with all applicable local,
city, state and federal laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, and
orders. A franchisee is also subject to the city’s police power in accordance
with Illinois law.
   (B)   A franchisee or other person may not be excused from complying with
any of the terms and conditions of this chapter or a franchise agreement by any
failure of the city, upon one or more occasions, to require compliance or
performance.
   (C)   The city may, on its own motion or at the request of an applicant or
franchisee for good cause shown, waive any requirement of this chapter.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.13 INTERPRETATION OF FRANCHISE TERMS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter will apply to a franchise agreement as
if fully set forth in the franchise agreement. The express terms of this
chapter will prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in a franchise
agreement.
   (B)   The provisions of a franchise agreement will be liberally construed in
order to effectuate its purposes and objectives consistent with this chapter
and the public interest.
   (C)   A franchise agreement will be governed by and construed in accordance
with the laws of the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.14 APPLICATIONS FOR GRANT, RENEWAL, MODIFICATION OR TRANSFER OF
FRANCHISES.
   (A)   An application must be filed with the city for grant of a new
franchise, renewal of a franchise under either the formal or informal
procedures in accordance with Section626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546,
modification of a franchise agreement, or a transfer of a franchise. An
applicant has the burden to demonstrate compliance with all requirements of
this chapter and of federal law.
   (B)   To be acceptable for filing, an application must be submitted in the
number of copies required by the city, be accompanied by the application filing
fee where required, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and
contain all required information. All applications must include the names and
addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect
to the application.
   (C)   All applications accepted for filing must be made available by the
city for public inspection. The city shall advertise the receipt of all
accepted applications in accordance with standard procedure.
   (D)   An application for the grant of a new franchise may be filed pursuant
to a request for proposals issued by the city or on an unsolicited basis. The
city, upon receipt of an unsolicited application, may issue a request for
proposals. If the city elects to issue a request for proposals upon receipt of
an unsolicited application, the applicant may submit an amended application in
response to the request for proposals, or may inform the city that its
unsolicited application should be considered in response to the request for
proposals, or may withdraw its unsolicited application. An application which
does not conform to the requirements of a request for proposals may be
considered nonresponsive and returned.
   (E)   An application for the grant of a new franchise must contain, at
minimum, the following information:
      (1)    Name and address of the applicant and identification of the
ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and addresses of
the ten largest holders of an ownership interest in the applicant, and all
known persons with 5% or more ownership interest; the persons who control the
applicant; all officers and directors of the applicant; and any other business
affiliation and cable system ownership interest of each named person;
      (2)   An indication of whether the applicant, or any person controlling
the applicant, or any officer or major stockholder of the applicant, has been
adjudged bankrupt, had a cable franchise revoked, or not renewed, or been found
guilty by any court or administrative agency of a violation of a security or
antitrust law, or a felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude; and, if so,
identification of any such person or entity and a full explanation of the
circumstances;
      (3)   A demonstration of the applicant’s technical, legal and financial
ability to construct and operate the proposed cable facility, including
identification of key personnel;
      (4)   A description of applicant’s prior experience in cable operations
and identification of communities in which applicant or its principals have, or
had, a cable franchise or an interest therein, including the identification of
any litigation involving any such franchisees and their franchising
authorities;
      (5)   Identification of the area to be served by the cable system if the
entire city is not to be served;
      (6)   A detailed description of the physical facility proposed, including
channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics, headend, and
access facilities to be provided to satisfy the requirements of §
118.48;
      (7)   A description of the construction of the proposed system, including
an estimate of above-ground and below-ground mileage and its location, the
proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate, of how
services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and
information on the availability of space on poles and conduits including, where
appropriate, an estimate of the cost of rearrangement of facilities to
accommodate such use;
      (8)   A description of the services to be provided initially, including
all broadcast and non-broadcast signals to be carried and all non-television
services, and if services will be offered by tiers, identification of the
signals and/or services to be included on each tier;
      (9)   The proposed rate structure including charges for each service
tier, installation, converters, and other equipment or services;
      (10)   A demonstration of how the proposal will reasonably meet the
future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including a
description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent
community needs assessment conducted for the city;
      (11)   Pro forma financial projections for the first three years of the
franchise term, including statement of income, balance sheet, sources and uses
of funds, and schedule of capital additions, with all significant assumptions
explained in notes or supporting schedules;
      (12)   An affidavit of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the
truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and acknowledging the
enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the proposal
meets all federal and state requirements; and
      (13)   Any other information necessary to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and information that the city may request of the
applicant.
   (F)   An application for modification of a franchise must include, at
minimum, the following information:
      (1)   The specific modification requested;
      (2)   The justification for the requested modification, including the
impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the impact
on the applicant if the modification is not approved;
      (3)   A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section
625 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the
requested modification meets the legal standards of 47 U.S.C. § 545; and
      (4)   Any other information necessary for the city to make a
determination.
   (G)   An application for renewal of a franchise must comply with the
requirements of §
118.41.
   (H)   An application for approval of a transfer of a franchise must comply
with the requirements of §
118.42.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89; Am. Ord. 12-49, passed 9-10-12)
§ 118.15 GRANT OF FRANCHISES.
   (A)   The city may grant a franchise for a period not to exceed 15 years to
serve the city.
   (B)   The city may make the grant of a franchise conditioned upon the
completion of construction within a prescribed time or upon the performance of
other specific obligations, specifying in the franchise agreement that failure
to timely comply with the condition will cause the franchise to become null and
void without further action by the city.
   (C)   In evaluating an application for a new franchise, the city shall
consider the applicant’s character; the applicant’s technical, financial, and
legal qualifications to construct and operate the proposed system; the nature
of the proposed facilities, equipment, and services; the applicant’s record in
other communities, if any; and whether the proposal will meet anticipated
community needs and serve the public interest.
   (D)   Based upon the application, the written and oral testimony and other
material presented at a public hearing before the Council, and any other
information relevant to the application, the Council shall decide whether to
grant or deny a franchise application.
   (E)   If the Council grants a franchise application, the City Attorney and
the applicant must agree on the terms of a franchise agreement within 90
calendar days from the date of the resolution making the grant. This period may
be extended for good cause by the Council. If agreement is not reached with the
City Attorney within 90 calendar days or if the period is not extended by the
Council, the franchise grant will be null and void without further action by
the city.
   (F)   The text of a proposed franchise agreement must be made available by
the city to the public and advertised as required by city procedure.
   (G)   After complying with the requirements of divisions (C) through (F)
above, the Council shall, following a public hearing, approve or disapprove the
proposed franchise agreement by resolution.
   (H)   The grant of an initial franchise or a renewed franchise shall be
subject to a franchise acceptance fee in an amount not to exceed the city's out
of pocket costs in considering the application. Within 30 calendar days of the
date the resolution approving the franchise agreement the city must notify the
approved applicant of the amount of any franchise acceptance fee and its method
of calculation. If the franchise acceptance fee is not paid within 60 calendar
days of the date of the Council resolution approving the franchise agreement,
the grant will be null and void. Prior to the franchise becoming effective, the
approved applicant must demonstrate compliance with the surety, insurance and
similar provisions of the franchise agreement.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89; Am. Ord. 12-49, passed 9-10-12)
§ 118.16 INSURANCE; SURETY; INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Unless a franchise agreement specifies otherwise, the following
insurance coverage shall be in force at all times during the franchise period:
workmen’s compensation insurance to meet all state requirements; and general
comprehensive liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation
and maintenance of a cable system, including the operation of motor vehicles,
in the following minimum amounts:
      (1)   For bodily injury, including death, $1,000,000 for any one person,
and $5,000,000 for any one accident;
      (2)   For property damage $1,000,000; and
      (3)   For damages resulting from any liability of any nature that may
arise from or be occasioned by operation of the cable system, including any
communication over the cable system, excepting programming on government
channels, $2,000,000.
   (B)   All insurance policies must be with sureties qualified to do business
in Illinois and in a form approved by the City Attorney. The city may require
in a franchise agreement coverage and amounts in excess of the above minimums.
   (C)   A franchisee must, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold
harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards, commissions, agents and
employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and
judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of the construction,
maintenance or operation of its cable system regardless of whether the act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise.
This provision includes, but is not limited to, claims arising out of copyright
infringements or a failure by the franchisee to secure consents from the
owners, authorized distributors, or licensees of programs to be delivered by
the cable system.
   (D)   The franchise agreement may require the franchisee to have in force at
all times a performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount as
necessary to ensure the faithful performance by the franchisee of its
obligation under the franchise agreement. Such surety instruments must be
provided by an entity qualified to do business in the State of Illinois and in
a form approved by the City Attorney.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.17 (RESERVED).
FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
§ 118.30 MINIMUM FACILITIES AND SERVICES.
   (A)   The following minimum requirements for facilities and services apply
to all franchises. The city may require that a franchise exceed these minimum
requirements.
      (1)   A cable system constructed or rebuilt after the effective date of
this chapter must have a minimum capacity of 54 video channels available for
immediate or potential use and have the capability for two-way communications.
      (2)   A cable system may be required to provide one or more access
channels for public, educational or governmental access. In addition, the city
may require a franchisee to reserve one or more additional channels for present
or future access use. If the city determines that the use of existing access
facilities warrants the activation of such reserve channels, the franchisee
shall activate them upon 90 days’ notice from the city. The city may require in
a franchise agreement that the franchisee contribute to capital costs for
access studios and related equipment and facilities.
      (3)   A cable system must provide leased access channels as required by
federal law.
      (4)   Service to public buildings may be required without charge as set
forth in the franchise agreement.
   (B)   Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, a franchisee must
make cable service available to every unserved dwelling within the franchise
service area. Where the franchise service area is the entire city, the
franchisee shall extend service to any annexed areas within six months of the
date of annexation; provided, however, the franchisee is not required to extend
service in areas where the cable would pass fewer than 30 homes per cable mile.
   (C)   The city may waive minimum requirements of this section where, in the
judgment of the city, such waiver is justified in the public interest.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.31 FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, a franchisee, in
consideration of the privilege granted under a franchise for the use of public
rights-of-way to construct and operate a cable system, must pay to the city 5%
of the franchisee’s gross revenues derived from the operation of its cable
system within the city during the period of its franchise. Franchise fees are
payable quarterly. A franchisee must pay the franchise fee due to the city for
the preceding quarter within 30 calendar days of the end of that quarter.
   (B)   Any payment of franchise fees to adjust for a shortfall in the
quarterly payments for the preceding year must be made no later than the filing
date for the annual financial statements. Adjustments for any overpayment will
be credited to subsequent quarterly payments.
   (C)   Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, franchisee fee
payments shall be accompanied by a financial statement showing the gross
revenues received by the franchisee during the period covered by the payments
and the number of subscribers served at the end of the period.
   (D)   A franchisee must file within three months of the end of its fiscal
year the franchisee’s annual financial statements for the preceding year,
audited by a certified public accountant or certified as accurate by the
franchisee’s chief financial officer. The franchisee will bear the cost of the
preparation of such financial statements.
   (E)   The city may inspect and audit any and all books and records of the
franchisee, and recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the
franchise. The cost of the audit will be borne by the franchisee if the annual
payment to the city is increased by more than 5% as a result of the audit.
   (F)   In the event that a franchise payment is not received by the city on
or before the due date, interest will be charged from the due date at an
interest rate of 1 1/2% per month. In addition, the franchisee will pay a late
charge of 5% of the amount of such payment. Interest and late charges will not
be imposed for any payment necessary as a result of the yearly adjustment
provided for in division (B) above, if the payment to correct for a shortfall
does not exceed 10% of the total payments made during the year. In the event
such payment exceeds 10% of the total payments made during the year, the
franchisee will be liable for interest and late charges for the entire amount
due.
   (G)   When a franchise terminates for whatever reason, the franchisee must
file with the city within 90 calendar days of the date its operations cease a
financial statement, audited by a CPA or certified by the franchisee’s chief
financial officer, showing the gross revenues received by the franchisee since
the end of the previous fiscal year. Adjustments will be made at that time for
franchise fees due to the date that the franchisee’s operations ceased.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.32 REPORTS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Within three months of the close of its fiscal year, a franchisee must
file with the city an annual report that includes the following information:
      (1) A summary of the previous calendar year’s activities in development
of the system, including but not limited to services begun or dropped, number
of subscribers (including gains and losses), homes passed, and miles of cable
distribution plants in service. The summary shall also include a comparison of
any construction, including system upgrades, during the year with any
projections previously provided to the city.
      (2)   A financial statement, including a statement of income, a balance
sheet, and where the franchisee is in a significant construction phase, a
statement of sources and applications of funds. The statement shall include
notes that specify all significant accounting policies and practices upon which
it is based. A summary shall be provided comparing the current year with
previous years since the beginning of the franchise.
      (3)   A copy of updated maps depicting the location of all trunks where
there was construction in the year of the report.
      (4)   A summary of complaints, identifying the number and nature of
complaints and their disposition. Where complaints involve one or more
recurrent system problems, the nature of each problem and what steps have been
taken to correct it shall be identified. More detailed information on
complaints shall be submitted upon request of the city.
      (5)   If the franchisee is a corporation, a list of officers and members
of the board and the officers and board members of any parent corporation; and
where a parent corporation’s stock is publicly traded, a copy of its most
recent annual report.
      (6)   A list of all partners or stockholders holding 5% or more ownership
interest in the franchisee and any parent corporation; provided, however, when
any such entity has fewer than ten persons holding 5% ownership interest, the
ten largest such holders. Alternatively, the annual ownership information
required by the FCC for broadcast licensees may be supplied.
      (7)   A copy of all the franchisee’s rules and regulations applicable to
subscribers and users of the cable system.
   (B)   A franchisee must maintain a complete set of books and records
available for inspection upon reasonable prior notice by the city during normal
business hours.
   (C)   Upon written request of the franchisee and approval by the City
Attorney, information of a proprietary nature submitted to the city pursuant to
this chapter or a franchise agreement will not be made available for public
inspection.
   (D)   The franchisee shall provide to the city a copy of all filings of the
franchisee or affiliated entity made with the Federal Communications
Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission, or other federal agency
where such filings involve matters that affect, or could affect, the operation
of the franchised cable system or the franchisee’s capability to carry out its
obligations under the franchise agreement and this chapter.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.33 CUSTOMER SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A franchisee must have available at all times personnel, equipment and
procedures capable of locating and correcting major system malfunctions. Major
system malfunctions must be corrected without delay. Corrective action for all
other malfunctions must be initiated not later than the next business day after
the subscriber service call is received, and must be completed as promptly as
possible.
   (B)   A franchisee must provide each subscriber at the time cable service is
installed written instructions for placing a service call, filing a complaint,
or requesting an adjustment. Each subscriber must also be provided with a
schedule of the subscriber’s rates and charges, a copy of the service contract,
delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures, and a description of
any other of the franchisee’s policies in connection with its subscribers.
   (C)   A franchisee must maintain a complete record of service complaints
received and action taken. These records must be open to the city for
inspection during normal business hours. Such records must be retained for not
less than two years.
   (D)   Upon termination of service to a subscriber and at the subscriber’s
request, a franchisee must remove all its facilities and equipment from the
subscriber’s premises within 30 days of the subscriber’s request. Where removal
is impractical, such as with buried cable or internal wiring, facilities and
equipment may be disconnected and abandoned rather than removed.
   (E)   If warranted in the city’s judgment, the city may adopt regulations
governing customer service so as to assure prompt, courteous or responsive
treatment of the public by a cable operator.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89; Am. Ord. 12-49, passed 9-10-12)
§ 118.34 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Unless approved by the city and to the extent consistent with federal
law, no franchisee may in its rates or charges, or in the availability of the
services or facilities of its system, or in any other respect, make or grant
undue preferences or advantages to any subscriber or potential subscriber to
the system, or to any user or potential user of the system, nor subject any
such persons to any undue prejudice or any disadvantage.
   (B)   A franchisee must not deny cable service to any potential subscribers
because of the income of the residents of the area in which the subscribers
reside.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.35 USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   A franchisee must utilize, with the owner’s permission, existing
poles, conduits or such other facilities whenever possible. Copies of
agreements for use of poles, conduits or other facilities must be filed with
the city upon city request.
   (B)   All transmission lines, equipment and structures must be installed and
located to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners. The city may from time-to-time issue such
reasonable rules and regulations concerning the installation and maintenance of
the cable system installed in the public rights-of-way as may be consistent
with this chapter and the franchise agreement.
   (C)   Suitable safety devices and practices as required by local, city,
state and federal laws, ordinances, regulations and permits must be used during
construction, maintenance and repair of a cable system.
   (D)   A franchisee must remove, replace or modify at its own expense the
installation of any of its facilities within any a public right-of-way when
required to do so by the city to allow it to change, maintain, repair or
improve a public thoroughfare.
   (E)   On streets and roads where electrical or telephone utility wiring are
located underground, either at the time of initial construction or
subsequently, the cable must also be located underground at the franchisee’s
expense. Between a street or road and a subscriber’s residence, the cable must
be located underground if either electrical and telephone utility wiring are
located underground. If both electric and telephone utility wiring is aerial, a
franchisee may install aerial cable except where a property owner or resident
requests underground installation and agrees to bear the additional cost over
aerial installation.
   (F)   A franchisee must obtain any required permits before causing any
damage or disturbance to public thoroughfares or private property as a result
of its construction or operations and must restore to their former condition
such private property and public thoroughfares, the latter in a manner approved
by the city. If such restoration is not satisfactorily performed within a
reasonable time, the city, or the property owner in the case of private
property may, after prior notice to the franchisee, cause the repairs to be
made at the expense of the franchisee.
   (G)   A franchisee may trim trees within public rights-of-way at its own
expense as necessary to protect its wires and facilities, subject to any
direction that may be provided by the city. Trees on private property may be
trimmed with the consent of the property owner.
   (H)   At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit
and upon sufficient notice, the franchisee must temporarily raise, lower or cut
its wires as necessary to facilitate such move upon not less than 72 hours’
advance notice. The direct expense of such temporary changes, including standby
time, must be paid by the permit holder and the franchisee may require payment
in advance.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.36 SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY; UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION.
   (A)   A franchisee must protect the privacy of all subscribers pursuant to
the provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551. A franchisee
must not condition subscriber service on the subscriber’s grant of permission
to disclose information which, pursuant to federal law, cannot be disclosed
without the subscriber’s explicit consent.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to intercept or use any video, voice, or
data signal transmissions over a cable system, unless such interception or use
is authorized by the franchisee or other person having the lawful right to
authorize the reception or use.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.37 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Any cable system constructed within the city must meet or exceed
technical standards consistent with this chapter, the franchise agreement, and
the franchisee’s application. The system must be capable of delivering all
National Television Systems Committee (NTSC) color and monochrome standards
signals and designed to provide picture quality of TASO grade 2 or better and
superior reliability. All television signals transmitted on a cable system must
include any closed captioning information for the hearing impaired. Antennas,
supporting structures, and outside plant used in the system must be designed to
comply with the recommendations of the Electronics Industries Association on
tower structures and outside plant.
   (B)   All construction, installation and maintenance must comply with the
National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electric Code, the standards of
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, all state and local
regulations, and good and accepted industry practices. Close coordination with
public and private utilities or any other cable operator in the area, and the
use of accepted practices and procedures, is retired to avoid damage or adverse
impact on existing or planned facilities.
   (C)   At the stages of any construction specified in the franchise
agreement, the franchisee must perform at its expense proof of performance
tests designed to demonstrate compliance with the retirements of this chapter,
the franchise agreement, and FCC requirements. The franchisee must provide the
proof of performance test results promptly to the city.
   (D)   The city may require periodic proof of performance tests to be
performed at the expense of the franchisee. The franchisee must provide the
test results promptly to the city.
   (E)   The franchisee must advise the city when a proof of performance test
is scheduled so that the city may have an observer present.
   (F)   A franchisee must not design, install or operate its facilities in a
manner that will interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the
electrical system located in any building, the cable system of another
franchisee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving television or
other broadcast signals.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 118.40 ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   The city has the right to apply any one or combination of the
following remedies in the event a franchisee violates any provision of the law
or its franchise agreement:
      (1)   Impose liquidated damages in such amount, whether per day,
incident, or other measure of violation, as provided in the franchise
agreement. Payment of liquidated damages by the franchisee will not relieve the
franchisee of its obligation to meet the franchise requirements.
      (2)   Reduce the duration of the franchise on such basis as the city
determines is reasonable pursuant to the process specified in §
118.43.
      (3)   Revoke the franchise as provided for in §
118.43.
   (B)   In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the city must
take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or persons
bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy, required in
order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the city
determines are appropriate. The city shall not impose any remedy without first
giving the franchisee notice of the violation and a reasonable opportunity to
cure it.
   (C)   In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the city may seek legal
or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.41 RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   If a franchisee decides to initiate a formal franchise renewal process
in accordance with Section 626(a) through (g) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546
(a) - (g), it must notify the city within 30 to 36 months of the franchise
expiration date. Upon such notification, or at the city’s own initiative, the
city must commence the following process:
      (1)   The city shall review and evaluate the future cable-related
community needs and interests and the franchisee’s past performance. The review
and evaluation process must include opportunity for public comment.
      (2)   Immediately upon completion of the review and evaluation process,
the city must notify the franchisee that it may file a renewal application. The
notice must specify the information to be included in the renewal application
and the deadline for filing the application, which must be no earlier than 30
calendar days following the date of the notice. If the franchisee does not
submit a renewal application by the specified date, it will be deemed not to be
seeking renewal of its franchise.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the renewal-application, the city shall publish
notice of its receipt and may schedule one or more public meetings or implement
other procedures under which comments from the public on the application may be
received.
   (B)   In considering a renewal application, the city must consider whether:
      (1)   The cable operator has substantially complied with the material
terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law;
      (2)   The quality of the cable operator’s service, including signal
quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices (but without
regard to the mix, quality, or level of cable services or other services
provided over the system) has been reasonable in light of community needs;
      (3)   The cable operator has the financial, legal and technical ability
to provide the services, facilities, and equipment set forth in its proposal;
and
      (4)   The cable operator’s proposal is reasonable to meet the future
cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of
meeting such needs and interests.
   (C)   The Council shall hold at least one public hearing to consider the
application. An advisory committee or a committee of the Council may make
recommendations to the Council prior to its consideration, a copy of which
recommendations shall be made available to the franchisee in advance of the
Council’s consideration. Following the public hearing on the renewal
application, the Council must either:
      (1)   Pass a resolution agreeing to renew the franchise, subject to the
negotiation of a franchise agreement satisfactory to the city and the
franchisee, or
      (2)   Pass a resolution that makes a preliminary assessment that the
franchise should not be renewed.
   (D)   The Council’s action under division (C) above must be taken within
four months of the date of the renewal application notice to the franchisee
required in division (A)(2) above.
   (E)   If a preliminary assessment is made that a franchise should not be
renewed, at the request of the franchisee or on its own initiative, the city
must commence an administrative proceeding in accordance with Section 626(c) of
the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(c).
   (F)   The city shall commence an administrative proceeding, initiated by a
hearing order which establishes the issues to be addressed in the hearing and
the procedures to be followed and appoints a presiding officer for the hearing.
Upon the completion of the hearing, the presiding officer shall issue a
recommended decision. Parties to the hearing and the public shall have 30
calendar days to comment on the recommended decision after its issuance.
   (G)   Based on the recommended decision, the comment and arguments
presented, and other evidence of record, the Council, following a public
hearing, shall make a final determination on whether to grant or deny the
renewal application. The Council shall issue a written decision setting forth
the reasons for its decision.
   (H)   The provisions of divisions (A) through (G) above notwithstanding, a
franchisee may submit a proposal for renewal of a franchise in accordance with
47 U.S.C. § 546(h). The city must hold one or more public hearings or implement
other procedures under which comments on the proposal from the public may be
received. Following such public hearings or other procedures, the Council shall
determine whether the franchise should be renewed and the terms and conditions
of any renewal. In making its determination the Council shall not consider the
pendency of any other application for a franchise.
   (I)   Once the Council grants a renewal application, the city and the
franchisee must agree on a franchise agreement, pursuant to the procedures
specified in divisions (E) through (J) of §
118.15, before the renewal becomes effective.
   (J)   If renewal of a franchise is denied, the city may acquire ownership of
the cable system or effect a transfer of ownership of the system to another
person upon the agreement of the owner of the facilities and approval of the
Council. Any such acquisition by the city must be at fair market value,
determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with
no value allocated to the franchise itself.
   (K)   If renewal of a franchise is denied and the city does not purchase the
cable system, the city may require the former franchisee to remove its
facilities and equipment. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a
reasonable period of time, the city may have the removal done at the former
franchisee’s and/or surety’s expense.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.42 TRANSFERS.
   (A)   A transfer of a franchise must not occur without prior approval of the
city.
   (B)   An application to transfer a franchise must meet the requirements of §
118.14 and provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including
details on the legal, character, financial, technical and other pertinent
qualifications of the transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer
on subscriber rates. At minimum, the information required in §
118.14(E)(l) through (4) must be provided by the proposed transferee. The
information required in §
118.14(E)(5) through (10) must also be provided whenever the proposed
transferee expects material changes to occur in those areas. Transfer
applications should be filed at least 90 days prior to the anticipated date of
the proposed transaction.
   (C)   Final action on an application for transfer of a franchise must be
taken by the Council. In making a determination on such an application, the
Council will consider the legal, financial, technical and character
qualifications of the transferee to operate the system and whether operation by
the transferee would adversely affect the cable services to subscribers or
otherwise be contrary to the public interest.
   (D)   Approval by the city of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute
a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under this chapter or the
franchise agreement.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.43 REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   A franchise may be revoked by the Council for failure to construct as
required, operate or maintain the cable system as required by this chapter or
the franchise agreement or for other material breach of this chapter or the
franchise agreement. However, where the city has issued a franchise
specifically conditioned upon the completion of construction or other specific
obligation by a specified date pursuant to §
118.15(B), failure of the franchisee to complete construction or comply with
other specific obligation as required will result in the automatic forfeiture
of the franchise without further action by the city, unless the city, at its
discretion and for good cause demonstrated by the franchisee, grants an
extension of time. If within 30 calendar days following written notice from the
city to the franchisee that it is in material breach of this chapter or the
franchise agreement, the franchisee has not taken corrective action or
corrective action is not being actively and expeditiously pursued, the Council,
acting on its own motion or upon the recommendation of the Mayor, may give
written notice to the franchisee of its intent to consider revocation of the
franchise or reducing its term, stating its reasons.
   (B)   Before final action can be taken, the Council shall hold a public
hearing at which time the franchisee and members of the public must be given an
opportunity to present evidence and make argument. Following the public hearing
the Council shall determine whether or not to revoke the franchise or reduce
its term based on any recommended decision, the evidence and argument presented
at the hearing, and other evidence of record. The Council’s determination shall
be reflected in a written opinion setting forth the reasons for its decision.
   (C)   Any franchise may, at the option of the city, be revoked 120 calendar
days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a
receiver or trustee to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of
creditors, or other action or proceeding, unless within that 120-day period:
      (1)   Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or
      (2)   Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the
terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement and has
executed an agreement, approved by the court having jurisdiction, assuming and
agreeing to be bound by the terms, and conditions of the franchise.
   (D)   In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the
facilities, equipment or property of a franchisee, the city may revoke the
franchise by serving notice upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at
the sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the
franchise will be revoked 30 calendar days after serving such notice, unless:
      (1)   The city has approved the transfer of the franchise to the
successful bidder; and
      (2)   The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the city to
assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise.
   (E)   If the city revokes a franchise, or if for any other reason a
franchisee abandons, terminates or fails to operate or maintain service to its
subscribers, the following procedures and rights are effective:
      (1)   The city may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities
and equipment. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable
period of time, the city may have the removal done at the franchisee’s and/or
surety’s expense.
      (2)   The city, by resolution of the Council may acquire ownership of the
cable system at an equitable price.
      (3)   If a cable system is abandoned by a franchisee, the city may sell,
assign or transfer all or part of the assets of the system.
   (F)   The city may, upon resolution of the Council, acquire ownership of and
operate a cable system, whether or not such ownership is acquired following
revocation or forfeiture of a franchise.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.44 ARBITRATION.
   (A)   If the city exercises a right to purchase a cable system pursuant to
this chapter or a franchise agreement and the city and franchisee are unable to
agree on a price for the purchase of the system, the price may be determined by
arbitration. Other matters that are arbitrable under the provisions of a
franchise agreement may be subjected to the arbitration procedures specified
below.
   (B)   The arbitration procedure employed shall be consistent with the rules
and procedures of the American Arbitration Association. The city and the
franchisee will each select a qualified arbitrator. The two persons selected
shall select a third qualified arbitrator, and the three arbitrators will
constitute a panel whose decision is binding on both parties. The fees of the
first two arbitrators shall be paid by the party selecting such person, and the
third person shall be compensated one-half by the city and one-half by the
franchisee. The general costs of the proceeding shall be shared equally by the
city and the franchisee.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.45 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY.
   (A)   It is the right of all subscribers to receive all available services
from the franchisee as long as their financial and other obligations to the
franchisee are satisfied.
   (B)   In the event of a termination or transfer of the franchise for
whatever reason, the franchisee must do everything in its power to ensure that
all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted, service regardless of the
circumstances. The franchisee must cooperate with the city to operate the
system for a temporary period following termination or transfer as necessary to
maintain continuity of service to all subscribers. The temporary period will
not exceed six months without the franchisee’s written consent. During such
period the cable system must be operated under such terms and conditions as the
city and the franchisee may agree, or such other terms and conditions that will
continue, to the extent possible, the same level of service to subscribers and
that will provide reasonable compensation to the cable operator.
   (C)   If the franchisee discontinues service to its subscribers without city
approval, the franchise may immediately be terminated, and the city is
empowered to occupy and take possession of all facilities and property, real
and personal, related to the cable system for the purpose of temporarily
operating the system. The city may undertake such, operation itself or
authorize operation by a contractor.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.46 UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION OR ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to offer any gift, favor, loan, service,
promise, employment or anything of value to a city official or employee, or for
a city official or employee to solicit or accept any such thing of value, for
the purpose of influencing the grant, modification, renewal, transfer, or any
other matter affecting a franchise or the administration or enforcement of this
chapter.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.47 RATES.
   Rates and charges may be changed by the franchisee following a minimum 30
days prior notice to the city and the subscribers. At such time as federal law
permits rate regulation, the city reserves the rights to implement procedures
to impose such regulation.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.48 ACCESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Applications for a franchise or franchise renewal shall include
proposals for the provision of public, educational and governmental access
channels sufficient to meet community needs during term of franchise as
determined by city. A franchisee or applicant shall specify what grants, if
any, it is willing to make for studio equipment and facilities to be used for
local program production by all cable access users.
   (B)   All access channel operations must conform to the following minimum
requirements:
      (1)   The city may require that a franchisee provide studio space for
access use. Access channels shall be carried on the franchisee’s lowest priced
service offering.
      (2)   The franchisee shall have no control over the content of any
programming carried on access channels. The city may require a franchisee, or
select a non-profit corporation or other entity, to manage the access program
and to establish reasonable rules for the use of access channels consistent
with the requirements of this chapter, the franchise agreement and the intended
purpose of such channels. Such rules shall be subject to review and approval by
the city.
      (3)   The use of any public access channel shall be made available to any
city resident on a nondiscriminatory basis at no charge for channel use. Where
access studio facilities are located on a franchisee’s premises, the franchisee
shall make its personnel available for consultation and assistance to access
uses at no charge provided that such personnel can be spared from their normal
duties.
   (C)   At the request of a franchisee, the city shall promulgate rules under
which channel capacity dedicated to access use may be used by the franchisee
when it is not being used for access purposes.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.49 CABLE ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The city may establish a cable advisory committee to advise it on
matters related to the use of cable systems and facilities. Unless otherwise
provided, any such committee shall consist of five residents of the city
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. If such a committee is to
have a continuing or indefinite existence, members shall serve for overlapping
terms of five years, or until their successors are appointed and confirmed. A
vacancy on the committee shall be filled for the unexpired term of the
departing member.
   (B)   An advisory committee shall advise the city on matters related to the
use of cable communications operations as specified by the Mayor or Council at
the time of its establishment. Its functions may be modified from time-to-time
by the Mayor or Council.
   (C)   Members of an advisory committee shall receive no compensation for
their services except reasonable and necessary expenses as may be provided in
the budget.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.50 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION.
   (A)   The city may periodically evaluate the performance of a franchisee
during the franchise term. A franchisee shall cooperate fully with these
evaluations and supply the city with all relevant information requested. If the
city desires to implement a survey of subscribers in connection with its
evaluation of service, a franchisee shall distribute the city’s questionnaire
to its subscribers. Any meetings between the city and the franchisee for
purposes of evaluation shall be publicized in advance and open to the public.
   (B)   If evaluation indicates the need for modification to the franchise
agreement, the city shall attempt to negotiate the necessary changes. The city
shall issue a report to the Council of the results of the performance
evaluation and any recommended changes to the franchise agreement as negotiated
with the franchisee.
   (C)   The Council may hold a public hearing on any performance evaluation
reports. Any franchise agreement modifications must be approved by the Council
before they become effective.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.51 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-
to-day administration of cable communication operations within the city as
governed by this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement. The City Clerk
shall be empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the city
except for those actions specified herein which are reserved to the Council or
other named entity.
   (B)   The Council has the sole authority to grant franchises, authorize the
execution of franchise agreements, modify franchise agreements, renew
franchises, revoke franchises, and authorize the transfer of franchises. Where
this chapter or a franchise agreement specifies that a certain action will be
taken by the Council or other named city entity, that action is reserved to the
named entity.
   (C)   All filings and reports required of franchisees or applicants pursuant
to this chapter or a franchise agreement shall be made with the City Clerk
unless otherwise specified.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
§ 118.52 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter, or an amendment thereto, shall be applicable to all cable
franchises issued by the city, whether or not such franchises were: issued
prior to the effective date of this chapter or an amendment thereto. However,
this chapter shall not act to unilaterally abrogate prior contractual
commitments of the city as contained in any franchise agreement.
(Ord. 89-15, passed 5-8-89)
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
§ 118.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the city.
      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges.
         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and
repair charges.
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including but not limited to service order and service
termination charges.
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges,
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
city. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city
divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional
or national compensation arrangement.
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to division (i) below.
         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications,
the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-
801(b).
      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi).
         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service.
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes.
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 21-401.
   PEG. Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801(d) by the holder to the city for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE. The provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over
the public internet.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 5-10-08)
§ 118.61 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the city.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of the
holder's gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice to the city. The holder shall notify the city at least ten days
prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video
service in the city.
   (D)   Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this subchapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
subchapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder's application notice sent pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)
(6) to the city.
   (E)    Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the city in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the
amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B)
above.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 3-10-08)
§ 118.62 PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the city in addition to the
fee imposed pursuant to §
118.61.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be 1% of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of
gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the city or its designee
for PEG access support in the city.
   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the city
or to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in §
118.61(D).
   (D) Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (E)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG
access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had
it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an
incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited
against the fees that that operator owes under division (B) above.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 3-10-08)
§ 118.63 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this subchapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 3-10-08)
§ 118.64 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax
that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with
respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 3-10-08)
§ 118.65 AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Audit requirement. The city will notify the holder of the requirements
it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers
in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute
any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the city. If all
local franchises between the city and cable operator terminate, the audit
requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant to the Local
Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act, 45, §§ 1 et seq. No
acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the
amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the city's submission of an invoice for the sum.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 3-10-08)
§ 118.66 LATE FEES/PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this city pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights
Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 3-10-08)
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
§ 118.70 CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW.
   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501 are hereby
adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers
offering services within the city's boundaries.
   (B)   Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection
Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this subhapter shall be
incorporated into this subhapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable
or video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this subhapter by reference
without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city.
(Ord. 08-04, passed 3-10-08)
§ 118.71 ENFORCEMENT.
   The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
city.
(Ord. 08-04, passed 3-10-08)
§ 118.72 PENALTIES.
   The city, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(r)(1), does hereby
provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and
Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach,
and shall not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer.
   (A)   Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   (B)   The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any
alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30 days
from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
   (C)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in division (B) above.
(Ord. 08-04, passed 3-10-08)
§ 118.73 CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, § 70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next
billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits
and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit.
(Ord. 08-04, passed 3-10-08)
CHAPTER 119: CRANES AND HOISTING EQUIPMENT
Section
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   Purpose, scope, exceptions
   
119.03   Crane siting
   
119.04   Communications
   
119.05   High wind preparedness
   
119.06   Operation regulations
   
119.07   Additional enforcement
 
   
119.99   Penalty
§ 119.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CRANE. A machine for lifting or hovering a load and moving it horizontally,
in which the consisting mechanism is an integral part of the machine. It may be
driven manually or by power and may be a fixed or mobile machine and includes
tower crane and mobile tower crane. The term does not include stackers, lift
trucks, power shovels, backhoes, excavators, concrete pouring equipment, or
straddle type mobile boat hoists.
   HOISTING EQUIPMENT. Includes mast climbing work platforms, tower cranes,
mobile cranes and personnel and material hoists.
   MAST. A vertical structure that supports and guides the elevating assembly.
   MAST CLIMBING WORK PLATFORM. A powered device consisting of an elevating
assembly, base or chassis and mast, that when erected, is capable of supporting
personnel, material, equipment, tools, and is capable of traveling vertically
in infinitely adjustable increments to reach the desire work level.
   MOBILE CRANES. A mobile or locomotive crane covered within the scope defined
in current, American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) B30.5 standards and
includes crawler cranes, locomotive cranes, wheel mounted cranes, and any
variation hereof that retain the same fundamental characteristics.
   PERSONNEL AND MATERIAL HOIST. A mechanism and its hoistway for use in
connection with the construction, alteration, on-going maintenance or
demolition of a building, structure or other work. It is used for hoisting and
lowering workers or material or both, and is equipped with a car that moves
vertically on guide members.
   TOWER CRANE. A hammerhead, lulling, or other type of tower crane that is
regularly assembled and disassembled for use at various sites. It is usually
characterized by provisions to facilitate erection and dismantling and may
include features to permit climbing or telescoping.
(Ord. 11-16, passed 6-13-11)
§ 119.02 PURPOSE, SCOPE, EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall provide a uniform standard for the erection of tower
cranes and mobile cranes within the City of Paxton, Illinois, on applicable
threshold buildings that are buildings greater than 25 feet in height. This
chapter shall be of uniform applicability throughout the city. The following
hoisting equipment is specifically exempted from the application of this
chapter:
   (A)   Mobile cranes having a boom length of less than 25 feet or a maximum
rated load capacity of less than 15,000 pounds;
   (B)   Electric line trucks;
   (C)   Aerial work platforms or boom supported platforms covered by the ANSI/
SIA A92 series of standards; and
   (D)   Taxi/mobile rough terrain cranes, boom trucks, and lattice boom
crawler cranes with a limited use of 15 consecutive calendar days or less.
(Ord. 11-16, passed 6-13-11)
§ 119.03 CRANE SITING.
   (A)   The permit applicant shall submit to the city’s Building Inspector all
required applications and/or approvals related to the operation of the crane on
site, including but not limited to any required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (“FAA”) pursuant to 14 CFR Part 77 and FAA Advisory Circular
AC70/7460-2K. Prior to the erection of the crane, the permit applicant shall
submit to the Building Inspector a crane operational plan which includes:
      (1)   A site plan identifying the location of the crane; clearances from
power lines, including overhead power lines; the location of adjacent
buildings; and the structural foundation of the crane;
      (2)   Documentation as to the qualifications of the crane operator;
      (3)   Documentation of the crane inspections performed periodically by a
qualified and competent crane inspector to ensure that safety measures are in
place during operation;
      (4)   Documentation that the crane lighting meets all FAA requirements;
and
      (5)   Documentation of communication and signaling requirements for use
with the operation of a crane.
   (B)   Failure to provide the Building Inspector with a crane operational
plan may result in one or all of the following:
      (1)   Issuance of a stop-work order; and
      (2)   The imposition of fines as set forth in §
119.99.
(Ord. 11-16, passed 6-13-11) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.04 COMMUNICATIONS.
   When more than one crane is used within the same swing radius an independent
and clear channel of radio communication and operable equipment to transmit
same between the cranes shall be provided.
(Ord. 11-16, passed 6-13-11)
§ 119.05 HIGH WIND PREPAREDNESS.
   Hoisting equipment shall abide by the following high wind event precautions:
   (A)   Cranes and hoisting equipment shall abide by all manufacturers
recommendations relating to high wind event preparedness including any relating
to the placement and removal of advertisement banners, the use and removal of
rigging;
   (B)   Tower crane turntable must be lubricated prior to the event;
   (C)   Mobile cranes with fixed booms must be laid down;
   (D)   Hydraulic cranes must have booms retracted and stored;
   (E)   Any counterweighted hoist must have the counterweight locked below the
top tie-in;
   (F)   Tower crane must be set in the weathervane position;
   (G)   All rigging must be removed from the hoist block;
   (H)   All power at base of tower shall be disconnected by a general
contractor; and
   (I)   A high wind event preparedness plan which conforms with the
requirements of this section and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAH) standards shall be available at the site for inspection.
(Ord. 11-16, passed 6-13-11) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.06 OPERATION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   During the period of time commencing at 8:00 p.m. and continuing
through 7:00 a.m. of the next day, all mobile cranes with fixed booms must be
laid down.
   (B)   During the period of time commencing at 8:00 p.m. and continuing
through 7:00 a.m. of the next day, all hydraulic cranes must have booms
retracted and stored.
   (C)   During all periods of time a mobile crane with a fixed boom is not a
construction site or is not undergoing repair, with a repair person present,
the mobile crane must be laid down.
   (D)   During all periods of time that a hydraulic crane is not at a
construction site or is not undergoing repair, with a repair person present,
the hydraulic crane must have the boom retracted and stored.
(Ord. 11-16, passed 6-13-11) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.07 ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT.
   Violations of this chapter involving any damages to the public health and
safety may also be addressed by the city through an action in court for
injunctive or other available relief.
(Ord. 11-16, passed 6-13-11)
§ 119.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation, or organization violating any provision of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 11-16, passed 6-13-11)
CHAPTER 120: CONSTRUCTION AND INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, TRUCKS AND TRAILERS
Section
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Violations
   
120.03   Exceptions
 
   
120.99   Penalty
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE CONSTRUCTION SITE. Any private or public property upon which repairs
to existing buildings or appurtenances, construction of new buildings or
appurtenances, or demolition of existing structures is taking place.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, firm, partnership or corporation.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property not owned by the federal government,
state government, county, city, township, park district or other public body.
   REMOVAL. The physical relocation of an item to an authorized location.
(Ord. 11-36, passed 12-12-11)
§ 120.02 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Anywhere in any residential zone, designated R-1, R-2 or R-3, by the
zoning ordinance and zoning map of the city, it shall be unlawful for any
person owning or having custody of any item of construction equipment or
industrial equipment set forth in division (B) below to store or permit any
said item set forth in division (B) below to remain on any private property for
a period of more than seven days after receipt of a notice requiring such
removal or to remain on any public street, public alley or public right of way
for a period of more than seven days after receipt of a notice requiring such
removal. It shall be unlawful for any person owning any private property in any
residential zone, designated R-1, R-2 or R-3 by the zoning ordinance and zoning
map of the city, to store or to permit to remain on private property any item
of construction equipment or industrial equipment set forth in division (B)
below on the owner’s private property for a period of more than seven days
after receipt of a notice requiring such removal. Such storage is declared to
be a public nuisance and may be abated or removed and penalties imposed as
provided in this chapter.
   (B)   The items of construction equipment or industrial equipment prohibited
by division (A) are as follows:
      (1)   Aerial lifts or aerial work platforms;
      (2)   Air compressor greater than seven gallon capacity;
      (3)   Articulated trucks;
      (4)   Asphalt equipment;
      (5)   Auger;
      (6)   Auto grader and trimmers;
      (7)   Backhoe;
      (8)   Boring and tunneling machines;
      (9)   Bulldozer;
      (10)   Commercial scales;
      (11)   Commercial shredders;
      (12)   Compaction equipment;
      (13)   Compact track loaders;
      (14)   Concrete pouring equipment;
      (15)   Cranes, including but not limited to, hydraulic crane, mobile
crane, tower crane, hoisting equipment, all terrain cranes, crawler cranes and
gantry cranes;
      (16)   Crawler dozers;
      (17)   Crawler loaders;
      (18)   Crawler tractors;
      (19)   Ditchers and trenchers;
      (20)   Draglines;
      (21)   Dredges;
      (22)   Drilling equipment;
      (23)   Excavator;
      (24)   Fork lift;
      (25)   Front end loader;
      (26)   Graders;
      (27)   Grinders;
      (28)   Highhoe;
      (29)   Hoist and winches;
      (30)   Industrial welder;
      (31)   Light tower;
      (32)   Line pullers and tensioners;
      (33)   Off highway trucks;
      (34)   Pile driving equipment;
      (35)   Pipelayers;
      (36)   Power shovels;
      (37)   Pulverizers and soil stabilizers;
      (38)   RGN low boy trailer;
      (39)   Rigging equipment;
      (40)   Rock saws;
      (41)   Self propelled roller compactor;
      (42)   Sawmills;
      (43)   Scissor lift;
      (44)   Scrapers with blade wider than five feet;
      (45)   Sheeps foot packer;
      (46)   Shoring and shielding;
      (47)   Skid steer loader;
      (48)   Soil remediation equipment;
      (49)   Stacker;
      (50)   Tractor over 50 horsepower;
      (51)   Tractor scrapers greater than five feet in width;
      (52)   Trenching equipment;
      (53)   Truck box beds not attached to a licensed vehicle;
      (54)   Vehicle trailers, with wheels removed;
      (55)   Vehicle trailers which are not currently licensed;
      (56)   Vehicle trailers which are being used for storage;
      (57)   Welding equipment;
      (58)   Wheel dozer;
      (59)   Wheel loaders; or
      (60)   Work platform, when not in use.
   (C)   Anywhere in any residential zone, designated R-1, R-2 or R-3, by the
zoning ordinance and zoning map of the city, it shall be unlawful for any
person owning or having custody of a truck or trailer as described in division
(D) below to store or permit more than two of said trucks or trailers as
described in division (D) below to remain on any private property for a period
of more than seven days after receipt of a notice requiring such removal or to
remain on any public street, public alley or public right of way for a period
of more than seven days after receipt of a notice requiring such removal. It
shall be further unlawful for any person owning any private property in any
residential zone, designated R-1, R-2 or R-3 by the zoning ordinance and zoning
map of the city, to store or to permit to remain any more than two of said
trucks or trailers as described in division (D) below on the owner’s private
property for a period of more than seven days after receipt of a notice
requiring such removal. Such storage is declared to be a public nuisance and
may be abated or removed and penalties imposed as provided in this chapter. Any
truck or trailer as described in division (D) below must be parked on paved or
graveled areas designated for parking.
   (D)   The trucks and/or trailers limited by division (C) are as follows:
      (1)   Construction or industrial trucks exceeding a one-ton maximum load
weight or construction or industrial trailers exceeding a one-ton maximum load
weight each;
      (2)   Construction or industrial trucks or construction or industrial
trailers with temporarily or permanently mounted welding equipment;
      (3)   Construction or industrial trucks or construction or industrial
trailers with temporarily or permanently mounted generators; and
      (4)   Construction or industrial trucks or construction or industrial
trailers with temporarily or permanently mounted air compressors.
   (E)   After receipt of a seven-day notice as set forth in division (A)
above, it shall be unlawful for any person to move any item of construction
equipment or industrial equipment described in division (B) from any private
property or public street, public alley, or public right of way to any other
private property or public street, public alley or public right of way upon
which such storage is not permitted by division (A).
   (F)   After receipt of a seven-day notice as set forth in division (C)
above, it shall be unlawful for any person to move any truck or trailer
described in division (D) from any private property or public street, public
alley or public right of way to any other private property or public street,
public alley or public right of way upon which such storage is not permitted by
division (C).
(Ord. 11-36, passed 12-12-11; Am. Ord. 12-05, passed 2-13-12) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   Section
120.02 shall not apply to any item of construction equipment or industrial
equipment set forth in §
120.02(B) or to any truck or trailer set forth in §
120.02(D) that is stored within an enclosed building and excluded from public
view. Section
120.02 shall not apply to any item of construction equipment or industrial
equipment set forth in §
120.02(D) while said equipment is in use at an active construction site.
(Ord. 11-36, passed 12-12-11)
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense;
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 11-36, passed 12-12-11)
CHAPTER 121: REGULATION OF BOUNCE HOUSES ON CITY PROPERTY
Section
   
121.01   Bounce houses
§ 121.01 BOUNCE HOUSES.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this chapter the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOUNCE HOUSE. Any structure fabricated from flexible material, kept
inflated by one or more blowers which rely upon air-pressure to maintain their
shape and are used by participants to bounce, slide, run, jump or climb. Such
term includes, but is not limited to: bounce houses as commonly known, mazes,
obstacle courses, inflatable slides, moon walks, inflatable climbing walls, or
other similar types of amusement apparatus.
      OPERATOR. The owner and/or operator referenced under this chapter.
   (B)   License required. No person, firm or corporation shall erect or
operate a bounce house as defined in division (A) above without first having
obtained a license as herein provided.
   (C)   Application. Application for the license shall be made to the City
Clerk at least seven calendar days prior to the proposed use. The application
shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name of operator of the bounce house;
      (2)   Address, email address and telephone number of the operator;
      (3)   Event description including location, hours of operation, set up
time, tear down time, estimated number of attendees, and estimated number of
staff/volunteers/participants;
      (4)   Proof of general liability insurance in an amount of no less than
$1,000,000 naming the City of Paxton as an additional insured.
   (D)   Rules. As a condition of the license, the operator its/his/her agents,
employees, volunteers, and attendees shall:
      (1)   Follow all federal, state and local laws, including all applicable
city ordinances.
      (2)   Provide proof of general liability insurance no less than
$1,000,000 and name the City of Paxton as additionally insured.
      (3)   Release and indemnify the city from liability for any injury,
damage, theft, or loss of property, before, during or after usage arising from
installation, use and/or removal of any bounce house under the control,
operation and/or contract of operator.
      (4)   Operator shall set up bounce houses only in compliance with
manufacturer specifications.
      (5)   Operators shall not allow bounce houses in city parks or facilities
overnight.
      (6)   The individual executing the license application must be on the
premises and assure adequate adult supervision during the hours of the bounce
house event.
      (7)   Bounce houses should be freestanding and weighted. Stakes are
prohibited in city parks. Bounce houses should not be tied or tethered to
trees, tables or other park amenities.
      (8)   The Mayor, his/her designee, or the Police Department may limit the
number and size of bounce houses to assure, in their best judgment, public
safety.
      (9)   Failure by the permit holder or vendor to adhere to any portion of
this chapter results in the immediate removal of bounce house and may be the
basis for denial of future use of city parks and facilities all in the
discretion of the Mayor, his/her designee, and/or the discretion of the Police
Department.
      (10)   Operator shall not serve as or hold itself out as an agent of the
city.
   (E)   License fee. The fee for such license shall be $0.00.
   (F)   Transfer of license. No license issued to any person, firm or
corporation shall be transferable.
   (G)   Fines. Failure to secure a permit and operate a bounce house shall
result in the authority of the city to authorize its immediate removal and
result in a fine of $250 per bounce house with each day constituting a separate
fineable offense.
(Ord. 15-35, passed 12-14-15)
CHAPTER 122: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
122.01   Registration required
   
122.02   Definitions
   
122.03   Requirements of registration
   
122.04   City policy on soliciting
   
122.05   Notice regulating soliciting
   
122.06   Duty of solicitors
   
122.07   Time limit on soliciting
   
122.08   Signs and notices
 
   
122.99   Penalty
§ 122.01 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant, itinerant
vendor, or solicitor, to engage in such business within the City of Paxton
without first registering with the Police Department. Provided, however, this
chapter shall not be construed as applying to any person(s) who hold a “garage
sale” as defined herein.
(Ord. 16-1, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 17-26, passed 6-13-17) Penalty, see §
122.99
§ 122.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words are defined as set
forth herein:
   CHARITABLE SOLICITATION. All solicitation by or on behalf of a charitable
origination. Within the meaning of Section 501(a) and (c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. § 501(a), (c)(3).
   GARAGE SALE. A sale of used items, goods, and wares legally owned. At the
time such goods, items and wares are offered for sale by the person(s) actually
residing on the premises upon which such sale is held or legally owned by the
neighbors of said person(s).
   GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE. Any and all items of tangible or intangible
personal property.
   RESIDENCE. Shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for
residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure.
   SOLICITOR. A solicitor is any person, whether a resident of the City of
Paxton or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type
of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to
street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares and merchandise,
offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivery articles
to purchasers, or offering services for hire, or who, without traveling from
place to place shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive
vehicles, or other vehicle conveyance. One who solicits orders and as a
separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers at a future date shall be
deemed a solicitor subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT, or ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person,
firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a
resident of the City of Paxton or not, who engages in a temporary business of
selling and/or delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city and who
in furtherance of such purpose hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, or boat, public room in
hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley, or other place
within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise, either privately or a public auction. This definition shall
include any person, firm, or corporation who, while occupying such temporary
location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose
of securing orders for future delivery. No person, firm, or corporation shall
be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason
of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer, or by reason of conducting such transient business in connection
with, as part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant, or
auctioneer.
(Ord. 16-1, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 17-26, passed 6-13-17; Am. Ord. 23-31,
passed 12-12-23)
§ 122.03 REQUIREMENTS OF REGISTRATION.
   Before a registration card may be issued under this chapter, a written sworn
application signed by the applicant, if an individual; or by a duly authorized
partner, if a partnership; or by a duly authorized officer of a corporation, if
a corporation; or by the managing member, if an LLC, or association; or
managing official of any other entity, containing the following must be
submitted:
   (A)   The name or names of the persons or persons having the management or
supervision in the applicant's business during the time that is proposed that
business will be carried on in the City of Paxton.
   (B)   The name or names of the person(s) who are in fact the ultimate owners
and person(s) responsible for the applicant's business.
   (C)   The local address or addresses of such person or persons while engaged
in such business; the permanent address(es) of such person(s).
   (D)   The capacity in which such person(s) shall act (e.g., proprietor,
agent or otherwise).
   (E)   The name, address and phone number of the person for whose account the
business will be carried on, if any, and if a corporation or LLC, under what
state the same is incorporated or organized.
   (F)   The place(s) in the City of Paxton where it is proposed to carry on
the applicant's business and length of time during which it is proposed that
such business shall be conducted.
   (G)   The place of places other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant where the applicant within six months next preceding the date of
application conducted his/her/its business, stating the nature thereof and
giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which
said business was conducted.
   (H)   A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares
and merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the City of
Paxton, a statement whether such goods, wares and merchandise are sold from
stock and possession or by sample, credentials from the person for which the
applicant proposes to do business authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative, and such other reasonable information as to identify the person
or person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business, or
the method or plan of doing business.
   (I)   Written proof of compliance with the Illinois “transient merchant act
of 1987 (255 ILCS 465),” as amended, the Illinois, “Solicitation For Charity
Act (255 ILCS 460),” as amended, or other applicable state or county laws,
ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 16-1, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 17-26, passed 6-13-17) Penalty, see §
122.99
§ 122.04 CITY POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City Council of the City of
Paxton that the occupant or occupants of the residences in the city shall make
the determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to
their respective residences. If no determination is made as provided in §
122.05 hereof, then in that event, solicitors may go upon such premises for any
lawful purpose as long as said solicitor has been properly registered and has
been issued a permit for solicitation, and provided that entry onto the
premises is not refused of prohibited by some other lawful means.
(Ord. 16-1, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 17-26, passed 6-13-17)
§ 122.05 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided
by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall
comply with the following directions.
   (B)   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence shall
be given in the following manner:
      (1)   A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches in
size or larger, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence indicating the determination by the occupant containing the
applicable words, as follows:
NO SOLICITORS INVITED
CHARITABLE SOLICITORS ONLY
      (2)   The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height.
   (C)   Such cards so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(Ord. 16-1, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 17-26, passed 6-13-17)
§ 122.06 DUTY OF SOLICITORS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of any prospective solicitor
to make application through the Police Department a minimum of two business
days prior to the intended time of solicitation. Upon approval of the
application and payment of the appropriate fees, a permit will be issued for a
period not to exceed the timelines below:
      (1)   For any solicitor wherein the business employing the solicitor has
entered into a franchise agreement with the city, or which qualifies as a
telecommunications carrier under the Illinois Telecommunications Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 635, § 10(d), or which is a holder of a
state-wide franchise to offer cable and video services pursuant to the Illinois
Public Utilities Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(k), the period for the
permit issued shall not exceed six calendar months.
      (2)   For all other solicitors, the permit issued shall be valid for a
period not to exceed five consecutive calendar days.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of each applicant to pay a non-refundable
application fee of $50 upon initial application for each person who shall be
soliciting or acting as a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant
vendor provided that there shall be no fee for charitable solicitation as
defined in §
122.02 above. Food trucks and bicycles vending ice cream shall alternatively
pay a seasonal $50 permit fee for the period starting April 1 through October 1
each year. All applicants will each also be required to each pay a $500 deposit
per person which will be refunded upon expiration of the permit period pending
upon their incurring no incidents during their five days. There will be an
additional $10 non-refundable fee for paperwork (the lanyard, card, etc).
   (C)   Any business having entered into a franchise agreement with the city,
or which qualifies as a telecommunications carrier under the Illinois
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 635, §
10(d), or which is a holder of a state-wide franchise to offer cable and video
services pursuant to the Illinois Public Utilities Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-201(k), shall be exempt from paying the $50 application fee.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the city upon which a residence, as defined in §
122.02 of this code, is located, to first examine the notice provided for in §
122.05 of this code, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement
contained on this notice. If the notices states “CHARITABLE SOLICITORS ONLY,”
then the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises
unless such person represents a charitable organization, as defined in §
122.02 of this code; and if the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the
solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   (E)   Any solicitor who has gained entry to any residence, whether invited
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
   (F)   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any
door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as defined in this
chapter, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance
with the provision of §
122.05 of this code or to otherwise violate the provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 16-1, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 17-26, passed 6-13-17; Am. Ord. 23-31,
passed 12-12-23) Penalty, see §
122.99
§ 122.07 TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises in the City of Paxton and ring the doorbell upon
or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door,
or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of
the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with
the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as defined in this chapter, prior
to 9:00 a.m. or after sunset or 8:00 p.m., whichever is earlier, on any day
other than Sunday or a national or state holiday. No soliciting shall be lawful
on Sunday or a national or state holiday, except for charitable soliciting.
(Ord. 16-1, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 17-26, passed 6-13-17) Penalty, see §
122.99
§ 122.08 SIGNS AND NOTICES.
   The Mayor of the City of Paxton is authorized to order and display
appropriate signs and notices to be placed at appropriate places within the
city advising that solicitors must register with the Police Department.
(Ord. 16-1, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 17-26, passed 6-13-17)
§ 122.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
the sum of $500 for the first offense, and $750 for any subsequent offenses
occurring in any give 18 month period. Each solicitation or offer to sell in
violation of this act shall be considered a separate violation for the purposes
of this chapter.
(Ord. 16-1, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 17-26, passed 6-13-17)
CHAPTER 123: SIDEWALK CAFÉ LICENSE
Section
   
123.01   Sidewalk café permit
   
123.02   Sidewalk café permit issuance
   
123.03   Application for permit
   
123.04   Recommendation by the Mayor
   
123.05   Conditions for approval
   
123.06   Permit holder regulations
   
123.07   Suspension or revocation
   
123.08   Public property
   
123.09   Enforcement
§ 123.01 SIDEWALK CAFÉ PERMIT.
   (A)   Individuals or entities operating a restaurant may be granted the
privilege of encroaching upon any public highway, street, sidewalk, alley, or
publicly-owned common area (hereinafter referred to as public right-of-way) of
the city by the issuance of a sidewalk café. No such licenses shall be granted
to any business or for any other use than a restaurant.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate a restaurant
on any public right- of-way without first securing a sidewalk café permit or
some other applicable permit.
(Ord. 19-O-15, passed 8-13-19)
§ 123.02 SIDEWALK CAFÉ PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   A sidewalk café permit shall only be issued for the purpose of public
convenience or public necessity. The issuance of the sidewalk café permit shall
grant the applicant the privilege of using a portion of right-of-way for the
purposes set forth in said permit, subject to the terms and conditions set
forth in the permit and this section. This permission to encroach upon public
right-of-way granted by the city is only a license to use the property in
question; it is neither an easement nor a conveyance of real property; it may
be revoked by the city at any time for any reason without compensation to the
permit holder. After notice of the revocation, the permit holder shall
immediately remove said encroachment from the city right-of-way. Prior to being
granted an encroachment permit an applicant shall make an application on a form
provided by the city. The applicant must comply with the requirements as
provided by this chapter, unless such compliance is waived by the City Council.
A sidewalk café permit may only be granted by a majority of City Council
members then holding office.
(Ord. 19-O-15, passed 8-13-19)
§ 123.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person, group, or entity seeking the privilege of encroaching upon any
public right-of-way in the city shall file an application for a sidewalk café
permit. The application shall include the following:
   (A)   A detailed map of the proposed location.
   (B)   A description of the proposed encroachment including nature of
construction, material to be used, the exact dimensions, a drawing of the
encroachment, an explanation of any utility requirements and location of such
utilities.
   (C)   The name and address of the person, entity or group that will be
responsible for the operation and/or maintenance of the encroachment; if the
person or group is a corporation, the applicant shall list the name and
addresses of all officers and the registered agent of the corporation.
   (D)   A certificate of insurance indicating the applicant has purchased and
maintains public liability and property damage insurance in a liability amount
of at least $500,000 to the city to secure payment for any loss or damage
caused by the encroachment. The certificate of insurance shall name the city as
an additional insured.
   (E)   A statement providing that in consideration of receiving the
encroachment permit, the applicant will pay any and all expenses, including
compensation for damages, caused by the encroachment and that the applicant
will indemnify and hold harmless the city from any action, proceeding or claim
of liability asserted against the city resulting from the encroachment or from
the issuance of the encroachment permit.
   (F)   The period of time for which the encroachment permit is sought.
(Ord. 19-O-15, passed 8-13-19)
§ 123.04 RECOMMENDATION BY THE MAYOR.
   Upon submission of a complete application and the payment of the fee, the
Mayor or his/her designee shall examine the application and investigate the
proposed encroachment to determine whether the proposed encroachment is
consistent with this code and all other applicable law. With respect to an
application for a continuous encroachment permit, the Mayor shall make a
recommendation to the City Council as to whether the permit should be issued or
denied.
(Ord. 19-O-15, passed 8-13-19)
§ 123.05 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL
   Upon receiving the recommendation of the Mayor, the City Council may grant a
sidewalk café permit subject to any conditions or terms it deems appropriate to
protect the public health, safety, or welfare, including, but not limited to,
the following:
   (A)   The encroachment shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in a
clean, safe, and sanitary manner, and kept free from trash, weeds or other
debris.
   (B)   The encroachment shall be designed, constructed, and maintained
without the presence of any overhead wiring; any and all wiring required or
utilities, including electric and telephone wiring, shall be placed underground
insofar as it is reasonably possible.
   (C)   Any furniture used in the public right-of-way shall be constructed for
outdoor dining use.
(Ord. 19-O-15, passed 8-13-19)
§ 123.06 PERMIT HOLDER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   An outdoor restaurant is permitted only on sidewalks or approved plaza
areas. The permit area shall be immediately adjacent to the food service
establishment requesting the permit, or a sidewalk contiguous to the sidewalk
adjacent to the food service establishment.
   (B)   The hours when service is permitted at the outdoor restaurant shall be
between 6:00 a.m. and 11:59 p.m. during the period starting April 1 until
November 1 of each year.
   (C)   Any person making use of an outdoor restaurant shall do so in a
reasonable manner with due regard for the health and safety of persons and
property. No permittee shall make any physical alteration to public property. A
permittee shall owe a duty to the city and third persons to maintain the permit
area in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition.
   (D)   The permittee shall keep the permit area free of litter, cans, bottles
and spills at all times. The permittee shall promptly collect and dispose of
all litter, trash and other waste materials associated with the outdoor
restaurant, including materials in the adjacent public right-of-way or property
originating from the outdoor restaurant. The permittee shall not dispose of any
such waste in the public trash receptacles.
   (E)   Upon the expiration or other termination of an outdoor restaurant use
permit, the permittee shall immediately remove all tables, chairs, furnishings,
equipment and other items of personal property from the permit areas. Any such
items remaining upon the public right-of-way after a reasonable opportunity to
remove the same may be removed and disposed of by the city at the sole cost and
expense of the permittee.
   (F)   A sidewalk café permit may allow for the temporary placement of
tables, chairs, furnishings, equipment and other items of personal property
related to the restaurant. Except for plaza areas, all tables and chairs must
be portable, meaning that no such furniture shall be chained together or bolted
together as a unit or affixed to the outdoor wall or ground surface.
   (G)   Umbrellas shall have a maximum diameter of eight feet and a minimum
clearance of seven feet above the ground, a weighted base, and be fabric
covered. All umbrellas must be made of cloth fabric; vinyl umbrellas are
prohibited. Umbrella materials may not have a shiny, synthetic appearance.
Signage on umbrellas is prohibited. No lettering, advertising, graphics, and/or
logos are allowed on the umbrella face.
   (H)   Tables, chairs and umbrellas shall be located so that there remains
open, at all times, a longitudinal walking space, the location of which shall
be determined by the city, of a minimum of four feet in width, with slopes not
to exceed Americans with Disability Act (ADA) requirements.
(Ord. 19-O-15, passed 8-13-19)
§ 123.07 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The use of a public sidewalk as a sidewalk restaurant shall be subject to
temporary suspension or termination at any time by the city in the interest of
the public health, safety, welfare and for community events. To the extent that
a permit area is needed by the city for the purpose for which it was dedicated,
or any other public purpose, the city may immediately suspend or terminate the
sidewalk restaurant permit by sending written notices to the permittee and
assume full possession and control of the permit area. The permittee shall
remove all furniture from the right-of-way within the time specified by the
notice. If the furniture is not removed by the permittee, the city shall be
authorized to remove all furniture and other objects of the permittee from the
permit area. If such furniture is not reclaimed by the permittee within seven
days after removal by the city, the property shall be presumed abandoned and
subject to disposal according to law.
(Ord. 19-O-15, passed 8-13-19)
§ 123.08 PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to the locating of outdoor
restaurants on public property or public right-of-way and shall not apply to
any private property.
(Ord. 19-O-15, passed 8-13-19)
§ 123.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city may inspect the permit area at any time. The city shall mail
or deliver the result of the inspections to the permittee.
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of the chapter shall be remedied
within the time given in the notice or, if not stated in the notice, within ten
calendar days from the date of delivery or postmark on the notice.
   (C)   Any permittee violating or failing to comply with the terms or
requirements of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $250 per offense
with each day of violation constituting a separate offense.
(Ord. 19-O-15, passed 8-13-19)
CHAPTER 124: VIDEO GAMING
Section
   
124.01   Applicability
   
124.02   Definitions
   
124.03   License required
   
124.04   License application requirements
   
124.05   Application filing; renewals; fees
   
124.06   License fees
   
124.07   License revocation or suspension
   
124.08   Limitations on licenses and terminals
 
   
124.99   Penalty
§ 124.01 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided, shall
apply to all video gaming as hereinafter defined, whether specifically licensed
or regulated under other provisions of this code or other ordinances, or not.
   (B)   Except as otherwise excepted in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to gamble within the corporate limits of the city, or for any person
or entity which owns, occupies or controls an establishment within the city to
knowingly permit others to gamble on the premises.
(Ord. 2025-07-05, passed 7-8-25)
§ 124.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Illinois Gaming Board.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES. As defined in Section 15b-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 18b-101.
   LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT. Any business licensed by the state to have or
operate a video gaming device in the city, including any licensed fraternal
establishment, licensed veterans establishment, licensed truck stop
establishment and licensed large truck stop establishment as those terms are
defined in the VGA, ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, § 5.
   LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT. The location where a qualified fraternal
organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal organization
regularly meets.
   LICENSED LARGE TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT. A facility located within three
road miles from a freeway interchange, as measured in accordance with the
Department of Transportation's rules regarding the criteria for the
installation of business signs: (i) that is at least a three-acre facility with
a convenience store; (ii) with separate diesel islands for fueling commercial
motor vehicles; (iii) that sells at retail more than 50,000 gallons of diesel
or biodiesel fuel per month; and (iv) with parking spaces for commercial motor
vehicles. The requirement of item (iii) of this definition may be met by
showing that estimated future sales or past sales average at least 50,000
gallons per month.
   LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT. A facility (i) that is at least a three-
acre facility with a convenience store; (ii) with separate diesel islands for
fueling commercial motor vehicles; (iii) that sells at retail more than 10,000
gallons of diesel or biodiesel fuel per month; and (iv) with parking spaces for
commercial motor vehicles. The requirement of item (iii) of this definition may
be met by showing that estimated future sales or past sales average at least
10,000 gallons per month.
   LICENSED VETERANS ESTABLISHMENT. The location where a qualified veterans
organization that derives its charter from a national veterans organization
regularly meets.
   MARKET STREET DISTRICT. A designated area within the city, generally bounded
by Spruce Street to the north, the Railroad right-of-way to the west, Ottawa
Street to the south, and Tan Street to the east.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including but not limited to, video poker, line up and blackjack, as authorized
by the Board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player
may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does
not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens or is for
amusement purposes only.
(Ord. 2025-07-05, passed 7-8-25)
§ 124.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent, or in
any other capacity, shall operate or permit to be operated any video gaming
terminal, as defined in §
124.02, at any premises within the city without first having obtained a video
gaming license from the city. The license provided for in this section shall
permit a licensee to operate video gaming terminals at the licensed
establishment.
   (B)   No applicant, including any person, either as owner, lessee, manager,
officer or agent, shall be eligible for a video gaming license from the city,
nor shall an existing license holder be entitled to maintain a video gaming
license, unless each of the following requirements are met and continue to be
met:
      (1)   The applicant holds the appropriate certificate or license from the
state permitting video gaming and is in good standing with same;
      (2)   The applicant is not in arrears in any tax, fee or bill due to the
city or state;
      (3)   The applicant has completed and complies with all the application
requirements set forth in §
124.04 and is not disqualified due to a felony, gambling offense, or crime of
moral turpitude;
      (4)   The establishment is not located in a residential zoning district
within the city;
      (5)   The establishment is not located within 100 feet of a school nor
300 feet of another establishment licensed under this chapter; and
      (6)   The applicant has not been found to have made a false statement on
any license application to the city for any license or other document required
to be filed with the city.
   (C)   The Mayor shall be the approving authority for all licenses. If a
licensee or prospective licensee disagrees with any action taken by the Mayor,
an appeal may be made directly to the City Council at its next regularly
scheduled meeting after written notice of the action from which an appeal is
made. The Mayor's action with respect to a license and/or licensee shall be
entitled to deference, and may only be overturned by the City Council if the
applicant satisfies the abuse of discretion standard.
(Ord. 2025-07-05, passed 7-8-25)
§ 124.04 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The license applicant shall provide the following information to the city on
a form provided by the city:
   (A)   The legal name of the establishment;
   (B)   The business name of the establishment;
   (C)   The address of the establishment where the video gaming terminals are
to be located;
   (D)   The type of establishment, including whether it is classified as a
veteran, fraternal, regular truck stop, large truck stop or liquor
establishment and supporting documentation demonstrating the classification;
   (E)   The amount of time the establishment has been in business under the
ownership of the applicant at the location where video gaming is proposed to
take place;
   (F)   The business office address of the establishment if different from the
address of the establishment;
   (G)   In the case of a corporation, limited liability company or trust, the
name and address of an agent authorized and designated to accept service on
behalf of the licensee;
   (H)   A phone number for the establishment;
   (I)   An e-mail address for the establishment;
   (J)   The name and address of every person owinng more than a 5% share of
the establishment;
   (K)   The name, address, phone number and e-mail address of any terminal
operator or distributor proposed to own, service or maintain video gaming
terminals at the establishment;
   (L)   A copy of the establishment's state video gaming license;
   (M)   In the case of a corporation, limited liability company or
partnership, a copy of the establishment's state certificate of good standing;
   (N)   A statement as to the number of video gaming terminals which the
establishment proposes to have on its premises;
   (O)   A statement that the establishment is not in arrears in any tax, fee
or bill due to the city or state;
   (P)   A statement that the establishment agrees to abide by all state and
federal laws and any local ordinance;
   (Q)   A statement that no manager or owner with more than 5% interest in the
establishment has ever been convicted of a felony, a gambling offense or a
crime of moral turpitude; and
   (R)   Any other such information deemed to be material by the city in the
consideration of the applicant and the application.
(Ord. 2025-07-05, passed 7-8-25)
§ 124.05 APPLICATION FILING; RENEWALS; FEES.
   (A)   Applications shall be processed by the City Clerk on a first come,
first served basis. Every application shall be date and time stamped upon
filing. An application received in the mail shall be considered filed on the
date and time it is opened by the City Clerk's department.
   (B)   Every video gaming license holder shall be required to file a renewal
application, which may contain the same or similar information as set forth in
§
124.04. Renewal applications shall be due on or before [insert date] unless
that day falls on a holiday, in which case the application may be received by
the Clerk on the following business day.
(Ord. 2025-07-05, passed 7-8-25)
§ 124.06 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The fee for operation of a video gaming terminal shall be $250 per
terminal annually. The cost of this fee shall be shared equally between the
terminal operator and the applicable licensed establishment.
   (B)   The application fee is not subject to reimbursement or refund upon
denial of a license.
   (C)   Said fees are not subject to proration or refund and are due prior to
issuance of the license.
   (D)   All licenses required by this chapter shall be prominently displayed
next to the video gaming terminal.
(Ord. 2025-07-05, passed 7-8-25)
§ 124.07 LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The Mayor, at any time, may notify any licensee under this division
within five business days of any charge of a violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter in connection with the operation of any video gaming terminal.
After a hearing presided over by the Mayor, the Mayor may order the revocation
of the license upon a finding that the violation has occurred, and the license
shall thereupon be terminated. The licensee may appeal the revocation as
prescribed in §
124.03(E).
   (B)   In the event of the revocation or denial of any license or
registration under this section, such person shall not be issued any license
provided for in this chapter for one calendar year following the revocation or
any appeal thereof.
(Ord. 2025-07-05, passed 7-8-25)
§ 124.08 LIMITATIONS ON LICENSES AND TERMINALS.
   (A)   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for not to exceed only one year after issuance unless sooner
revoked as allowed by this chapter or abandoned by the licensee. Any license
issued pursuant to this chapter shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, nor subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee.
   (B)   The City Council shall, from time to time, set a limitation on the
number of licenses to be issued under this chapter. Said limitations shall be
adopted by resolution. This restriction on the number of licenses shall not
limit the right to the renewal of any existing license nor to the issuance of a
license to the purchaser, but as licenses are revoked, expire without renewal
or for any other reason cease to exist, then the total number of licenses shall
be reduced until the total of each such class shall not exceed the number
authorized by the City Council. Further, no more than five licenses may be
conferred upon establishments located within the Market Street District.
   (C)   The number of terminals allowed by the city in each establishment
shall be limited to such number as may, at any given point, be allowed by the
laws of the state.
(Ord. 2025-07-05, passed 7-8-25)
§ 124.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating this chapter shall be fined
not less than $200 nor more than $500 for each offense; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, or allows to be
violated, this chapter on a premises that is licensed pursuant to
Chapter 115 shall, in addition to any such penalties provided for in
Chapter 115, have its license summarily revoked for 30 days.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, or allows to be
violated, this chapter on a premises that is licensed pursuant to
Chapter 115 more than once shall, in addition to any such penalties provided
for in
Chapter 115, have its license permanently revoked and shall not be eligible to
possess any such license in the future.
   (D)   Any gambling device which is not authorized by this chapter shall be
subject to immediate seizure and confiscation by the city. Any money or other
thing of value intrinsically related to acts of gambling not authorized by this
chapter shall be seized and forfeited as contraband. Disposition of such
gambling devices and funds seized or confiscated shall be made in accordance
with the law.
(Ord. 2025-07-05, passed 7-8-25)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
135.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
      
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
137.   WEAPONS
      
138.   USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR THE COMMISSION OF CERTAIN OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Intent
   
130.03   Knowledge
   
130.04   Recklessness
   
130.05   Negligence
   
130.06   Attempt
   
130.07   Parental responsibility
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   ACT. The taking of action or a failure or omission to take action.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-2)
   ANOTHER. A person or persons other than the offender.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-3)
   CONDUCT. An act or a series of acts, and the accompanying mental state.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-4)
   OFFENSE. A violation of a penal statute of this city or state.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-12)
§ 130.02 INTENT.
   A person intends, or acts intentionally or with intent, to accomplish a
result or engage in conduct described by the section defining the offense, when
his or her conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish that result or
engage in that conduct.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-4)
§ 130.03 KNOWLEDGE.
   (A)   A person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:
      (1)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her conduct,
described by the section defining the offense, when he or she is consciously
aware that his or her conduct is of that nature or that those circumstances
exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial
probability that the fact exists.
      (2)   The result of his or her conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that that result is
practically certain to be caused by his or her conduct.
   (B)   Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed willfully,
within the meaning of a statute using the term "willfully", unless the section
clearly requires another meaning.
   (C)   When the law provides that acting knowingly suffices to establish an
element of an offense, the element also is established is a person acts
intentionally.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-5)
§ 130.04 RECKLESSNESS.
   A person is reckless or acts recklessly, when that person consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or
that a result will follow, described by the section defining the offense, and
that disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation. An act performed recklessly
is performed wantonly, within the meaning of a section using the term
"wantonly", unless the statute clearly requires another meaning.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-6)
§ 130.05 NEGLIGENCE.
   A person is negligent, or acts negligently, when that person fails to be
aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a
result will follow, described by the statute defining the offense, and that
failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-7)
§ 130.06 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits the offense of attempt when,
with intent to commit a specific offense, he or she does any act which
constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense.
   (B)   Impossibility.  It is not a defense to a charge of attempt that
because of a misapprehension of the circumstances it would have been impossible
for the accused to commit the offense attempted.
   (C)   Statutory fine. A person convicted of an attempt may be fined not to
exceed the maximum provided for the offense attempted. If such fine exceeds
that set forth in § 130.99 below, however, the city shall enforce said offense
under the provisions of state law.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-4)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.07 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the
terms specified have the meanings ascribed to them.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian or given custody, of a minor
by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act.
      MINOR. A person who is above the age of 7 years, but not yet 18 years of
age.
   (B)   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with
the parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to
the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and
said minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with the
knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this
section, upon the occurrence of the events described in subsections (1), (2)
and (3) below:
      (1)   An unemanicipated minor residing with a parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting intentional, wilful, malicious, or wanton acts causing injury to a
person or property, or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions from another
official agency resulting from an admission of guilt or violation or any
ordinance, law, or statute prohibiting intentional, willful, malicious acts
causing injury to a person or property;
      (2)   The parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or
by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned, from the
Police Department of the city following the adjudication of non-judicial
sanction; and
      (3)   If at any time within one year following receipt of the notice set
forth in subsection (2) above, the minor is either adjudicated to be in
violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection (1)
above, or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions guilt of violation of any
ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection (1) above.
   (C)   Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense.
   (D)   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides
with the parent or legal guardian is liable for actual damages for the willful
or malicious acts of the minor which cause injury to a person or property.
   (E)   Any municipal corporation, county, township, village or any other
political subdivision or department of the state, or any person, partnership,
corporation, association or any incorporated or unincorporated religious,
educational or charitable organization is entitled to enforce the liability
imposed by this section.
   (F)   No recovery under this section may exceed $500 actual damages for each
person or legal entity as provided in division (E) of this section for each
occurrence of willful or malicious acts by the minor causing injury, in
addition to taxable court costs. In determining the damages to be allowed in an
action under this section for personal injury, only medical, dental and
hospital expenses may be considered.
   (G)   This section shall not affect the recovery of damages in any other
cause of action where the liability of the parent or legal guardian is
predicated on a common law basis.
   (H)   Section 5 of Chapter 77 of the Illinois Revised Statutes of 1975
titled “An Act in regard to judgments and decrees, and the manner of enforcing
the same by execution, and to provide for the redemption of real estate sold
under execution or decree,” approved March 22, 1872, as now or hereafter
amended, or any applicable successor statute, is not applicable to judgments
obtained under this section.
(Ord. 76-26, passed 8-9-76)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provisions of this title for which another penalty is
not specifically provided shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750.
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   (Reserved)
   
131.02   Trespass to land
   
131.03   Damaging city property
   
131.04   Deceptive practices
§ 131.01 (RESERVED).
§ 131.02 TRESPASS TO LAND.
   (A)   (1)   A person commits criminal trespass to real property when he or
she:
         (a)   Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains within
or on a building;
         (b)   Enters upon the land of another, after receiving prior to the
entry notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is forbidden;
         (c)   Remains upon the land of another, after receiving notice from
the owner or occupant to depart;
         (d)   Presents false documents or falsely represent his or her
identity orally to the owner of occupant of the building or land in order to
obtain permission from the owner or occupant to enter or remain in the building
or on the land;
         (e)   Intentionally removes a notice posted on residential real estate
as required by Section 15-1505.8(l) of Article XV of the Code of Civil
Procedure before the date and time set forth in the notice; or
         (f)   Enters a field used or capable of being used for growing crops,
an enclosed area containing livestock, an agricultural building containing
livestock, or an orchard in or on a motor vehicle (including an off-road
vehicle, motorcycle, moped or any other powered two-wheel vehicle) after
receiving, prior to the entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry
is forbidden or remains upon or in the area after receiving notice from the
owner or occupant to depart.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (A), this section shall not apply to
being in a building which is open to the public while the building is open to
the public during its normal hours of operation, nor shall this section apply
to a person who enters a public building under the reasonable belief that the
building is still open to the public.
   (B)   (1)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within
the meaning of division (A) if the person has been notified personally, either
orally or in writing, including a valid court order as defined by ILCS Ch. 725,
Act 5, § 112A-3(b)(7) granting remedy (2) of ILCS Ch. 725, Act 5, § 112A-14(b),
or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously
posted or exhibited at the main entrance to the land or the forbidden part
thereof.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to the provisions of division (B)(3) below, as an
alternative to posting of real property as set forth in division (B)(1) above,
the owner or lessee of any real property may post the property by placing
identifying purple marks on trees or posts around the area to be posted. Each
purple mark shall be:
            1.   A vertical line of at least eight inches in length and the
bottom of the mark shall be no less than three feet nor more than five feet
high. Such marks shall be placed no more than 100 feet apart and shall be
readily visible to any person approaching the property; or
            2.   A post capped or otherwise marked on at least its top two
inches. The bottom of the cap or mark shall be not less than three feet nor
more than five feet six inches high. Posts so marked shall be placed not more
than 36 feet apart and shall be readily visible to any person approaching the
property. Prior to applying a cap or mark which is visible from both sides of a
fence shared by different property owners or lessees, all such owners or
lessees shall concur in the decision to post their own property.
         (b)   Nothing in this division (B)(2) shall be construed to authorize
the owner or lessee of any real property to place any purple marks on any tree
or post or to install any post or fence if doing so would violate any
applicable law, rule, ordinance, order covenant, bylaw, declaration,
regulation, restriction, contract or instrument.
      (3)   Any owner or lessee who marks his or her real property using the
method described in division (B)(2) above must also provide notice as described
in division (B)(1) above. The public of this state shall be informed of the
provisions of division (B)(2) above by the Illinois Department of Agriculture
and the Illinois Department of Natural Resources. These Departments shall
conduct an information campaign for the general public concerning the
interpretation and implementation of division (B)(2) above. The information
shall inform the public about the marking requirements and the applicability of
division (B)(2) above including information regarding the size requirements of
the markings as well as the manner in which the marking shall be displayed. The
Departments shall also include information regarding the requirement that,
until the date this division becomes operative, any owner or lessee who chooses
to mark his or her property using paint, must also comply with one of the
notice requirements listed in division (B)(1) above. The Departments may
prepare a brochure or may disseminate the information through agency websites.
Non-governmental organizations including, but not limited to, the Illinois
Forestry Association, Illinois Tree Farm and the Walnut Council may help to
disseminate the information regarding the requirements and applicability of
division (B)(2) above based on materials provided by the Departments. This
division is inopeative on and after January 1, 2013.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(2) and (3) do not apply to real property located in a
municipality of over 2,000,000 inhabitants.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or
otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of the owner's
agent having apparent authority to hire workers on the land and assign them
living quarters or a place of accommodation for living thereon, nor to anyone
living on such land at the request of or by occupancy, leasing, or other
agreement or arrangement with the owner or the owner's agent, nor to anyone
invited by such migrant worker or other person so living on the land to visit
him or her at the place that person is so living upon the land.
   (D)   (1)   A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section if
the person beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial
properties located within any municipality.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (D), UNOCCUPIED AND ABANDONED
RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY means any real estate:
         (a)   In which the taxes have not been paid for a period of at least
two years; and
         (b)   Which has been left unoccupied and abandoned for a period of at
least one year.
      (3)   For the purpose of this division (D), BEAUTIFIES means to
landscape, to clean up litter, or to repair dilapidated conditions on, or to
board up windows and doors.
   (E)   No person shall be liable in any civil action for money damages to the
owner of unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial property which
that person beautifies pursuant to division (D) of this section. Mortgagee or
agent of the mortgagee exceptions:
      (1)   A mortgagee or agent of the mortgagee shall be exempt from
prosecution for criminal trespass for entering, securing or maintaining an
abandoned residential property.
      (2)   No mortgagee or agent of the mortgagee shall be liable to the
mortgagor or other owner of an abandoned residential property in any civil
action for negligence or civil trespass in connection with entering, securing
or maintaining the abandoned residential property.
      (3)   For the purpose of divisions (E)(1), (2) and (3) only, ABANDONED
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means mortgaged real estate that the mortgagee or agent of
the mortgagee determines in good faith meets the definition of abandoned
residential property set forth in Section 15-1200.5 of Article XV of the Code
of Civil Procedure.
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a person from entering a building or
upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of this division
(F), EMERGENCY means a condition or circumstance in which an individual is or
is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent danger of serious bodily
harm or in which property is or is reasonably believed to be in imminent danger
of damage or destruction.
   (G)   Division (A)(1)(d) does not apply to a peace officer or other official
of a unit of government who enters a building or land in the performance of his
or her official duties.
   (H)   (1)   A person may be liable in any civil action for money damages to
the owner of the land he or she entered upon with a motor vehicle as prohibited
under division (A)(3) of this section. A person may also be liable to the owner
for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees.
         (a)   The measure of damages shall be:
            1.   The actual damages, but not less than $250, if the vehicle is
operated in a nature preserve or registered area as defined in §§ 3.11 and 3.14
of the Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act;
            2.   Twice the actual damages if the owner has previously notified
the person to cease trespassing; or
            3.   In any other case, the actual damages, but not less than $50.
         (b)   If the person operating the vehicle is under the age of 16, the
owner of the vehicle and the parent or legal guardian of the minor are jointly
and severally liable.
      (2)   For the purposes of this division (H) the following definitions
apply:
         LAND. Includes but is not limited to land used for crop land, fallow
land, orchard, pasture, feed lot, timber land, prairie land, mine spoil nature
preserves and registered areas. LAND does not include driveways or private
roadways upon which the owner allows the public to drive.
           OWNER.  The person who has the right to possession of the land,
including the owner, operator or tenant.
           VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as provided under Section 1-217 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (I)   This section does not apply to the following persons while serving
process:
      (1)   A person authorized to serve process under Section 2-202 of the
Code of Civil Procedure; or
      (2)   A special process server appointed by the circuit court.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 131.03 DAMAGING CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to:
      (1)   Knowingly damage any city property without the city's consent.
      (2)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosion, damage city property
without the city's consent.
      (3)   Knowingly start a fire on city land without the consent of the
city.
      (4)   Knowingly deposit on city land or in a city building any stink bomb
or any offensive- smelling compound which thereby tends to interfere with the
use by the city of its land or buildings.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, PROPERTY means anything of value
including but not limited to real estate, money, commercial instruments,
written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of
value, labor, or services, things affixed to or found on land or part of or
affixed to any building, electricity, gas, or water.
Penalty, see § 130.99
Statutory reference:
   Additional prohibitions; felonies, see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1
§ 131.04 DECEPTIVE PRACTICES.
   (A)   It is determined that the following conduct is illegal: for any
person, with intent to obtain control over property or to pay for property,
labor or services of another, to issue or deliver a check or other order upon a
real or fictitious depository for the payment of money knowing that it will not
be paid by the depository. Failure to have sufficient funds or credit with the
depository when the check or the order is issued or presented to the depository
is prima facie evidence that the offender knew that it would not be paid by the
depository.
   (B)   The penalty for violating this section shall be as follows:
      (1)   For the first conviction, a fine of not less than $5 nor more than
$500;
      (2)   For the second conviction, a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $500;
      (3)   For the third conviction, a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $500.
(Ord. 76-28, passed 9-13-76)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
   
132.01   Disorderly conduct
   
132.02   (Reserved)
   
132.03   Disturbing others
   
132.04   Blocking traffic
§ 132.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
      (1)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
      (2)   Enters upon the property of another, and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it;
      (3)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
to the Department of Children and Family Services under the Abused and
Neglected Child Reporting Act, ILCS Ch. 325, Act 5, § 4;
      (4)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
to the Department of Public Health under the Nursing Home Care Act, ILCS Ch.
210, Act 45, §§ 1-101 et seq.; or the MR/DD Community Care Act;
      (5)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the Police
Department or Fire Department or any privately-owned and operated ambulance
service, a false request for an ambulance, emergency medical technician-
ambulance, or emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the time there
is no reasonable ground for believing that such assistance is required;
      (6)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
under ILCS Ch. 320, Act 15, §§ 0.01 et seq;
      (7)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
to any public safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe
that transmitting such a report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public;
      (8)   Calls or texts the number “911” or transmits or causes to be
transmitted in any manner to a public safety agency or public safety answering
point for the purpose of making or transmitting a false alarm or complaint and
reporting information when, at the time the call, text, or transmission is
made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for making the call, text,
or transmission and further knows that the call, text, or transmission could
result in the emergency response of any public safety agency;
      (9)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a threat of
destruction of a school building or school property, or a threat of violence,
death or bodily harm directed against persons at a school, school function or
school event, whether or not school is in session.
   (B)   In addition to any penalty imposed as set forth in §
130.99, any person convicted of disorderly conduct shall be ordered by the
court to perform community service, as set forth under the provisions of ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.02 (RESERVED).
§ 132.03 DISTURBING OTHERS.
   (A)   No person in any public place in the city shall do any of the
following acts:
      (1)   Continue to accost any second person after that person has asked
the first person to stop;
      (2)   Threaten any other person with violence; or
      (3)   Block any person’s passage to any place where that person desires
to go and is lawfully entitled to go.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall be found guilty of violating this
section if the person, firm or corporation is acting in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or pursuant to a motion, ordinance or resolution
duly passed and adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 95-48, passed 11-13-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.04 BLOCKING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall stand in any location in any public place where the
person is blocking any pedestrian lawfully using any street or sidewalk. No
person shall stand in any location in any public place where the person is
blocking any vehicular traffic entitled to use that location at that time.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall be found guilty of violating this
section if the person, firm or corporation is acting in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or pursuant to a motion, ordinance or resolution
duly passed and adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 95-48, passed 11-13-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
133.01   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer, firefighter, or correctional
institution employee
   
133.02   Refusing to aid an officer
   
133.03   Tampering with public notice
§ 133.01 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER, FIREFIGHTER, OR CORRECTIONAL
INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one
known to the person to be a peace officer, firefighter, or correctional
institution employee of any authorized act within his or her official capacity.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply.
      CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE. Any person employed to supervise and
control inmates incarcerated in a penitentiary, state farm, reformatory,
prison, jail, house of correction, police detention area, half-way house, or
other institution or place for the incarceration or custody of persons under
sentence for offenses or awaiting trial or sentence for offenses, under arrest
for an offense, a violation of probation, a violation of parole, a violation of
aftercare release, a violation of mandatory supervised release, or awaiting a
bail setting hearing or preliminary hearing, or who are sexually dangerous
persons or who are sexually violent persons.
      FIREFIGHTER. Any individual, either as an employee or volunteer, of a
regularly constituted fire department of a municipality or fire protection
district who performs fire fighting duties, including, but not limited to, the
fire chief, assistant fire chief, captain, engineer, driver, ladder person,
hose person, pipe person, and any other member of a regularly constituted fire
department. FIREFIGHTER also means a person employed by the Office of the State
Fire Marshal to conduct arson investigations.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if a
person resists or obstructs the performance of one known by the person to be a
firefighter by returning to or remaining in a dwelling, residence, building, or
other structure to rescue or to attempt to rescue any person.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 133.02 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.
   No person, upon command, shall refuse or knowingly reasonably fail to aid a
person known by him or her to be a police officer in:
   (A)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
   (B)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-8)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 133.03 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.
   A person commits tampering with public notice when he or she knowingly and
without lawful authority alter, destroy, deface, remove, or conceal any public
notice posted according to law, during the time for which the notice was to
remain posted.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 32-9)
Penalty, see § 130.99
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
   
134.01   Public indecency
   
134.02   Obscenity
   
134.03   Harmful material
§ 134.01 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct as defined in ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-12; or
      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
   (B)   Breast-feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency.
   (C)   PUBLIC PLACE. For purposes of this section means any place where the
conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-9)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 134.02 OBSCENITY.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he or she:
      (1)   Sells, delivers, or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver,
or provide any obscene writing, picture, record, or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene;
      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
      (3)   Publishes, exhibits, or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his or her body for gain;
      (5)   Creates, buys, procures, or possesses obscene matter or material
with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal
laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented
or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (B)   Obscene defined. Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:
      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest;
      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions, or lewd
exhibition of the genitals; and
      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political,
or scientific value.
   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.
      (1)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults except
that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience.
      (2)   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic, political,
or scientific value.
      (3)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence
shall be admissible to show:
         (a)   The character of the audience for which the material was
designed or to which it was directed;
         (b)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for
ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would
probably have on the behavior of such people;
         (c)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational, or other merits
of the material, or absence thereof;
         (d)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
state;
         (e)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising
or other promotion of the material;
         (f)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher, or disseminator.
   (D)   Prima facie evidence. The creation, purchase, procurement, or
possession of a mold, engraved plate, or other embodiment of obscenity
specially adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more
than three copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an
intent to disseminate.
   (E)   Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      (1)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under 18 years of age;
      (2)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 134.03 HARMFUL MATERIAL.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTE. Transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
        HARMFUL TO MINORS. That quality of any description or representation,
in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-
masochistic abuse, when, taken as a whole, it predominately appeals to the
prurient interest in sex of minors, is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community in the State as a whole with respect to what
is suitable material for minors, and lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value for minors.
      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the contents.
      MATERIAL. Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, film, video game,
computer game, video or similar visual depiction, including any such
representation or image which is stored electronically, or any book, magazine,
printed matter however reproduced, or recorded audio of any sort.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion below the top of
the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernably turgid
state.
        SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one clothed
for sexual gratification or stimulation.
        SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or physical
contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or,
if such person be a female, breast.
        SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when
in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   A person is guilty of distributing harmful material to a minor when he
or she does either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly sells, lends, distributes, or gives away to a minor,
knowing that the minor is under the age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable
care in ascertaining the person’s true age:
          (a)   Any material which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-
masochistic abuse, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions
or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic
abuse, and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors;
          (b)   A motion picture, show, or other presentation which depicts
nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and is harmful to minors; or
          (c)   An admission ticket or pass to premises where there is
exhibited or to be exhibited such a motion picture, show, or other
presentation.
       (2)   Admits a minor to premises where there is exhibited or to be
exhibited such a motion picture, show, or other presentation, knowing that the
minor is a person under the age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the person's true age.
    (C)   In any prosecution arising under this section, it is an affirmative
defense:
      (1)   That the minor as to whom the offense is alleged to have been
committed exhibited to the accused a draft card, driver’s license, birth
certificate or other official or apparently official document purporting to
establish that the minor was 18 years of age or older, which was relied upon by
the accused;
       (2)   That the defendant was in a parental or guardianship relationship
with the minor or that the minor was accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
       (3)   That the defendant was a bona fide school, museum, or public
library, or was a person acting in the course of his or her employment as an
employee or official of such organization or retail outlet affiliated with and
serving the educational purpose of such organization;
      (4)   That the act charged was committed in aid of legitimate scientific
or educational purposes; or
      (5)   That an advertisement of harmful material as defined in this
section culminated in the sale or distribution of such harmful material to a
child under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of the
child by the defendant, his employees, or agents, as where the order or request
for such harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone, Internet or
similar means of communication, and delivery of such harmful material to the
child was by mail, freight, Internet or similar means of transport, which
advertisement contained the following statement, or a substantially similar
statement, and that the defendant required the purchaser to certify that he or
she was not under the age of 18 and that the purchaser falsely stated that he
or she was not under the age of 18: “NOTICE: It is unlawful for any person
under the age of 18 to purchase the matter advertised. Any person under the age
of 18 that falsely states that he or she is not under the age of 18 for the
purpose of obtaining the material advertised is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor
under the laws of the State.”
   (D)   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall be
judged with reference to average children of the same general age of the child
to whom such material was sold, lent, distributed or given, unless it appears
from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination or
distribution that it is designed for specially susceptible groups, in which
case the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged with reference to
its intended or probable recipient group.
   (E)   Distribution of harmful material in violation of this section is a
Class A misdemeanor. A second or subsequent offense is a Class 4 felony.
   (F)   Any person under the age of 18 that falsely states, either orally or
in writing, that he or she is not under the age of 18, or that presents or
offers to any person any evidence of age and identity that is false or not
actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing, or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material is
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
   (G)   A person over the age of 18 who fails to exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the true age of a minor, knowingly distributes to, or sends, or
causes to be sent, or exhibits to, or offers to distribute, or exhibits any
harmful material to a person that he or she believes is a minor is guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor. If that person utilized a computer web camera, cellular
telephone, or any other type of device to manufacture the harmful material,
then each offense is a Class 4 felony.
   (H)   Telecommunications carriers, commercial mobile service providers, and
providers of information services, including, but not limited to, internet
service providers and hosting service providers, are not liable under this
section, except for willful and wanton misconduct, by virtue of the
transmission, storage, or caching of electronic communications or messages of
others or by virtue of the provision of other related telecommunications,
commercial mobile services, or information services used by others in violation
of this section.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-21)
Penalty, see § 130.99
CHAPTER 135: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Gambling
   
135.03   Keeping a gambling place
   
135.04   Seizure of gambling devices and gambling funds
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   GAMBLING DEVICE.  
      (1)   Any clock, tape machine, slot machine, or other machines or device
for the reception of money or other thing of value on chance or skill, or upon
the action of which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded, bet,
won, or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment, or other device
designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A GAMBLING DEVICE does not
include the following, as more specifically defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §
28-2(a)(1) through (a)(4):
         (a)   Coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical devices;
         (b)   Vending machines;
         (c)   Crane games;
         (d)   Redemption machines.
      (2)   Further, for the purposes of this chapter only, a GAMBLING DEVICE
does not include a video gaming terminal owned, maintained or operated in
compliance with the Video Gaming Act, ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq., and
the ordinances of the city.
   INTERNET. An interactive computer service or system or an information
service, system, or access software provided that provides or enables computer
access by multiple users to a computer server, including but not limited to an
information service, system, or access software provider that provides access
to a network system commonly known as the internet or any comparable system or
service, and also including but not limited to a world-wide web page,
newsgroup, message board, mailing list, or chat area on any interactive
computer service or system or other online service. ACCESS and COMPUTER have
the meanings ascribed to them in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16D-2.
   LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed
by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to
win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle,
gift, sale, or some other name, excluding savings promotion raffles authorized
under state and federal law.
   POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees
by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token, or other device that any
particular number, character, ticket, or certificate shall in the event of any
contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser or holder to
receive money, property, or evidence of debt.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2) (Am. Ord. 12-35, passed 7-16-12)
§ 135.02 GAMBLING.
   (A)   A person commits gambling when he or she:
      (1)   Knowingly plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing
of value, unless excepted in division (B);
      (2)   Knowingly makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or
any political nomination, appointment, or election;
      (3)   Knowingly operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents,
sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures, or distributes any
gambling device;
      (4)   Contracts to have or give himself or herself or another the option
to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or
other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, as
described in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1(a)(4);
      (5)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument, or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he or she has received in the courses of a
bet or wager;
      (6)   Knowingly sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of
skill or chance, political nomination, appointment, or election;
      (7)   Knowingly sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell,
or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;
      (8)   Knowingly sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to
sell, or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record,
document, or other similar device;
      (9)   Knowingly drafts, prints, or publishes any lottery ticket or share,
or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state or foreign
government;
      (10)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state;
      (11)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore, or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such information; except that nothing in this division prohibits
transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting of
sporting events or contests; or
      (12)   Knowingly establishes, maintains, or operates an internet site
that permits a person to play a game of chance or skill for money or other
thing of value by means of the internet or to make a wager upon the result of
any game, contest, political nomination, appointment, or election by means of
the internet. This division does not apply to activities referenced in
divisions (B)(6) and (6)(a) of this section.
   (B)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted
of gambling:
      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance
including without limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life or
health or accident insurance;
      (2)   Offers of prizes, awards, or compensation to the actual contestants
in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength, or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest;
      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this state;
      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this state when such
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law; or the
manufacture, distribution or possession of video gaming terminals, as defined
in the Video Gaming Act, by manufacturers, distributors and terminal operators
licensed to do so under the Video Gaming Act;
      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo,” when conducted in accordance
with ILCS Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.;
      (6)   Lotteries when conducted by the State of Illinois or a third party
pursuant to a management agreement with the State of Illinois in accordance
with ILCS Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq. This exemption includes any activity
conducted by the Department of Revenue to sell lottery tickets pursuant to the
provisions of the Illinois Lottery Law and its rules;
      (6a) The purchase of lottery tickets through the internet for a lottery
conducted by the State of Illinois under the program established under the
Illinois Lottery Law;
      (7)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this division, an ANTIQUE SLOT
MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier;
      (8)   Raffles and poker runs when conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch.
230, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.;
      (9)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 230,
Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.;
      (10)   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under ILCS Ch. 230, Act 20,
§§ 1 et seq.;
      (11)   Gambling games conducted on riverboats when authorized under ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.;
      (12)   Video gaming terminal games at a licensed establishment, licensed
truck stop establishment, licensed large truck stop establishment, licensed
fraternal establishment or licensed veteran’s establishment when conducted in
accordance with the Video Gaming Act;
      (13)   Games of skill or chance where money or other things of value can
be won but no payment or purchase is required to participate.
      (14)   Savings promotion raffles authorized under state and federal law.
      (15)   Sports wagering when conducted in accordance with the Sports
Wagering Act.
   (C)   Circumstantial evidence. In prosecutions under this section,
circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight as in any
criminal prosecution.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 135.03 KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a GAMBLING PLACE is any real estate,
vehicle, boat, or any other property whatsoever used for the purposes of
gambling other than the gambling conducted in the manner authorized by the
Illinois Gambling Act, the Sports Wagering Act, or the Video Gaming Act. No
person shall knowingly permit any premises or property owned or occupied by him
or her or under his or her control to be used as a gambling place.
   (B)   When any premises is determined by the circuit court to be a gambling
place:
      (1)   The premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
proceeded against as such; and
      (2)   The premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a
violation of any section of this chapter shall be held liable for and may be
sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any unsatisfied
fine that may be levied under any section of this chapter.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-3)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 135.04 SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.
   (A)   Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use or
every device used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a gambling device
and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation, and destruction by city
authorities. As used in this section, a GAMBLING DEVICE includes any slot
machine and includes any machine or device constructed for the reception of
money or other thing of value and so constructed as to return or cause someone
to return on chance to the player thereof money, property, or a right to
receive money or property. With the exception of any device designed for
gambling which is incapable of lawful use, no gambling device shall be
forfeited or destroyed unless an individual with a property interest in the
device knows of the unlawful use thereof.
   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to
the county wherein the seizure occurs. Any money or other thing of value
integrally related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited as
contraband to the county wherein the seizure occurs.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-5(a),(b))
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
   
136.01   Electric fences prohibited
   
136.02   Playing sports in streets prohibited
   
136.03   Horses regulated
   
136.04   Sale and discharge of fireworks
§ 136.01 ELECTRIC FENCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or install any
electrically charged fence within the limits of the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any electrically
charged fence within the limits of the city on or after March 1, 1994.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
section shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 93-8, passed 2-8-93)
§ 136.02 PLAYING SPORTS IN STREETS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall, at any place within the city limits, discharge any
bow, throw stones or other hard substances, play ball or engage in any sport or
exercises likely to impede the passage of vehicles or otherwise injure persons
or property or obstruct the business of other persons.
   (B)   Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation violating
any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than
$250 for each offense.
(Ord. 91-37, passed 12-9-91)
§ 136.03 HORSES REGULATED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, lead, ride or in any
manner cause any horse to go upon any of the following places within the city
limits:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   Upon any private property without the permission of the owner or
tenant of the property;
      (3)   In any park, except in the areas designated as public roads or
streets.
   (B)   Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than $5 and
no more than $500 for each offense.
(Ord. 79-43, passed 10-8-79)
§ 136.04 SALE AND DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   The discharge, firing or use of all firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes,
Roman candles or other fireworks or substances designed and intended for
pyrotechnic display and of all pistols, canes, cannons or other appliances
using blank cartridges or caps containing chlorate or potash mixture is
prohibited; provided, however, that the Mayor or City Council may order the
public display of fireworks by properly qualified individuals under the direct
supervision of experts in the handling of fireworks; provided, also, that such
display or displays shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or
fired, as, in the opinion of the City Marshal, shall not be hazardous to
surrounding property or endanger any person or persons.
   (B)   The sale of fireworks at retail is prohibited in the city.
   (C)   Storage or sale of fireworks at wholesale is prohibited, except by
permit from the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, issued for
a period of one year. Application for permit must be filed with the City Clerk
at least 30 days previous to the issuing of the permit and must give detailed
description of the proposed care and storage of the materials and the
structural conditions and occupancies of the building.
   (D)   Permits may be issued only after an inspection of the premises by the
City Marshal or his or her authorized agent who shall file with the Clerk a
certificate of approval or his or her disapproval.
(Ord. passed 11-4-40)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS
Section
Deadly Weapons
   
137.01   Unlawful possession of weapons
   
137.02   Exemptions
   
137.03   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition
   
137.04   Confiscation and disposition of weapons
Statutory reference:
   Firearms and ammunition registration, ILCS Ch. 430, Act 65, §§ 0.01 through
16.3
DEADLY WEAPONS
§ 137.01 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly:
      (1)   Sell, manufacture, purchase, possess, or carry any bludgeon, black-
jack, slung-shot, sand-club, sand-bag, metal knuckles or other knuckle weapon
regardless of its composition, throwing star, or any knife, commonly referred
to as a switch-blade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand
pressure applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle of the
knife, or a ballistic knife, which is a device that propels a knifelike blade
as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material or compressed gas,
but which shall not be deemed to include crossbows, common or compound bows
and/or underwater spearguns in accordance with ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(e);
      (2)   Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle
or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser, or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon or instrument of like character;
      (3)   Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, any firearm in a church, synagogue, mosque, or other building,
structure, or place used for religious worship;
      (4)   Carry on or about his or her person or in any vehicle, a tear gas
gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance,
other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious liquid gas or substance
designed solely for personal defense carried by a person 18 years of age or
older;
      (5)   Set a spring gun;
      (6)   (a)   Carry or possess any firearm, stun gun or taser or other
deadly weapon in any place which is licensed to sell intoxicating beverages, or
at any public gathering held pursuant to a license issued by any governmental
body or any public gathering at which an admission is charged, excluding a
place where a showing, demonstration, or lecture involving the exhibition of
unloaded firearms is conducted;
         (b)   This subsection does not apply to any auction or raffle of a
firearm held pursuant to a license or permit issued by a governmental body, nor
does it apply to persons engaged in firearm safety training courses; or
      (7)   Sell, manufacture, deliver, import, possess, or purchase any
assault weapon attachment or 0.50 caliber cartridge in violation of ILCS Ch.
720, Act. 5, § 24-1.9 or any explosive bullet. EXPLOSIVE BULLET shall mean the
projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries an
explosive charge which will explode upon contact with the flesh of a human or
an animal. CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal case having a projectile affixed at
the front thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end thereof, with the
propellant contained in the tube between the projectile and the cap.
   (B)   A STUN GUN or TASER, as used in division (A), means:
      (1)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a length of wire
and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting
the person's nervous system in such a manner as to render him or her incapable
of normal functioning; or
      (2)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing worn by a human,
can send out a current capable of disrupting the person's nervous system in
such a manner as to render him or her incapable of normal functioning.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(1), (2), (2.5), (3), (5), (8), (11)) Penalty,
see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   For provisions concerning silencers on guns; machine guns; possession of
weapon while hooded, robed and/or masked; or possession of weapons on school or
university grounds (all of which are felonies), see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 24-
1(a)(6), (7), and (9) and § 24-1(c)(2) respectively
§ 137.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Section
137.01(A)(3) does not apply to or affect any of the following:
      (1)   Peace officers or any person summoned by a peace officer to assist
in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually engaged in assisting
the officer.
      (2)   Wardens, superintendents, and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails, and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted
of an offense, while in the performance of their official duty, or while
commuting between their homes and place of employment.
      (3)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard or the Reserve Officers Training Corps,
while in the performance of their official duty.
      (4)   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public utility to
perform police functions or guards of armored car companies while actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or commuting
between their homes and places of employment; watchmen while actually engaged
in the performance of the duties of their employment.
      (5)   Persons licensed as private security contractors, private
detectives or private alarm contractors or employed by a private security
contractor, private detective or private alarm contractor agency licensed by
the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation if their duties include
the carrying of a weapon under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act 447, §§ 5-
5 et seq., while actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their
employment or commuting between their homes and places of employment. A person
shall be considered eligible for this exemption if he or she has completed the
required 20 hours of training for a private security contractor, private
detective, or private alarm contractor, or employee of a licensed private
security contractor, private detective or private alarm contractor agency and
20 hours of required firearm training, and has been issued a firearm control
card by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. Conditions for
the renewal of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of this
section shall be the same as for those cards issued under the provisions of
ILCS Ch. 225, Act 447, §§ 5-5 et seq. The firearm control card shall be carried
by the private security contractor, private detective, or private alarm
contractor, or employee of the licensed private security contractor, private
detective or private alarm contractor agency at all times when he or she is in
possession of a concealable weapon permitted by his or her firearm control
card.
      (6)   Any person regularly employed in a commercial or industrial
operation as a security guard for the protection of persons employed and
private property related to that commercial or industrial operation while
actually engaged in the performance of their duty or traveling between sites or
properties belonging to the employer, and who, as a security guard, is a member
of a security force registered with the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation; provided, that the security guard has successfully
completed a course of study, approved by and supervised by the State Department
of Financial and Professional Regulation consisting of not less than 48 hours
of training which shall include theory of law enforcement, liability for acts,
and the handling of weapons. A person shall be considered to be in compliance
with this section who has completed the required 20 hours of training for a
security officer and 28 hours of required firearm training and who has been
issued a firearm control card by the state Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation. Conditions for the renewal of firearm control cards
issued under the provisions of this section shall be the same as for those
cards issued under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act 447, §§ 5-5 et seq. The
firearm control card shall be carried by the security guard at all times when
he or she is in possession of a concealable weapon permitted by his or her
firearm control card.
      (7)   Agents and investigators of the Illinois Legislative Investigating
Commission authorized by the Commission to carry the weapons specified in §
137.01(A)(3) while on duty in the course of any investigation for the
Commission.
      (8)   Persons employed by a financial institution as a security guard for
the protection of other employees and property related to that financial
institution, while actually engaged in the performance of their duties,
commuting between their homes and places of employment, or traveling between
sites or properties owned or operated by the financial institution, and who as
a security guard, is a member of a security force registered with the
Department; provided that any person so employed has successfully completed a
course of study, approved by and supervised by the state Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation, consisting of not less than 48 hours of
training which includes theory of law enforcement, liability for acts, and the
handling of weapons. A person shall be considered to be eligible for this
exemption who has completed the required 20 hours of training for a security
officer and 28 hours of required firearm training and who has been issued a
firearm control card by the State Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation. Conditions for renewal of firearm control cards issued under the
provisions of this section shall be the same as for those issued under the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act 447, §§ 5-5 et seq. The firearm control card
shall be carried by the security guard at all times when he or she is in
possession of a concealable weapon permitted by his or her firearm control
card. For purposes of this division, FINANCIAL INSTITUTION means a bank,
savings and loan association, credit union, or company providing armored car
services.
      (9)   Any person employed by an armored car company to drive an armored
car while actually engaged in the performance of his or her duties.
      (10)   Persons who have been classified as peace officers pursuant to
ILCS Ch. 20, Act 2910, §§ 0.01 et seq.
      (11)   Investigators of the Office of the State's Attorneys Appellate
Prosecutor authorized by the board of governors of the Office of the State's
Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor to carry weapons pursuant to ILCS Ch. 725, Act
210, §§ 1 et seq.
      (12)   Special investigators appointed by a State's Attorney under ILCS
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-9005.
      (13)   Probation officers while in the performance of their duties, or
while commuting between their homes, places of employment or specific locations
that are part of their assigned duties, with the consent of the chief judge of
the circuit for which they are employed, if they have received weapons training
according to the requirements of the Peace Officer and Probation Officer
Firearm Training Act.
      (14)   Court security officers while in the performance of their official
duties or while commuting between their homes and places of employment, with
the consent of the Sheriff.
      (15)   A person employed as an armed security guard at a nuclear energy,
storage, weapons, or development site or facility regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission who has completed the background screening and training
mandated by the rules and regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
      (16)   Manufacture, transportation, or sale of weapons to persons
authorized under (A)(1) through (15) of this section to possess those weapons.
      (17)   ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(4) and ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1
(a)(10) do not apply to or affect any person carrying a concealed pistol,
revolver, or handgun and the person has been issued a currently valid license
under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act at the time of the commission of the
offense.
      (18)   ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(4) and ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1
(a)(10) do not apply to or affect a qualified current or retired law
enforcement officer or a current or retired deputy, county correctional
officer, or correctional officer of the Department of Corrections qualified
under the laws of this state or under the federal Law Enforcement Officers
Safety Act.
   (B)   Section
137.01(A)(1) does not apply to the purchase, possession, or carrying of a
black-jack or slung-shot by a police officer.
   (C)   Section
137.01(A)(5) does not apply to any owner, manager, or authorized employee of
any place specified in that division or to any law enforcement officer.
   (D)   Section
137.01(A)(6) does not apply to:
      (1)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard, while in the performance of their
official duty.
      (2)   Bona fide collectors of antique or surplus military ordinance.
      (3)   Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics, or
specializing in the development of ammunition or explosive ordnance.
      (4)   Commerce, preparation, assembly, or possession of explosive bullets
by manufacturers of ammunition licensed by the federal government, in
connection with the supply of those organizations and persons exempted by
division (D)(1) above, or like organizations and persons outside this state, or
the transportation of explosive bullets to any organization or person exempted
in this section by a common carrier or by a vehicle owned or leased by an
exempted manufacturer.
   (E)   An information or indictment based upon a violation of any provision
of this subchapter need not negative any exemptions contained in this
subchapter. The defendant shall have the burden of proving such an exemption.
   (F)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to, or affect the
transportation, carrying, or possession of any pistol or revolver, stun gun,
taser, or other firearm consigned to a common carrier operating under license
with the state or the federal government where such transportation, carrying,
or possession is incident to the lawful transportation in which the common
carrier is engaged. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to, or
affect the transportation, carrying, or possession of any pistol, revolver,
stun gun, taser, or other firearm not the subject of and regulated by ILCS Ch.
720, Act 5, §§ 24-1(a)(7) or 24-2(c), which is unloaded and enclosed in a case,
firearm carrying box, shipping box, or other container by the possessor of a
valid firearm owner's identification card.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2)
§ 137.03 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of firearms or
firearm ammunition when:
      (1)   He is under 18 years of age and has in his or her possession any
firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person;
      (2)   He is under 21 years of age, has been convicted of a misdemeanor
other than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent, and has any firearms or
firearm ammunition in his or her possession;
      (3)   He is a narcotic addict and has any firearms or firearm ammunition
in his or her possession;
      (4)   He has been a patient in a mental institution within the past five
years and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession. For
the purposes of this division, the following definitions shall apply:
         MENTAL INSTITUTION. Any hospital, institution, clinic, evaluation
facility, mental health center or part thereof, which is used primarily for the
care or treatment of persons with mental illness.
         PATIENT IN A MENTAL INSTITUTION. The person was admitted, either
voluntarily or involuntarily, to a mental institution for mental health
treatment, unless the treatment was voluntary and solely for an alcohol abuse
disorder and no other secondary substance abuse disorder or mental illness; or
      (5)   He is a person with an intellectual disability and has any firearms
or firearm ammunition in his or her possession; or
      (6)   He has in his or her possession any explosive bullet. For the
purposes of this section, EXPLOSIVE BULLET means the projectile portion of an
ammunition cartridge which contains or carries an explosive charge which will
explode upon contact with the flesh of a human or an animal. CARTRIDGE means a
tubular metal case having a projectile fixed at the front thereof and a cap or
primer at the rear end thereof with the propellent contained in the tube
between the projectile and the cap.
   (B)   Unlawful possession of firearms, other than handguns, and firearm
ammunition is punishable under § 130.99. Unlawful possession of handguns is a
felony punishable under appropriate state law. The possession of each firearm
or firearm ammunition in violation of this section constitutes a single and
separate violation.
   (C)   Nothing in division (A)(1) above prohibits a person under 18 years of
age from participating in any lawful recreational activity with a firearm such
as, but not limited to, practice shooting at targets upon established public or
private target ranges or hunting, trapping, or fishing in accordance with the
Wildlife Code, ILCS Ch. 520, Act 5 or the Fish and Aquatic Life Code, ILCS Ch.
515, Act 5.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 137.04 CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.
   Upon conviction of an offense in which a weapon was used or possessed by the
offender, any weapon seized shall be confiscated by the trial court.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-6(a))
CHAPTER 138: USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR THE COMMISSION OF CERTAIN OFFENSES
Section
   
138.01   Definitions
   
138.02   Violations; exceptions
   
138.03   Impoundment
   
138.04   Notice
   
138.05   Hearing
   
138.06   Hearing officer; proceedings
   
138.07   Disposition of impounded vehicle
   
138.08   Posting of bond
   
138.09   Failure to pay penalty
Cross-references:
   Driving under the influence, see §
77.10
   Driving without a valid license, see §
77.11
§ 138.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including but not
limited to automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles, and motor scooters.
   OWNER OF RECORD. Collectively, the record title holder or holders of the
motor vehicle.
(Ord. 09-29, passed 8-10-09)
§ 138.02 VIOLATIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The owner of record of any motor vehicle shall be liable to the
city for an administrative penalty in the amount of $500, plus any applicable
towing and storage feeds payable to a towing agent. Whenever any such motor
vehicle is used in the commission of any of the following offenses:
         (a)   The knowing possession not less than ten grams of cannabis as
provided in Section 4 of the Cannabis Control Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 4)
or the knowing possession of a controlled substance as provided in Section 402
of the Illinois Controlled Substance Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, § 402).
         (b)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs and/or
intoxicating compounds as provided in Section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501).
         (c)   Driving on a suspended or revoked license as defined in Section
5/6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303).
         (d)   Driving without a valid driver’s license or permit as provided
in Section 5/6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101).
The only exception to this provision shall be if the driver has a valid
graduated driver’s license as defined in Section 5/6-107 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-107).
         (e)   Any motor vehicle used with the knowledge and consent of the
owner in the commission of or in the attempt to commit one or more of the
following as provided in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 36-1(a)(1): sexual assault,
sexual abuse, indecent solicitation of a child, solicitation to meet a child,
traveling to meet a minor, possession of child pornography, residential
burglary, burglary, attempted fleeing and eluding, and/or aggravated attempted
fleeing and eluding.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle used in the commission of any such violation
shall be subject to impoundment as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, a motor vehicle is not considered to
have been used in a violation that would render such motor vehicle eligible for
impoundment if:
      (1)   The motor vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and
the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities with 24 hours
after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
      (2)   The motor vehicle was operating as a common carrier and the
violation occurred without the knowledge of the person in control of the motor
vehicle; and
      (3)   The alleged owner of record provides adequate proof that the motor
vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the violation.
(Ord. 09-29, passed 8-10-09; Am. Ord. 10-02, passed 2-8-10; Am. Ord. 22-16,
passed 10-11-22; Am. Ord. 23-32, passed 12-12-23)
§ 138.03 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle
is subject to impoundment pursuant to §
138.02, such police officer shall provide for the towing of such motor vehicle
to a facility designated by the city. Before or at the time the motor vehicle
is towed, the police officer shall notify the owner of record or the person in
control of the motor vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, whichever is
present if there is such a person, of the fact of the impoundment and of the
right of the owner of record to request a vehicle impoundment hearing under
this chapter.
(Ord. 09-29, passed 8-10-09; Am. Ord. 23-32, passed 12-12-23)
§ 138.04 NOTICE.
   Within 72 hours after a motor vehicle is impounded pursuant to §
138.03, the Police Department shall notify by certified mail the owner of
record and any lien holder of record of the fact of the impoundment and the
right to request a motor vehicle impoundment hearing under this chapter.
However, no such notice need be sent to the owner of record if the owner of
record is personally served with the notice at the time the motor vehicle is
impounded and the owner of record acknowledges receipt of such notice in
writing. A copy of such notice shall be forwarded to the hearing officer. The
notice shall state the penalties that may be imposed if no hearing is
requested, including that a motor vehicle not released by payment of the
administrative penalty and applicable towing and storage fees may be sold or
disposed of by the city in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 09-29, passed 8-10-09; Am. Ord. 23-32, passed 12-12-23)
§ 138.05 HEARING.
   (A)   The owner of record seeking a vehicle impoundment hearing shall file a
written request for such a hearing with the Police Department of the city no
later than 15 days after notice was mailed or otherwise given to the owner of
record under §
138.03 or
138.04 of this chapter. The hearing date shall be no more than ten calendar
days after a request for a vehicle impoundment hearing has been filed.
   (B)   (1)   If, after the vehicle impoundment hearing, the hearing officer
determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used
in the violation, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of
record liable to the city for the amount of the administrative penalty
prescribed, plus applicable towing and storage fees payable to the towing
agent.
      (2)   If, after a hearing, the hearing officer does not determine by a
preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in such a
violation, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding for the owner of
record and for the return of the motor vehicle and any previously paid
administrative penalty and applicable towing and storage fees; provided that if
the motor vehicle was impounded pursuant to state or federal drug asset
forfeiture laws, the motor vehicle shall not be returned unless and until the
city receives notice from the appropriate state, or where applicable, federal
officials that:
         (a)   Forfeiture proceedings will not be instituted; or
         (b)   Forfeiture proceedings have concluded and there is a settlement
or a court order providing that the motor vehicle shall be returned to the
owner of record.
   (C)   If the owner of record requests a vehicle impoundment hearing but
fails to appear at such hearing or fails to request a vehicle impoundment
hearing in a timely manner, the owner of record shall be deemed to have waiver
his or her right to such a hearing and the hearing officer shall enter a
default order in favor of the city for the amount of the administrative penalty
prescribed, plus applicable towing and storage fees payable to the towing
agent.
   (D)   However, if the owner of record pays such administrative penalty and
applicable towing and storage fees and the motor vehicle is returned to the
owner of record, no default order need be entered if the owner of record is
informed of his or her right to a hearing and signs a written waiver, in which
case an order of liability shall be deemed to have been made when the city
receives the written waiver.
(Ord. 09-29, passed 8-10-09; Am. Ord. 23-32, passed 12-12-23)
§ 138.06 HEARING OFFICER; PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor or his or her designee shall serve as the hearing officer
for vehicle impoundment hearings under this chapter.
   (B)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at any vehicle impoundment hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not
apply at any such hearing.
   (C)   Any sworn or affirmed report, including a report prepared in
compliance with Section 11-501.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-501.1) that (1) is prepared in the performance of a law enforcement
officer’s duties and (2) sufficiently describes the circumstances leading to
the impoundment, shall be admissible evidence of the owner of record’s
liability under §
138.02 of this chapter, and shall support a finding of the owner of record’s
liability under §
138.02 of this chapter, unless rebutted by clear and convincing evidence.
(Ord. 09-29, passed 8-10-09)
§ 138.07 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   (A)   An administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter shall
constitute a debt due and owing the city which may be enforced in any manner
provided by law.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a motor vehicle
impounded pursuant to this chapter shall remain impounded until:
      (1)   The administrative penalty is paid in full to the city, and all
applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the towing agent, in which case
the owner of record shall be given possession of the motor vehicle;
      (2)   A cash bond in the amount of $500 is posted with the City
Comptroller or Police Department, and all applicable towing and storage fees
are paid to the towing agent, at which time the motor vehicle shall be released
to the of owner or record; or
      (3)   The motor vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a
judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, whenever a person
with a lien or record against a motor vehicle impounded under this chapter has
commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the motor vehicle shall be
given to that person if he or she pays the applicable towing and storage fees
and agrees in writing to refund to the city the net proceeds of any foreclosure
sale, less any amounts necessary to pay all lien holders of record, for the
total amount of administrative penalties imposed under this chapter.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no vehicle that
was impounded pursuant to state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws shall be
returned to the owner of record unless and until the city has received notice
from the appropriate state, or where applicable, federal officials that:
      (1)   Forfeiture proceedings will not be instituted; or
      (2)   Forfeiture proceedings have concluded and there is a settlement or
a court order providing that the vehicle shall be returned to the owner of
record.
(Ord. 09-29, passed 8-10-09; Am. Ord. 16-11, passed 6-14-16; Am. Ord. 17-44,
passed 11-14-17; Am. Ord. 23-32, passed 12-12-23)
§ 138.08 POSTING OF BOND.
   (A)   If a cash bond in the amount of $500 is posted with the City
Comptroller, the impounded motor vehicle shall be released to the owner of
record upon the payment of any applicable towing and storage fees to the towing
agent.
   (B)   If an administrative penalty is imposed for any violation under §
138.02, the $500 cash bond will be forfeited to the city; however, in the event
a violation under §
138.02 is not proven by a preponderance of the evidence, the $500 cash bond
will be returned to the person posting the bond.
   (C)   All bond money to be forfeited to the city pursuant to this section
shall be held by the City Comptroller until 30 days after an administrative
penalty is imposed by the hearing officer under this chapter, or, if there is a
judicial review, until a final judgment is rendered by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 09-29, passed 8-10-09)
§ 138.09 FAILURE TO PAY PENALTY.
   If the administrative penalty and applicable towing and storage fees are not
paid within 30 days after an administrative penalty is imposed under this
chapter against an owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the
vehicle impoundment hearing, the motor vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and
shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
unclaimed vehicles. In all other cases, if the administrative penalty and
applicable towing and storage fees are not paid within 30 days after the
expiration of time at which administrative review of the hearing officer’s
determination may be sought, or within 30 days after an action seeking
administrative review has been resolved in favor of the city, whichever is
applicable, the motor vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed
of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles;
provided that, if the motor vehicle was impounded pursuant to state or federal
drug asset forfeiture laws, the motor vehicle may not be disposed of by the
city, except as consistent with those proceedings.
(Ord. 09-29, passed 8-10-09; Am. Ord. 23-32, passed 12-12-23)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
      
150.   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT
      
151.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
150.01   Definitions
   
150.02   Duties of Building Administrator
   
150.03   Development permit
   
150.04   Review of proposed development
   
150.05   Review of subdivision proposals
   
150.06   Water supply systems
   
150.07   Sanitary sewage and waste disposal systems
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to real estate, including but not limited
to construction or reconstruction of buildings, installing manufactured homes
or travel trailers, installing utilities, construction of roads or bridges,
erection of levees, walls or fences, drilling, mining, filling, dredging and
storage of materials.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation or the runoff of surface water from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source. See FLOOD.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   STRUCTURE. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including gas or liquid storage tanks, that is principally above ground. The
term includes RVs and travel trailers on site for more than 180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      (2)   For the purpose of definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
         (a)   Any improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or
local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary
to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
(Ord. 96-21, passed 8-12-96)
§ 150.02 DUTIES OF BUILDING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Building Administrator shall be responsible for the general
administration of this chapter and ensure that all development activities under
the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter. The City
Building Administrator shall be responsible for receiving applications and
examining the plans and specifications for the proposed construction or
development. After reviewing the application, the City Building Administrator
shall require any additional measures which are necessary to meet the minimum
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-21, passed 8-12-96)
§ 150.03 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit requirements. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by state law shall commence any development activity without first
obtaining a development permit from the City Building Administrator.
   (B)   Permit application. To obtain a permit the applicant must first file a
permit application on a form furnished for that purpose. The form must be
completed and submitted to the City Building Administrator.
   (C)   Review of permit application. The City Building Administrator shall
review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites
will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a
flood prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements (including
the placement of prefabricated buildings and mobile homes) shall:
      (1)   Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
      (2)   Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      (3)   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      (4)   Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/
or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during flooding.
(Ord. 96-21, passed 8-12-96)
§ 150.04 REVIEW OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The City Building Administrator shall review proposed development to
assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental
agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33
USC 1334.
   (B)   If the development is proposed for a channel or adjacent area of a
stream draining one square mile or more, the applicant must first secure a
permit from the Illinois Division of Water Resources or a letter stating
“Permit Not Required.”
(Ord. 96-21, passed 8-12-96)
§ 150.05 REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   The City Building Administrator shall review subdivision proposals and
other proposed new developments to determine whether such proposals will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
   (B)   If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is in a
flood prone area, any such proposal shall be reviewed to assure that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage within the flood prone area;
      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazards.
(Ord. 96-21, passed 8-12-96)
§ 150.06 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.
   The City Building Administrator shall require within flood prone areas new
and replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
(Ord. 96-21, passed 8-12-96)
§ 150.07 SANITARY SEWAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   The City Building Administrator shall require within flood prone areas:
   (A)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into flood waters; and
   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems to be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 96-21, passed 8-12-96)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not less than $25 nor more than $750. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 96-21, passed 8-12-96)
CHAPTER 151: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Intent and purpose
   
151.002   Definitions
   
151.003   Interpretation
   
151.004   Lot coverage
   
151.005   Lot area and dimension
   
151.006   Access to a public street
   
151.007   Number of buildings on a zoning lot
   
151.008   Rezoning of public and semi-public areas
   
151.009   Accessory buildings
   
151.010   Existing special uses
   
151.011   Uses not specifically permitted in districts
   
151.012   Fences
   
151.013   Permission to use downtown sidewalks for retail purposes
   
151.014   Reserved
   
151.015   Standards for solar energy systems
Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses
   
151.020   Continuance of use
   
151.021   Discontinuance of use
   
151.022   Termination and removal of non-conforming uses, buildings and
structures
   
151.023   Repairs and alterations
   
151.024   Damage and destruction
   
151.025   Additions and enlargements
   
151.026   Exempted buildings, structures and uses
Use Districts
   
151.035   Use districts
   
151.036   Zoning map
   
151.037   Zoning of annexed land
   
151.038   Zoning of streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way
   
151.039   Boundary lines
Residential Districts
   
151.050   Permitted uses
   
151.051   Lots or parcels of land of record
   
151.052   Requirements
MH-1 Mobile Home District
   
151.060   Trailers and mobile homes
   
151.061   Planned mobile home parks
   
151.062   Use regulations
   
151.063   Size and density of mobile home park
   
151.064   Permitted obstructions
   
151.065   Screening
   
151.066   Certificate of use occupancy required
Business Districts
   
151.075   Permitted uses
   
151.076   Conditions of use
   
151.077   Height of buildings
   
151.078   Transitional yards
   
151.079   Signs
Manufacturing Districts
   
151.090   Permitted uses
   
151.091   Conditions of use
   
151.092   Height of buildings
   
151.093   Lot coverage
   
151.094   Yard areas
   
151.095   Performance standards
   
151.096   Signs
Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
151.105   Purpose
   
151.106   General provisions; parking and loading
   
151.107   Additional regulations; parking
   
151.108   Design and maintenance
   
151.109   Location of accessory off-street parking facilities
   
151.110   Schedule of parking requirements
   
151.111   Additional regulations; off-street loading
   
151.112   Schedule of loading requirements
Public Sidewalks, Curbs and Driveways
   
151.120   Permit required
   
151.121   Plans and specifications
   
151.122   Reserved
Subdivision Regulations
   
151.130   General provisions
   
151.131   Approvals, interpretations and exceptions
   
151.132   Rules
   
151.133   Design standards
   
151.134   Pre-application procedure
   
151.135   Procedure for filing of preliminary plans
   
151.136   Approval of final plat
   
151.137   Agreements
   
151.138   Required land improvements
   
151.139   Construction and inspection
   
151.140   Acceptance of streets and improvements
   
151.141   Variations and exceptions
   
151.142   Building permit
   
151.143   Occupancy permit
   
151.144   Blasting
   
151.145   Enforcement
   
151.146   Record of plats
Wind Energy Conversion System Regulations
   
151.150   WECS towers
   
151.151   Quadrants of the city for WECS purposes
   
151.152   Prohibition of WECS
   
151.153   Special use variations
Administration
   
151.155   Enforcing officer
   
151.156   Building permits, certificate of compliance and use permits
   
151.157   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
151.158   Variations
   
151.159   Special use variations
   
151.160   Planned developments
   
151.161   Change of zoning
   
151.162   Miscellaneous
   
151.163   Stay of proceedings
   
151.164   Amendments
   
151.165   Interpretation: purpose and conflict
   
151.166   Fees
 
   
151.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Residential Districts
   
Appendix B:   Business Districts
   
Appendix C:   Manufacturing Districts
   
Appendix D:   Selected illustrations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The prime tool of planning is land use control, most commonly referred to as
zoning. The purposes of zoning are many, but foremost among these are:
   (A)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
general welfare of the people;
   (B)   To divide the city into zones or districts, restricting and regulating
therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and
use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business and manufacturing
and other specified uses;
   (C)   To protect the character and the stability of the residential,
business and manufacturing areas within the city, and to promote the orderly
and beneficial development of such areas;
   (D)   To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property;
   (E)   To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the
area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light
and air and to protect the public health;
   (F)   To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential, business, manufacturing or other uses within such areas;
   (G)   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform therein;
   (H)   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts;
   (I)   To prevent additions to, or alteration or remodeling of, existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereunder;
   (J)   To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing the off-street
parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
   (K)   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in
the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
   (L)   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by
regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding
them;
   (M)   To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
city;
   (N)   To provide for the elimination of non-conforming uses of land,
buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value
of desirable development in each district; and
   (O)   To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided herein.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.002 DEFINITIONS.
   Certain words used to explain land use regulations require special usage.
Other words and terms must be defined as to the manner in which they relate to
the use of land and buildings. The following words are defined as suggested for
the purpose of clarity and understanding of this chapter.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. A subordinate building or use which is located on
the same lot on which the principle building or use is situated and which is
reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such
building or main use, when permitted by district regulations. An ACCESSORY USE
includes but is not limited to the following:
      (1)   A children's playhouse, garden house and private greenhouse;
      (2)   A garage, shed or building for domestic storage;
      (3)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot
with any retail service or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the
district regulations;
      (4)   Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities,
on the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless such storage
is excluded by the district regulations;
      (5)   Off-street motor vehicle parking areas, and loading and unloading
facilities;
      (6)   Signs, as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated
herein;
      (7)   Swimming pool, private, in residential districts for use by
occupants of the residence or building and their guests;
      (8)   Public utility communication, electric, gas, water and sewer lines,
their supports and incidental equipment.
      (9)   Where a substantial part of the wall of an accessory building is a
part of the wall of the main building or where an accessory building is
attached to the main building in a substantial manner, as by a roof, such
accessory building shall be counted as a part of the main building.
   ALLEY. A public way, not more than 40 feet wide, which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is
arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn
or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame
or fender straightening or repair; and over-all painting of vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and
motor service to automobiles, but not including any operation specified under
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline, stored only in
underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease, for operation of
automobiles, are offered for sale directly to the public on the premises, and
including accessories and services for automobiles.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. Any place where two or more motor vehicles not in
running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being
restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or
storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, and including any used farm
vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being
restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any
other goods, articles or merchandise.
   BASEMENT. A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half of
it's height is above the established curb level or above the average level of
the adjoining ground where curb level has not been established, a basement
shall not be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
   BILLBOARD. Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or
advertisements used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include any
bulletin boards used to announce church services or to display official court
notices, or signs advertising the sale or lease of the premises on which the
sign is located.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a street or
streets, by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or
shore lines of waterways or a corporate boundary of the city.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals are
provided for compensation to four or more persons, but not more than 12, who
are not members of the keeper's family.
   BUILDING. Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to
the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space
or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and
which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals or chattels. Any structure with interior areas not normally
accessible for human use, such as gas holders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain
elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers, and other similar structures are
not considered as buildings.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level of
its' equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof; to the
deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and
ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided that where buildings are set
back from the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the
average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
   BUILDING, NON-CONFORMING. A legally existing building which fails to comply
with the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to the district in
which such building is located.
   BUILDING PRINCIPLE. A building in which is conducted the main use of the
zoning lot on which it is situated.
   BUILDING LINE. A line within a lot or other parcel of land so designated on
the plat of the proposed subdivision, between which the adjacent boundary of
the street or side upon which the lot abuts the erection of an enclosed
structure or portion thereof is to be prohibited.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the street line at a distance from
it, regulated by the front yard requirements.
   BULK. The term used to describe the size and mutual relationships of
buildings and other structures, as to size, height, coverage, shape, location
of exterior walls in relation to lot lines, to the center line of streets, to
other walls of the same building, and to other buildings or structures; and to
all open spaces relating to the building or structure.
   CELLAR. A story having more than one-half of its height below the curb level
or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
counted as a story for the purpose of height measurements.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the Building Administrator
stating that the occupancy and use of land or a building or structure complies
with the provisions herein.
   CITY COUNCIL. Whenever the words "Council" or "City Council" are used in
this chapter, they shall mean the City Council of the City of Paxton, Illinois.
   CLINIC OR MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER. An establishment where three or more
licensed doctors of medicine engage in the practice of medicine, operating on a
group or individual basis, with pooled facilities, such as coordinated
laboratory, X-ray and allied departments, for the diagnosis and treatment of
humans, which need not, but may, include a drug prescription center (not a drug
store) for the dispensing of drugs and pharmaceutical products to the patients
of the said organization. In addition to the above, the medical center or
medical clinic may include the practice of dentistry.
   CLUB. An association of persons for some common purpose which is jointly
supported and meets periodically, but not including groups organized primarily
to render services which is customarily carried on as a business.
   COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the City of Paxton, Illinois.
   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively
permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of unrelated persons
with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff provided by a
sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a 24-hour basis, or
present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling and
which complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which the site
is located. (Changed by Ordinance #90-38).
   CROSSWALK. A strip of land dedicated to public use which is reserved across
a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street having one open end and being permanently terminated by
a vehicle turnaround.
   CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb in front of the building
measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one
street, the CURB LEVEL shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the
center of the front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been
established, the mean level of the land immediately adjacent to the building
shall be considered the CURB LEVEL.
   DAY CARE CENTER. An establishment for the part-time care and/or instruction
at any time of day of four or more unrelated children of pre-elementary school
age.
   DISABILITY. A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of a person's major life activities, impairs their ability to live
independently, or a record of having such an impairment, or being regarded as
having such an impairment, but such term does not include current use of, nor
addiction to, a controlled substance. (Changed by Ordinance #90-38).
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer
or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units and multiple-
family dwelling units, but not including hotels, boarding or lodging houses.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as
living quarters for a family, or for a community residence as a single
housekeeping unit. A dwelling unit includes bathroom and kitchen facilities in
addition to sleeping and living areas. (Changed by Ordinance #90-38).
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for use and occupancy
by one family, and entirely separated from any other building by space.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed or altered to provide dwelling
units for occupancy by two families.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof designed or altered
for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING, ROW (PARTY WALL). A row of two to eight attached, one-family,
party wall dwellings, not more than two and one-half stories in height.
   DWELLING GROUP. Two or more one-family, two-family or multiple-family
dwellings, or boarding or lodging houses, located on one zoning lot, but not
including tourist courts or motels.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the
general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for a specific
purpose or purposes.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Public, parochial, charitable or non-profit junior
college, college or university, other than trade or business schools, including
instructional and recreational uses, with or without living quarters, dining
rooms, restaurants, heating plants and other incidental facilities for
students, teachers and employees.
   FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a
group of not more than five persons (excluding servants) who need not be
related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together and maintaining a
common household, but not including sororities, fraternities or other similar
organizations.
   FAMILY COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively
permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of no more than eight
unrelated persons with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff
provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a 24-hour
basis, or present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the
dwelling and which complies with the zoning regulations for the district in
which the site is located. (Changed by Ordinance #90-38).
   GARAGE, BUS. Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of
three or more passenger motor buses, or motor coaches used in public
transportation, including school buses.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or portion of the principle
building, designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for the storage of
passenger automobiles of the occupants of the premises.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building other than a private garage, used for the care,
incidental servicing and sale of automobile supplies, or where motor vehicles
are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale within the structure, but
not including trucks, tractors, truck-trailers and commercial vehicles
exceeding one and one-half tons capacity.
   GARAGE, BUS OR TRUCK. A building which is used or intended to be used for
the storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors and commercial vehicles
exceeding one and one-half tons capacity.
   GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Reference to "General Development Plan" shall mean
the approved General Development Plan of the City of Paxton, Illinois.
   GROUP COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively
permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of nine to 15 unrelated
persons with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff provided by a
sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a 24-hour basis, or
present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwellings, and
which complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which the site
is located. (Changed by Ordinance *90-38).
   GUEST HOUSE. Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on
the same premises with the principle building, for use by temporary guests of
the occupants of the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities,
not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
   HALFWAY HOUSE. A temporary residential living arrangement for persons who
are receiving therapy and counseling from support staff who are present at all
times residents are present, for the following purposes:
      (1)   To help them recuperate from the effects of drugs or alcohol
addiction;
      (2)   To help them re-enter society while housed under supervision while
under the constraints of alternatives to imprisonment including, but not
limited to, pre-release, work-release, and probationary programs;
      (3)   To help persons with family or school adjustment problems that
require specialized attention and care in order to achieve personal
independence; or
      (4)   To provide temporary shelter for persons who are victims of
domestic abuse. (Changed by Ordinance #90-38).
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling
and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change
the character thereof; and provided that no article is sold or offered for sale
except such as may be produced on the premises by members of the immediate
family. Offices, clinics, doctors' offices, hospitals, barber shops, beauty
parlors, dress shops, millinery shops, real estate offices, tea rooms,
restaurants, tourist homes, animal hospitals, kennels, among others, shall not
be deemed to be home occupations.
   HOSPICE. A temporary residential living arrangement for persons with a
disease that requires full- time support, therapy and/or treatment. (Changed by
Ordinance #90-38).
   HOSPITAL OR SANITARIUM. An institution open to the public in which patients
or injured persons are given medical or surgical care; or for the care of
contagious diseases or incurable patients.
   HOTEL, APARTMENT. A building containing dwelling units or individual guest
rooms, the majority of which are for permanent guests. Maid and janitor service
may be provided but kitchen facilities are not necessarily included.
   HOTEL, MOTEL, INN OR AUTO COURT. An establishment containing lodging
accommodations designed for use by transients or travelers or temporary guests,
with no provision in said accommodations for cooking in any individual room or
suite. Facilities provided may include maid service, laundering of linen used
on the premises, telephone, and secretarial or desk service.
   HOUSEHOLDER. The occupant of a dwelling unit who is either the owner or
lessee thereof.
   JUNK YARD. Open area where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags or similar
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or
handled, including auto and building wrecking yards, but excluding similar uses
taking place entirely within a completely enclosed building.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any lot or premises on which two or more domestic
animals, at least four months of age, are kept for compensation or kept or bred
for sale.
   LABORATORY, COMMERCIAL. A place devoted to experimental study such as
testing and analyzing. Manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products is not
included within this definition.
   LINE OF BUILDING. (For measuring yards.) A line parallel to the nearest lot
line drawn through the point of a building or group of buildings nearest to
such lot line, exclusive of such features specified as being permitted to
extend into a yard.
   LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An open hard surfaced area of land
other than a street or a public way, the principal use of which is for the
standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractors and trailers, to
avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys. Such space
shall be not less than ten feet in width, 25 feet in length and 14 feet in
height, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.
   LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE. A building with not more than five guest rooms
where lodging is provided for compensation pursuant to previous arrangement,
but not open to the public or to overnight guests.
   LOT. The word LOT when used alone shall mean a ZONING LOT unless the use of
the word clearly indicates otherwise.
   LOT COVERAGE. The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principle building or
buildings and accessory buildings.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a
public street; for a corner lot the owner may elect either street line as the
front lot line.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The rear lot line is the lot line or lot lines most nearly
parallel to and most remote from the front lot line. Lot lines other than front
or rear lot lines are side lot lines.
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
   LOT, THROUGH OR LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two parallel
or approximately parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to the lot depth at the established front building line.
   MOBILE HOME/TRAILER. A vehicle with or without motive power used or
adaptable for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no
foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirting, and has
been or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for
transporting the structure from place to place.
   MANUFACTURE. The making of anything by any agency or process.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to
primary streets and highways and which provides access to abutting properties
and protection to local traffic from fast, through-moving traffic on the
primary streets.
   MINOR STREET. A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building in which freight, brought to said
building by motor truck, is assembled and sorted for routing in intra-state and
interstate shipment by motor truck.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. Any use of land, buildings or structures which does not
comply with the regulations herein.
   NURSING HOME OR REST HOME. A private home for the care of children or the
aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but
not including facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries or for
surgical care.
   NURSERY SCHOOL. An establishment for the part-time care and/or instruction
at any time of day of four or more unrelated children of pre-elementary school
age.
   OFFICIAL MAP. Reference to OFFICIAL MAP shall mean the approved Official Map
of the City of Paxton, Illinois.
   PARKING AREA, PRIVATE. An open, hard-surfaced area of land, other than a
street or public way, designed, arranged and made available for the storage of
private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings
for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.
   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or
public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles under one and one-half ton capacity, and available to the
public, whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients or
customers.
   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. Space within a public or private parking area of
not less than 200 square feet (10 x 20 feet), exclusive of access aisles or
drives, ramps, columns, or office and work areas, for the storage of one
passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under one-half ton capacity.
   PARKWAY. A route intended to be used primarily by passenger vehicles and
whose right-of-way is or is intended to be developed in a park-like character.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land which is developed as a unit under
single ownership or control, which includes two or more principal buildings,
and which is at least four acres in area - except for planned developments
operated by a municipal corporation which shall be at least two acres in area,
and manufacturing planned developments, which shall be at least ten acres in
area.
   PLAT. A plan, map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of the
subdivision is presented and which he or she submits for approval and intends
to record in final form.
   PLAT, FINAL. The drawings and documents presented for final approval and as
described in §§
151.130 through
151.146.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. (General plan). The drawings and documents presented for
conditional approval and as described in §§
151.130 through
151.146.
   PORCH. An open or enclosed room or veranda which is roofed and which
projects out from the wall or walls of a main structure.
   PRIMARY OR MAJOR STREET. A street of considerable continuity which serves or
is intended to serve as a major traffic artery connecting large areas.
   PROTECTIVE SCREEN PLANTING. A planting of trees, shrubs and/or evergreens
bordering an area intended to reduce and/or eliminate the nuisance of sound and
sight from adjoining uses.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any improvement for the benefit of the public, financed
and executed by any interest, public or private.
   PUBLIC STREET. All primary, secondary and minor streets which are shown on
the subdivision plat and are to be dedicated for public use.
   ROADWAY. The paved area for vehicular traffic existing on a street right-of-
way and not the street right-of-way width.
   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities
for track operation, but not including depots, loading platforms, stations,
train sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops or watertowers.
   SECONDARY OR COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from minor
streets to the primary street system, including the principal entrance streets
of residence development and streets for circulation within such development.
   SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. A sign of any material and character whatsoever
which is for outdoor advertising purposes, placed on the ground or on any
natural or man-made object. The term placed as used in the definition of
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN shall include erecting, constructing, painting,
printing and affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of
a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an additional story
for each 14 feet or fraction thereof.
   STREET. A street is an area which serves or is intended to serve as a
vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting lands or to other streets.
   STREET LINE. A line separating an abutting lot, piece or parcel from a
street.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the
public street.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
ground or is attached to something having location on the ground.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change other than incidental repairs which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
   SUBDIVIDER. The person or persons, group or corporation acting as a unit, or
any agent thereof, responsible for preparing and recording the plats of the
subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements relating thereto
as outlined in this chapter.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of land into two or more parts, any of which is
less than five acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer
of ownership or building development, including all public streets, alleys,
ways for public service facilities, parks, play-grounds, school grounds or
other public grounds, and all the tracts, parcels, lots or blocks, and
numbering of all such lots, blocks or parcels by progressive numbers, giving
their precise dimensions; provided, however, that the following shall not be
considered a subdivision and shall be exempt from the requirements herein.
      (1)   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
      (2)   The division of lots of blocks of less than one acre in any
recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
      (3)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land;
      (4)   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as
right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not
involve any new streets or easements of access;
      (5)   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
   TRAILER/MOBILE HOME. A structure with or without motive power used or
adaptable for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no
foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirting, and has
been or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for
transporting the structure from place to place. The term TRAILER includes CAMP
CAR, TRAILER COACH, HOUSE- TRAILER, MOBILE HOME, and HOUSE CAR.
   TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street, used for the display
or sale of new or used trailers, and where no repair work is done except for
minor incidental repair of trailers to be displayed and sold on the premises.
   TRAILER OR MOBILE HOME CAMP OR PARK. Any premises occupied or designed to
accommodate one or more families living in a house trailer or mobile home, or
the parking of one or more trailers for business or storage purposes.
   TRAILER HOUSE, OR MOBILE HOME. See TRAILER/MOBILE HOME.
   TRUCK PARKING AREA, OR YARD. Any land used or intended to be used for the
storage or parking of trucks, tractors, truck trailers, and including
commercial vehicles, while not loading or unloading, and which exceeds one and
one–half tons in capacity.
   WECS TOWER. The support structure to which the nacelle and rotor are
attached which is part of wind energy conversion systems.
   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). All necessary facilities that together
convert wind energy into electricity and deliver that electricity to a
utility's transmission lines, including, but not limited to, the rotor,
nacelle, generator, WECS tower, electrical components, WECS foundation,
transformer, electrical cabling from the WECS tower to the substations(s)/
switchyard(s), communications facilities, transmission lines, poles, and/or
towers, operations and maintenance building, and other related devices,
facilities, and equipment.
   YARD. An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or
group of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from it's lowest level
upward, except as otherwise permitted herein and which extends along a lot line
and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and
lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
   YARD, REAR. That part of the yard lying between the nearest line of the
principal building and side lot line, and extending from the required front
yard (or from the front lot line, if there is no required front yard) to the
required rear yard.
   YARD, SIDE. That part of the yard lying between the nearest line of the
principal building and a side lot line, and extending from the required front
yard (or from the front lot line, if there is no required front yard) to the
required rear yard.
   ZONING LOT. A plot of ground made up of one or more parcels which is or may
be occupied by a use, building or buildings, including the open spaces required
herein.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88 ; Am. Ord. 09-07, passed 1-19-09 )
§ 151.003 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The provisions herein shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and
welfare.
   (B)   Relationship with other laws. Where the conditions imposed by any
provision or upon the bulk of buildings are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision herein or
any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation (or which impose
higher standards or requirements) shall govern.
   (C)   Effect on existing agreements. The regulations herein are not intended
to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement provided
that where the regulations herein are more restrictive (or impose higher
standards or requirements) than such easements, covenants or other private
agreements, the requirements herein shall govern.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.004 LOT COVERAGE.
   Permitted obstructions in required yards. The following shall not be
considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards specified:
   (A)   In all yards.
      (1)   Open terraces. Not over four feet above the average level of the
adjoining ground but not including a permanently roofed-over terrace or porch.
      (2)   Awnings and canopies.
      (3)   Steps. Four feet or less above grade, which are necessary for
access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a street or
alley.
      (4)   Chimneys. Projecting 18 inches or less into the yard.
      (5)   Recreational and laundry drying equipment.
      (6)   Arbors, trellises and flag poles.
   (B)   In front yards.
      (1)   One-story bay windows. Projecting three feet or less into the yard.
      (2)   Overhanging eaves and gutters. Projecting three feet or less into
the yard.
      (3)   Gasoline pumps and other necessary equipment. In connection with an
automobile service station.
      (4)   Signs. As permitted or required.
   (C)   In rear yards.
      (1)   Enclosed, attached or detached off-street parking spaces.
      (2)   Open off-street parking spaces.
      (3)   Accessory sheds.
      (4)   Tool rooms and similar buildings or structures for domestic or
agriculture storage.
      (5)   Balconies, breezeways and open porches.
      (6)   One-story bay windows. Projecting three feet or less into the yard.
      (7)   Overhanging eaves and gutters. Projecting three feet or less into
the yard.
NOTE: In any residential district, no accessory building shall be nearer than
five feet to the side or rear lot line or ten feet to any principle building
unless attached.
   (D)   In side yards.  Overhanging eaves and gutters. Projecting three feet
or less into the yard.
NOTE:   In any residential district, no accessory building shall be nearer than
five feet to the side lot line or ten feet to any principle building unless
attached.
   (E)   Vision clearance - corner lots. No building or structure hereafter
erected and no planting or other obstruction to the vision of drivers of motor
vehicles shall be located:
      (1)   In any residential district, exceeding a height of three feet above
the street grade within 15 feet of the intersecting street lines bordering
corner lots; and
      (2)   In any business or manufacturing district, within eight feet of the
intersecting street lines bordering a corner lot, provided that this regulation
shall not apply to that part of a building or sign above the first floor.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 04-07, passed 3-8-04)
§ 151.005 LOT AREA AND DIMENSION.
   Contiguous parcels. When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks
adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the
requirements of the use district in which it is located, are contiguous and are
held in one ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.006 ACCESS TO A PUBLIC STREET.
   Except as otherwise provided for herein, every building shall be constructed
or erected upon a lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a public street,
unless a permanent easement of access to a public street was of record prior to
the adoption of the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.007 NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT.
   Except in the case of planned developments, not more than one principle
detached residential building shall be located on a residentially zoned lot,
nor shall a principal detached residential building be located on the same
zoning lot with any other principal building.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.008 REZONING OF PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC AREAS.
   An area indicated on the zoning map as a public park, recreational area,
public school site, cemetery, or other similar open space, shall not be used
for any other purpose than that designated; and when the use of the area is
discontinued, it shall automatically be rezoned to the most restricted
adjoining district with no further action required by the owner. An application
may be filed for rezoning following standard filing procedures.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.009 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   General regulations. The uses permitted in the various zoning
districts are principal uses, and a building, structure or use that is
accessory to a permitted use is allowable in connection with such a use
provided it shall meet the requirements of this section.
      (1)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be compatible with
the principal uses.
      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures shall not be established prior
to the establishment of the principal use; however, this shall not prohibit the
construction of a temporary structure prior to construction provided the
following rules are followed:
         (a)   A temporary structure shall only be allowed in conjunction with
the issuance of a building permit.
         (b)   The temporary structure shall be removed upon completion of the
original building project.
      (3)   Accessory buildings may not be used for dwelling purposes.
      (4)   Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main
building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this
chapter applicable to the main building.
      (5)   All accessory buildings, structures and uses must conform to such
other regulations that apply, including city adopted building code regulations.
         (a)   A detached accessory building shall not be located within ten
feet of the main building. Accessory buildings in existence prior to the date
of adoption of this chapter are permitted to remain as legal nonconforming
structures.
         (b)   A detached accessory building shall not be closer than five feet
to the rear lot line and shall not be closer than five feet from the side lot
line.
         (c)   No detached accessory building, structure or use may be erected
in a front yard.
         (d)   In no case shall a detached accessory building be located in a
utility easement.
   (C)   Percentage of required rear yard occupied. No accessory building or
buildings shall occupy more than 40% of the area of a required rear yard.
   (D)   Height of accessory buildings. The maximum height of an accessory
building shall be limited to 18 feet. Accessory buildings greater than 18 feet
in height may be constructed only after issuance of a variance.
   (E)   On reversed corner lots. On a reversed comer lot in a residential
district, and within 15 feet of an adjacent property to the rear in a
residential district, no accessory building or portion thereof located in a
required rear yard shall be closer to the side lot line abutting the street
than a distance equal to 60% of the least depth which would be required under
this chapter for the front yard on such adjacent property to the rear. Further,
in the above instance, no such accessory building shall be located within ten
feet of any part of a rear lot line which coincides with a side lot line or
portion thereof in a residential district.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 20-23, passed 9-8-20) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.010 EXISTING SPECIAL USES.
   When a use is classified as a "special use" under this Zoning Code and
exists as a permitted use at the date of adoption of this Zoning Code, it shall
be considered a legal use, without further action of the City Council, the
Building Administrator, the Board of Appeals, or the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.011 USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS.
   When a use is not specifically listed in the appendices listing the
"permitted uses" it shall be assumed that such uses are hereby expressly
prohibited unless by a written decision of the Board of Appeals it is
determined that said use is similar to and not more objectionable than the uses
listed.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.012 FENCES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      (1)   AREA FENCE. A fence that is located more than six inches from a
property line.
      (2)   FENCE. A non-living structure forming a barrier which is not
otherwise a part of any building or structure used to delineate a boundary or
as a means of confinement or for privacy.
      (3)   FENCE, OPEN. A fence having a regular pattern of which more then
80% of the surface will permit the unobstructed passage of light and air when
viewed perpendicular to the plane of the fence.
      (4)   FENCE, PERIMETER. A fence that is located on or within six inches
of the property line.
      (5)   FENCE, SEMI-OPEN. A fence having a regular pattern of which between
80% and 30% of the surface is unobstructed to both light and air when viewed
perpendicular to the plane of the fence.
      (6)   FENCE, SOLID. A fence having a regular pattern that has less than
30% of the surface which is open and unobstructed to both light and air when
viewed perpendicular to the plane of the fence.
      (7)   MEASUREMENT. A fence shall be measured along a typical unit of
fencing. A typical unit of fencing is defined as the portion of a fence located
between and including two vertical posts or other members which support the
unit of a fence.
      (8)   SECURITY FENCE. A fence with barbed wire or similar security
devices.
      (9)   SNOW FENCE. Portable, temporary fencing typically consisting of
thin, closely placed wooden pickets or plastic material, used to prevent the
drifting of snow over roads, fields, yards and sidewalks.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   Fences may be erected along property lines.
      (2)   Fences built on or within a public easement may be removed by the
city or at the direction of the city at the owner's expense in the event
repairs, maintenance, replacements or improvements are deemed necessary by the
city in such easements.
      (3)   Fences shall not obstruct any watercourse.
      (4)   Fence height shall be measured from the ground at a point directly
beneath the fence. Where the ground at a point directly beneath the fence has
been increased in elevation from its original elevation at the time of
subdivision development through berming, retaining walls, fill or other
measures and where such increased ground elevation has resulted in an increase
in ground elevation above an adjoining lot the height of the fence shall be
measured from the original ground elevation before installation of berming,
retaining walls, fill or other measures as determined by the City Council. The
City Council shall consult U.S. Geological Survey contour maps, city base map
contours, recorded subdivision plat information and other available information
in making such a determination.
      (5)   Every fence shall be designed and constructed to resist and
withstand a wind pressure from any angle of approach of not less than 20 pounds
per square foot of the gross projected area of fence, less openings. At least
one-third of the fence post must be in the ground to resist wind. All posts,
anchors and bracings of wood or other organic materials shall be treated to
protect them from deteriorating when they rest upon or enter into the ground.
All fences shall be maintained in good condition and shall not create a
harborage for rodents. Fences that are leaning in such a manner that an angle
15 degrees or greater is produced when measured from the vertical are dangerous
and shall be unlawful. Any fence that is to be painted, shall be painted with a
non-lead based paint.
      (6)   Every perimeter fence shall include a minimum of one gate or entry
way in the rear yard or either side yard.
      (7)   All fences shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary, nonhazardous
manner and kept in good structural repair, free of deterioration, including,
but not limited to: loose or missing slats or posts; peeling, scaling or
deteriorated paint; crumbling brick, stone and mortar; and rust and other signs
of decay. All fences shall be firmly anchored in the ground with all posts on
the inside of the fence. Wooden elements or other elements subject to
deterioration from weathering shall be maintained with nonhazardous chemicals
or paint to preserve the element and retard deterioration.
   (C)   Prohibited fences.
      (1)   Electric fences prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
erect, install or maintain any electrically-charged fence within the limits of
the city.
      (2)   Operation of electrical fences prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate any electrically charged fence within the limits of the
city.
      (3)   Barbed wire. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or
maintain a fence equipped with barbed wired, razor wire, iron spikes or any
similar or other sharp or sharp pointed material. However, this division shall
not prohibit the use of such material when:
         (a)   Located in business or manufacturing zoning districts, or for
government use;
         (b)   Used to provide security for a bona fide business operation;
and,
         (c)   Approved by the City Council, after review of the documentation
indicating the need for security and bona fide operation of a business;
provided no more than two feet of such barbed wire or other such similar device
is securely affixed to the top of and above a soundly constructed fence or
structural barrier which is at least six feet in height. Further, regardless of
the zoning district, barbed wire, razor wire, iron spikes, or other sharp-
pointed material meeting the aforementioned height standards may be used for
security around hazardous equipment or installations, such as, but not limited
to, high voltage equipment, electrical transformers or volatile fuel
installations.
      (4)   Snow fences. The use of snow fences on private property is
prohibited during the period commencing March 15th thru November 14th of each
year. This division shall not be construed to prohibit temporary fencing as
required during construction projects; or as needed by the Park District, the
city or other governmental agencies.
   (D)   Height.
      (1)   Rear and side yard (non-corner lots). Except as provided in
division (C) of this section, no person shall place, install, construct or
maintain any fence on a lot or area to a height greater than six feet and of
open or semi-open or solid construction above the original grade, between the
rear lot line and a line parallel to the rear lot line extending to the side
yard line from the outside edge of the house foundation nearest the rear lot
line and along the rear lot line.
      (2)   Front yard (non-corner lots):
         (a)   Fences of not more than five feet in height and of open
construction may be erected between a line parallel to the rear lot line
extending to the side yard line from the outside edge of the house foundation
nearest the rear lot line and the front property line. Fences of not more than
five feet and of open construction may be erected on the front property line.
         (b)   Fences in the front yard shall maintain a 15 foot visibility
triangle of which two legs shall be measured as follows: along both sides of
the driveway inward from the front property line a distance of 15 feet from the
intersection of the front property line and the driveway; and along the right-
of-way measured in the direction away from the driveway a distance of 15 feet.
The third leg of such triangle shall be the connection of such two previously
described lines. This area as defined shall be free from any fence creating a
visual obstruction for traffic on street or sidewalk. This visibility triangle
shall be maintained on properties adjacent to the lot on which the driveway is
located for that part of the adjacent property on which the visibility triangle
applies.
      (3)   Corner lots.
         (a)   For corner lots, fences in the front yard and side yard adjacent
to the side street shall be not more than five feet in height and of open
construction.
         (b)   Fences in the rear yard and side yard between a line parallel to
the rear lot line extending to the side yard line from the outside edge of the
house foundation nearest the rear lot line and the rear property line which are
not adjacent to a street shall be not more than six feet and of open or semi-
open or solid construction. Fences between a line parallel to the rear lot line
extending to the side yard line from the outside edge of the house foundation
nearest the rear lot line and the front property line shall be not more than
five feet in height and of open construction.
         (c)   A 30 foot visibility triangle shall be maintained at street
intersections. This "visibility triangle" is defined as an isosceles triangle
of which two legs shall be measured as follows: along the street curb/edge in
both directions from the intersection a distance of 30 feet. The third leg of
such triangle shall be the connection of said two previously described lines.
No fence shall be installed or maintained in this defined area.
         (d)   A 30 foot visibility triangle shall be maintained at the
intersection of a street with an alley right-of-way (both improved and
unimproved alley rights-of-way). This "visibility triangle" is defined as an
isosceles triangle which shall be measured as follows: one leg along the street
curb/edge 30 feet away from the intersection; a second leg along the alley
right-of-way 30 feet away from the intersection; and the third leg of such
triangle shall be the connection of said two previously described lines. No
fence shall be installed or maintained in this defined area.
   (E)   Noncompliance. Any fence lawfully existing on March 8, 2004, which is
not in compliance with this section, may continue to lawfully exist, and normal
repairs to such fences are permissible which such repairs do not constitute a
total fence replacement.
(Ord. 04-07, passed 3-8-04) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.013 PERMISSION TO USE DOWNTOWN SIDEWALKS FOR RETAIL PURPOSES.
   This section shall govern the permissible use of the public sidewalks
adjacent to Market Street between Holmes Street and Orleans Street in the city
by occupants of retail establishments ("occupant") along said portion of Market
Street.
   (A)   Permissible enforcement. An occupant may use an area on Market Street
directly in front of their establishment to display items of merchandise
currently for sale within said establishment.
   (B)   Boundaries of the permissible encroachment.  
      (1)   The area an occupant may use shall not extend more than three feet
perpendicular from the storefront.
      (2)   The above described area shall be limited by the following. The
display of merchandise shall allow for a minimum of five feet of clearance
between any permanent or semi-permanent structures, including but not limited
to, street lights and flower pots/planters.
   (C)   Time limit of the permissible encroachment.
      (1)   An occupant must remove the display of merchandise and any and all
other encroachments at the close of business each day or 7:00 p.m., whichever
is earlier, subject to the following.
      (2)   An occupant may leave out overnight, one bench. Said bench shall
not extend more than two feet perpendicular from the storefront and be within
the permissible area as set forth above. Said bench shall not be primarily used
as a platform to display merchandise.
   (D)   Violation. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of
any of the provisions of this section, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions provided by §
151.999.
(Ord. 13-17, passed 6-10-13)
§ 151.014 RESERVED.
§ 151.015 STANDARDS FOR SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system whose primary purpose
is to harvest energy by transforming solar energy into another form of energy
or transferring heat from a collector to another medium using mechanical,
electrical, or chemical means.
      BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS. An active solar energy system
that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a
separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or
structural component of the building. Building-integrated systems include, but
are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water solar energy systems that are
contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights and awnings.
      GRID-INTERTIE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A photovoltaic solar energy system
that is connected to an electric circuit served by an electric utility company.
      GROUND MOUNT. A solar energy system mounted on a rack or pole that rests
on or is attached to the ground.
      OFF-GRID SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A photovoltaic solar energy system in which
the circuits energized by the solar energy system are not electrically
connected in any way to electric circuits that are served by an electric
utility company.
      PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system that captures solar
light or heat without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring
the energy via a heat exchanger.
      PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM. An active solar energy system that converts solar
energy directly into electricity.
      POLLINATOR PLANTS. Pollinator plants shall be those plants designated on
the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation
Service pollinator plane list.
      RENEWABLE ENERGY EASEMENT, SOLAR ENERGY EASEMENT. An easement that limits
the height or location, or both, of permissible development on the burdened
land of a structure or vegetation, or both, for the purpose of providing access
for the benefitted land to wind or sunlight passing over the burdened land.
      ROOF MOUNT. A solar energy system that is mounted on a rack that is
fastened onto a building roof.
      SOLAR ACCESS. Unobstructed access to direct sunlight on a lot or building
through the entire year, including access across adjacent parcel air rights,
for the purpose of capturing direct sunlight to operate a solar energy system.
      SOLAR COLLECTOR. An assembly, structure, and the associated equipment and
housing, designed for gathering, concentrating, or absorbing direct and
indirect solar energy for which the primary purpose is to convert or transform
solar radiant energy into thermal, mechanical, chemical or electrical energy.
      SOLAR ENERGY. Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected
in the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
      SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES). All components required to become a complete
assembly for structure that will convert solar energy into electricity for use.
      SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM ADDITION. A private solar energy system which is
structurally attached to a building or structure on a zoning lot on which said
system is located. Said system shall be considered part of the building and
shall comply with all provisions of this section pertaining thereto.
      SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PRIVATE. A collection of one (1) or more solar
collectors designed for use by the occupant(s) of the zoning lot on which said
system is located; excess power generation is limited to net metering or
similar technology with regulations set by the local power utility, community,
county, and state. Private solar energy system equipment shall conform to
applicable industry standards, and applicants for building permits for private
solar energy systems shall submit certificates from equipment manufactures that
the equipment is manufactured in compliance with industry standards.
      SOLAR FARM. A commercial facility either more than 20 acres in size or
more than two megawatts a/c in capacity that converts sunlight into
electricity, whether by photovoltaics (PV), concentrating solar thermal devices
(CST), or other conversion technology, for the primary purpose of wholesale
sales of generated electricity. A solar farm is the principal land use for the
parcel on which it is located.
      SOLAR GARDEN. A commercial solar-electric (photovoltaic) array, of no
more than 20 acres in size and two megawatts or less a/c in capacity, that
provides retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power) to
multiple households or businesses residing in or located off-site from the
location of the solar energy system. A county solar garden may be either an
accessory use, when a part of existing or a proposed subdivision or a special
use if it is a stand-alone garden.
      SOLAR HEAT EXCHANGER. A component of a solar energy device that is used
to transfer heat from one substance to another, either liquor or [text
missing].
      SOLAR HOT AIR SYSTEM. An active solar energy system (also referred to as
solar air heat or solar furnace) that includes a solar collector to provide
direct supplemental space heating by heating and re-circulating conditioned
building air.
      SOLAR HOT WATER SYSTEM. A system (also referred to as solar thermal) that
includes a solar collector and a heat exchanger that heats or preheats water
for building heating systems or other hot water needs, including residential
domestic hot water and hot water for commercial processes.
      SOLAR MOUNTING DEVICES. Racking, frames, or other devices that allow the
mounting of a solar collector onto a roof surface or the ground.
      SOLAR STORAGE UNIT. A component of a solar energy device that is used to
store solar generated electricity or heat for later use.
   (B)   Building permit requirements and fees.
      (1)   All solar energy systems (SES) will be required to have a city
building permit before any work can be started. A written plan and a plat/
drawing for the proposed solar energy system shall be provided with the
building permit application. The plat/drawing must show the location of the
system on the building or on the property, (for a ground-mount system show
arrangement of panels), with all property lines and set back footages
indicated. Fees for processing the applications for building permits shall be
submitted to and collected by the City of Paxton as follows:
   -   0-2 kilowatts (kW)          No Fee      With Permit
   -   3-10 kilowatts (kW)         $50.00 Fee      With Permit
   -   11 - 100 kilowatts (kW)      $100.00 Fee      With Permit
   -   101 - kilowatts (kW)         $200.00 Fee      With Permit
      (2)   Any SES that construction has started before a building permit has
been applied and paid for will be charged double the permit fee.
   (C)   Set back requirements.
      (1)   Set back requirements for all solar energy systems (SES) shall meet
the structure minimum set back requirements when the SES is oriented at any and
all positions.
      (2)   No solar energy system shall be allowed to be placed in the front
yard of any residentially used or zoned property and such systems shall be
subject to a five foot rear yard setback and an 18 inch side yard setback. Such
ground mounted systems shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
      (3)   Roof mounted solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the
exterior perimeter of the building on which the system is mounted.
      (4)   In any manufacturing districts or agricultural districts:
         (a)   Ground mounted solar systems over ten kilowatts shall be subject
to a minimum 15 foot set back line measured from the edge of the solar panels.
         (b)   Solar farms, and/or solar gardens shall be subject to a 250 foot
setback from any properties having a residential zoning or residential use.
   (D)   Height requirements.
      (1)   Building or roof mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed the
maximum allowed height in any zoning district, of the city of zoning ordinance,
except that roof mounted solar energy systems installed in residential zones
and business district zones shall not exceed four feet above a flat roof and
shall not exceed two feet above a sloped roof. For the purposes of this
section, a flat roof shall be one that is sloped five degrees or less and a
sloped roof shall be one that is sloped more than five degrees.
      (2)   In business, agricultural and manufacturing districts roof mounted
SES may not exceed six feet above the peak or highest point of the roof.
   (E)   Other requirements.
      (1)   Upon request from the city building inspector, an owner of a
commercial solar energy system must provide documentation, within 30 days, that
the solar energy system is still in use. If it is not, the owner of the system
will have 180 days, after notification from the Zoning Department, to remove.
      (2)   Upon request from the city building inspector, the owner or
operator of a solar farm or a solar garden must submit, within 14 days, a
current operation and maintenance report to the Department.
      (3)   For any ground mounted solar system in excess of ten kilowatt, a
six foot security fence with lockable gate(s) shall be installed around the
entire perimeter, otherwise, no fencing is required. Any fence shall contain
appropriate warning signage that is posted such that is clearly visible on the
site.
      (4)   Any lighting for solar farms/gardens shall be installed for
security and safety purposes only. Except for lighting that is required by the
FCC or FAA, all lighting shall be shielded so that no glare extends
substantially beyond the boundaries of the facility.
      (5)   Reflection angles for solar collectors shall be oriented such that
they do not project glare onto adjacent properties.
      (6)   Electric solar energy system components must have a UL listing and
must be designed with anti-reflective coating(s).
      (7)   Solar energy systems must be in compliance with all State of
Illinois Building, Electric, Plumbing and Energy Codes.
      (8)   Pollinator plants customarily utilized in the region shall be
planted and properly maintained in all areas where practicable for the
installation of solar gardens and solar farms.
   (F)   Design standards. Active solar energy systems shall be designed to
conform to the county comprehensive plan and to blend into the architecture of
the building or may be required to be screened from routine view from public
right-of-ways other than alleys. Screening may be required to the extent it
does not affect the operation of the system. The color of the solar collector
is not required to be consistent with other roofing materials.
      (1)   Building integrated photovoltaic systems. Building integrated
photovoltaic solar energy systems shall be allowed regardless of whether the
system is visible from the public right-of-way, provided the building component
in which the system is integrated meets all required setback, land use or
performance standards for the district in which the building is located.
      (2)   Solar energy systems with mounting devices. Solar energy systems
using roof mounting devices or ground-mount solar energy systems shall not be
restricted if the system is not visible from the closest edge of any public
right-of-way or immediately adjacent to a residential structure.
      (3)   Reflectors. All solar energy systems using a reflector to enhance
solar production shall minimize glare from the reflector affecting adjacent or
nearby properties. Measures to minimize glare include selective placement of
the system, screening on the north side of the solar array, modifying the
orientation of the system, reducing use of the reflector system, or other
remedies that limit glare.
      (4)   Aviation protection. For solar units located within 500 feet of an
airport or within approach zones of an airport, the applicant must complete and
provide the results of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool (SGHAT) for the
airport traffic control tower cab and final approach paths, consistent with the
Interim Policy, FAA Review of Solar Energy Projects on Federally Obligated
Airports.
   (G)   Obligated airports, or most recent version adopted by the FAA.
      (1)   Coverage. Roof or building mounted solar energy systems, excluding
building-integrated systems, shall allow for adequate roof access for fire-
fighting purposes to the south-facing or flat roof upon which the panels are
mounted. Ground-mount private solar energy systems shall be exempt from
impervious surface calculations if the soil under the collector is not
compacted and maintained in vegetation. Foundations, gravel, or compacted soils
are considered impervious.
      (2)   Plan approval required. All solar energy systems shall require
administrative plan approval by the city building inspector via the review of
the application for a building permit.
         (a)   Plan applications. Plan applications for solar energy systems
shall be accompanied by horizontal and vertical (elevation) drawings. The
drawings must show the location of the system on the building or on the
property for a ground-mount system, including the property lines.
            1.   Pitched roof mounted solar energy systems. For all roof-
mounted systems other than a flat roof the elevation must show the highest
finished slope of the solar collector and the slope of the finished roof
surface on which it is mounted.
            2.   Flat roof mounted solar energy systems. For flat roof
applications a drawing shall be submitted showing the distance to the roof edge
and any parapets on the building and shall identify the height of the building
on the street frontage side, the shortest distance of the system from the
street frontage edge of the building, and the highest finished height of the
solar collector above the finished surface of the roof.
         (b)   Plan approvals. Applications that meet the design requirements
of this section, and do not require an administrative variance, shall be
granted administrative approval by the Director of Community Development and
shall not require Planning and Zoning Committee review. Plan approval does not
indicate compliance with Building Code or Electric Code.
   (H)   Approved solar components. Electric solar energy system components
must have a UL listing or approved equivalent and solar hot water systems must
have an SRCC rating.
   (I)   Compliance with Building Code. All active solar energy systems shall
meet approval of county building code officials, consistent with the State of
Illinois Building Code and solar thermal system shall comply with HVAC-related
requirements of the Energy Code. Any county adopted building codes will apply
and take precedence where applicable.
   (J)   Compliance with State Electric Code. All photovoltaic systems shall
comply with the Illinois State Electric Code.
   (K)   Compliance with State Plumbing Code. Solar thermal systems shall
comply with applicable Illinois State Plumbing Code requirements.
   (L)   Compliance with State Energy Code. All photovoltaic systems and solar
thermal systems shall comply with the Illinois State Energy Code.
   (M)   Utility notification. All grid-intertie solar energy systems shall
comply with the interconnection requirements of the electric utility. Off-grid
systems are exempt from this requirement.
   (N)   Principal uses. Ford County encourages the development of commercial
or utility scale solar energy systems where such systems present few land use
conflicts with current and future development patterns. Ground-mounted solar
energy systems that are the principal use on the zoning lot or lots are special
uses in selected districts.
   (O)   Rooftop gardens permitted. Rooftop community systems are permitted in
all zoning districts where buildings are permitted.
   (P)   Ground-mount gardens. Ground-mount community solar energy gardens must
be less than 20 acres in total size. Ground-mount solar developments covering
more than 20 acres shall be considered solar farms.
   (Q)   Stormwater solar gardens are subject to the city's stormwater
management regulations, erosion and sediment control provisions.
   (R)   Interconnection. An interconnection agreement must be completed with
the electric utility in whose service territory the system is located prior to
construction.
   (S)   Aviation protection. For solar gardens located within 500 feet of an
airport or within approach zones of an airport, the applicant must complete and
provide the results of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool (SGHAT) for the
airport traffic control tower cab and final approach paths, consistent with the
Interim Policy, FAA Review of Solar Energy Projects on Federally Obligated
Airports, or most recent version adopted by the FAA.
   (T)   Other standards. 
      (1)   Ground-mount systems must comply with all required standards for
structures in the district in which the system is located. All solar gardens
shall also be in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal
regulatory codes, including the State of Illinois Uniform Building Code, as
amended; and the National Electric Code, as amended. Also, Health Department
requirements for wells and septic systems must be met.
      (2)   For solar farms. Ground-mount solar energy systems that are the
primary use on the lot, designed for providing energy to off-site uses or
export to the wholesale market, are permitted under the following standards:
         (a)   Special use permit. Solar farms are special uses in the
agricultural district.
         (b)   Stormwater. Solar farms are subject to the city's stormwater
management regulations, erosion and sediment control provisions.
         (c)   Ground cover and buffer areas. Top soils shall not be removed
during development, unless part of a remediation effort. Soils shall be planted
to and maintained in perennial vegetation to prevent erosion, manage run off
and build soil. The city has a noxious weed ordinance which is to be followed
subject to the allowance of the planting of pollinator plants as otherwise
provided under this section. Due to potential liability under the Illinois
Endangered Species Protection Act (520 ILCS 10/11(b)) it is required that any
crops planted be in compliance with all federal and state laws protecting
endangered species. This will also include pollinators such as bees.
         (d)   Foundations. A qualified engineer shall certify that the
foundation and design of the solar panels racking and support is within
accepted professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
         (e)   Other standards and codes. All solar farms shall be in
compliance with all applicable local, state and federal regulatory codes,
including the State of Illinois Uniform Building Code, as amended; and the
National Electric Code, as amended.
         (f)   Power and communication lines. Power and communication lines
running between banks of solar panels and to nearby electric substations or
interconnections with buildings shall be buried underground. Exemptions may be
granted by the city in instances where shallow bedrock, water courses, or other
elements of the natural landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines, or
distance makes undergrounding infeasible, at the discretion of the City
Superintendent in consultation with the Mayor.
In addition, the Illinois Department of Agriculture (IDOA) has established
standards and policies in the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreements (AIMA)
regarding the construction or burial of electric transmission lines which
should be agreed to and adhered to between the landowner and the developer.
         (g)   Site plan required. A detailed site plan for both existing and
proposed conditions must be submitted, showing location of all solar arrays,
other structures, property lines, rights-of-way, service roads, floodplains,
wetlands and other protected natural resources, topography, farm tile, electric
equipment, fencing, and screening materials and all other characteristics
requested by the city. The site plan should also show all zoning districts, and
overlay districts. The city will retain the authority to suspend any
requirement for any studies or plans for purposes of permit approval so long as
such studies and/or plans are completed and approved by time of construction.
         (h)   Aviation protection. For approach zones of an airport, the
applicant must complete and provide the results of the Solar Glare Hazard
Analysis Tool (SGHAT) for the airport traffic control tower cab and final
approach paths, consistent with the Interim Policy, FAA Review of Solar Energy
Projects on Federally Obligated Airports, or most recent version adopted by the
FAA.
   (U)   Liability insurance and indemnification.
      (1)   For solar farms and solar gardens, commencing with the issuance of
building permits, the applicant, owner, or operator shall maintain a current
general liability policy covering bodily injury and property damage with limits
of at least $3,000,000 per occurrence and $5,000,000 in the aggregate. Such
insurance may be provided pursuant to a plan of self-insurance, by a party with
a net worth of $20,000,000 or more. The city shall be named as an individual
insured on the policy to the extent the city is entitled to indemnification.
      (2)   For private/individual SES(s), commencing with the issuance of
building permits, the applicant or owner shall maintain a current liability
policy covering bodily injuries and any damage that may occur, on their home
owner's policy or other applicable policy as approved by the Director of
Community Development.
      (3)   Any SES(s), applicant, owner, or operator, whether individual or
commercial, shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the county and its
officials, employees, and agents (collectively and individually, the
"Indemnified Parties") from and against any and all claims, demands, losses,
suits, causes of actions, damages, injuries, costs, expenses, and liabilities
whatsoever, including reasonable attorney's fees, except to the extent arising
in whole or part out of negligence or intentional acts of such indemnified
parties (such liabilities together known as "liability") arising out of
applicant, owner, or operators selection, construction, operation, and removal
of the SES(S) and affiliated equipment including, without limitation, liability
for property damage or personal injury (including death), whether said
liability is premised on contract or on tort (including without limitation
strict liability or negligence). This general indemnification shall not be
construed as limited or qualifying the county's other indemnification rights
available under the law.
   (V)   Decommissioning.
      (1)   A decommissioning plan shall be required to be submitted when
applying for all solar farms and solar gardens, to ensure that facilities are
properly removed after their useful life.
      (2)   Decommissioning of solar panels must occur in the event they are
not in use for 180 consecutive days.
      (3)   The owner or operator will have six months to complete the
decommissioning plan after operation of a solar farm or solar garden stops
operations.
      (4)   The decommissioning plan shall include provisions for removal of
all structures and foundations, restoration of soil and vegetation and a plan
ensuring financial resources will be available to fully decommission the site.
      (5)   The city may require the posting of a bond, letter of credit or the
establishment of an escrow account to ensure the proper decommissioning. The
posting of a bond may be required prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the facility.
      (6)   In the event that the State of Illinois enacts a law with regards
to the decommissioning of a solar farm, the strictest requirements shall
prevail.
      (7)   Failure by an owner or operator to comply with this section shall
entitle the city to issue a notice of noncompliance giving the owner or
operator 45 days from date of issuance to comply with this section prior to the
city taking further action. Such notice shall be deemed effective when mailed
by first class mail to the billing address for real estate taxes or the last
known business address of the owner or operator and when posted at an entryway
of the premises. Failure by the city to properly and/or timely issue such
notice shall not limit the city's ability to enforce this section and shall not
release the owner or operator from its obligation to comply with this section.
(Ord. 19-O-18, passed 10-8-19)
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
§ 151.020 CONTINUANCE OF USE.
   (A)   Any lawfully established use of a building or land that does not
conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is located shall be
deemed to be a legal non-conforming use and may be continued, except as
otherwise provided herein.
   (B)   Any legal non-conforming building or structure may be continued in use
provided there are no physical changes other than necessary maintenance and
repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
   (C)   Any building, for which a permit has been lawfully granted, may be
completed in accordance with the approved plans; provided construction is
started within 90 days and diligently prosecuted to completion. Such building
shall thereafter be deemed a lawfully established building.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.021 DISCONTINUANCE OF USE.
   (A)   Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a non-
conforming use is changed to or replaced by a conforming use, such premises
shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a non-conforming use, even though
the building may have been originally designed and constructed for the prior
non-conforming use.
   (B)   Whenever a non-conforming use of a building or structure or part
thereof has been discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months, or
whenever there is evidence of a clear intent on the part of the owner to
abandon a non-conforming use, such use shall not, after being discontinued or
abandoned, be re-established, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be
in conformity with the regulations of the district.
   (C)   Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a non-
conforming use for a period of six months shall constitute abandonment, and
shall not thereafter be used in a non-conforming manner.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.022 TERMINATION AND REMOVAL OF NON-CONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES.
   The period of time during which the following non-conforming uses of
buildings, structures or land may continue or remain shall be limited from the
effective date of the Zoning Code or amendment(s) thereto which causes the use
to be non-conforming. Every such non-conforming use shall be completely removed
from the premises at the expiration of the period of time specified below:
 
                                                                  REMOVED AFTER
Any non-conforming use of a building/structure having an assessed 2 years
valuation not in excess of $500
All non-conforming signs, billboards and outdoor advertising      10 years
structures shall be
Any non-conforming use of land where no enclosed building is
involved, or where the only buildings employed are accessory or    2 years
incidental to such use, or where such use is maintained in
connection with a conforming building, shall be
Any non-conforming house trailers shall be                        10 years
 
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.023 REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a non-
conforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the non-conforming use.
   (B)   No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other
structure containing a non-conforming use, except in the following situations:
      (1)   When the alteration is required by law.
      (2)   When the alteration will actually result in elimination of the
nonconforming use.
      (3)   When a building in a residential district containing residential
nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve livability, provided no
structural alterations shall be made which would increase the number of
dwelling units or the bulk of the building.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.024 DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION.
   (A)   If a building or other structure containing a non-conforming use is
damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50% or more of its
replacement value at that time, the building or other structure can be rebuilt
or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance with the
provisions of the district in which it is located. In the event the damage or
destruction is less than 50% of its replacement value, based on prevailing
costs, the building may then be restored to its original condition and the
occupancy or use of such building may be continued which existed at the time of
such partial destruction.
   (B)   In either event, restoration or repair of the building or other
structure must be started within a period of six months from the date of damage
or destruction, and diligently prosecuted to completion. The bulk of the
building cannot be increased.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.025 ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS.
   (A)   A non-conforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the
entire building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use, and is made to
conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (B)   No building partially occupied by a non-conforming use shall be
altered in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space
occupied by such non-conforming use.
   (C)   No non-conforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required usable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries of the
zoning lot as it existed on the effective date of the Zoning Code, or to
displace any conforming uses in the same building or on the same parcel.
   (D)   A building or structure which is non-conforming with respect to yards,
floor area ratio, or any other element of bulk shall not be altered or expanded
in any manner which would increase the degree or extent of its non-conformity
with respect to the bulk regulations for the district in which it is located.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.026 EXEMPTED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   Wherever a lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise conform
to the use regulations of the district in which it is located, but is non-
conforming only in the particular manner hereinafter specified, the building
and use thereof shall be exempt from §§
151.022 and
151.023:
   (A)   In any residential district where a dwelling is non-conforming only as
to the number of dwelling units it contains, provided no such building shall be
altered in any way so as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
   (B)   In any residential district, where a use permitted in the B-1 District
occupied ground floor space within a multiple-family dwelling located on a
corner lot.
   (C)   In any business or manufacturing district, where the use is less
distance from a residential district than that specified in the regulations for
the district in which it is located.
   (D)   In any district, where an established building, structure, or use is
non-conforming with respect to the standards prescribed herein for any of the
following:
      (1)   Yards: front, side, rear or transitional;
      (2)   Off-street parking and loading;
      (3)   Lot area;
      (4)   Building height;
      (5)   Gross floor area.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
USE DISTRICTS
§ 151.035 USE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Residential districts:
      (1)   R-1 One-Family Dwelling District;
      (2)   R-2 One-Family Dwelling District; and
      (3)   R-3 General Residence District.
   (B)   Business districts:
      (1)   B-1 Business District, Limited Retail;
      (2)   B-2 Business District, General Retail; and
      (3)   B-3 Service and Wholesale District.
   (C)   Manufacturing districts:
      (1)   M-1 Manufacturing District, Restricted;
      (2)   M-2 Manufacturing District, Limited; and
      (3)   M-3 Manufacturing District, General.
   (D)   Mobile home district:
      (1)   MH-1 Mobile Home District.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.036 ZONING MAP.
    The locations and boundaries of the districts established herein are shown
on the zoning map which is a part of this chapter. The territory shown on the
map which lies outside the corporate limits is designated as suitable for
annexation and the zoning classification is the classification for such land
upon annexation.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 95-40, passed 9-11-95)
§ 151.037 ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND.
   Property that becomes annexed to the city shall automatically be rezoned to
the classification shown on the zoning map. If no classification is shown on
the zoning map for the territory annexed, the territory shall automatically be
classified to the highest restrictive use (R-1) under this chapter. Nothing
herein contained shall be construed to prevent the filing of a petition for a
zoning change as provided in the Statutes of the State of Illinois or in this
chapter.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 95-40, passed 9-11-95; Am. Ord. 12-57,
passed 11-13-12)
§ 151.038 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS AND RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same use
district as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public
ways and railroad rights-of-way. Where the center line of a street, alley,
public way or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning
of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be
the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.039 BOUNDARY LINES.
   Whenever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as
shown on the zoning map incorporated herein, the following rules are suggested:
   (A)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets,
alleys or similar rights-of-way, they shall be construed as following the
center lines thereof.
   (B)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following
lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 151.050 PERMITTED USES.
   The uses permitted in these districts are listed in Appendix A of this
chapter.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.051 LOTS OR PARCELS OF LAND OF RECORD.
   Any single lot or parcel of land held in one ownership, which was of record
on September 28, 1964, the same being the time of adoption of the zoning code,
that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot width and area, may be
utilized for a permitted use, provided the lot coverage percentages are not
exceeded, and no variance shall be required for substandard yards or courts
provided adherence to the following:
LOT WIDTH AVAILABLE AT ESTABLISHED MINIMUM TOTAL SETBACK FROM BOTH SIDE LOT
BUILDING LINE                      LINES
LOT WIDTH AVAILABLE AT ESTABLISHED MINIMUM TOTAL SETBACK FROM BOTH SIDE LOT
BUILDING LINE                      LINES
                                   District
                                   R-1 R-2 R-3
69'                                19'
68'                                18'
67'                                17'
66'                                16'
65'                                15'
64'                                14' 14'
63'                                13' 13'
62'                                12' 12'
61'                                11' 11'
60'                                10' 10'
59' or less                        10' 10' 10'
NOTE: The dimension of one side yard will not be less than five feet.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.052 REQUIREMENTS.
   Every principle building erected in any R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential
District shall conform to the applicable requirements in tabular form below:
 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
 R-1 R-2 R-3
                      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
                      R-1            R-2            R-3
(A) Minimum Lot Area:
   One family      12,000 sq. ft. 10,000 sq. ft. 7,200 sq. ft.
   Two family                                    9,000 sq. ft.
   Apartments:                                   (lot area per dwelling
                                                    unit)
      4-bedrooms                              2,000 sq. ft.
      3-bedrooms                              1,500 sq. ft.
 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
 R-1 R-2 R-3
                                      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
                                      R-1 R-2  R-3
      2-bedrooms                         900 sq. ft.
      1-bedroom                          600 sq. ft.
      Efficiency                         600 sq. ft.
   1-family row dwelling                    2,000 sq. ft.1
(B) Minimum Lot Width:                   At established building line
                                      70' 65'  60'
(C) Minimum Setbacks: Interior lot
   Front yard                      30' 25'  20'
   Side yard (total)               20' 15'  15'
   Side yard (single)              7'  6.5' 6'
   Rear yard                       30' 30'  30'
   Row dwellings                            25'
   Multi-family dwellings/ apartments       25'
 
1 Except that corner and end dwelling units shall have not less than 2,500 sq.
ft. of lot area. The minimum lot area shall be not less than 8,000 sq. ft. The
building line width will be not less than 65 ft.
 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
 R-1 R-2 R-3
                                 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
                                 R-1           R-2           R-3
(D) Minimum Setbacks: Corner Lot
   Front yard                 30'           25'           20'
   Side yard (total)          25'           20'           20'
   Side yard (single)         15'           10'           10'
   Rear yard                  30'           30'           30'
(E) Minimum Dwelling Area:
   Ground floor               1,200 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft.
   Multi-story                1,400 sq. ft. 1,100 sq. ft. 1,100 sq. ft.
 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
 R-1 R-2 R-3
                                                                     RESIDENTIAL
                                                                     DISTRICT
                                                                     R- R- R-3
                                                                     1  2
                                                                           620
   Two-family                                                           sq.
                                                                           ft.1
   Apartments multiple-family structures - three or more dwelling
units.
                                                                           750
      4-bedrooms                                                     sq.
                                                                           ft.1
                                                                           650
      3-bedrooms                                                     sq.
                                                                           ft.1
                                                                           550
      2-bedrooms                                                     sq.
                                                                           ft.1
                                                                           400
      1-bedroom                                                      sq.
                                                                           ft.1
                                                                           325
      Efficiency                                                     sq.
                                                                           ft.1
Note: Total floor area is measured from the outside of the exterior walls -
including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, garages, open
porches, breezeways and other spaces that are not used frequently, or during
extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes, except that enclosed
space intended for habitable rooms which are to be completed within a
reasonable time may be considered in computing such floor area.
 
1 Per dwelling unit.
 
(F) Maximum Lot Coverage: 35% 35% 45%
 NON-RESIDENTIAL
 R-1 R-2 R-3
                         NON-RESIDENTIAL
                         R-1    R-2            R-3
(G) Minimum Lot Area:    ½ acre16,000 sq. ft. 12,000 sq. ft.
(H) Minimum Lot Width:   125'   100'           85'
(I) Minimum Setbacks:
   Front yard         30'    25'            20'
   Side yard (total)  40'    35'            30'
   Side yard (single)
      Interior lot 15'    15'            12'
      Corner side o15'ot  10'            10'
      Rear yard    30'    30'            30'
 NON-RESIDENTIAL
 R-1 R-2 R-3
                       NON-RESIDENTIAL
                       R-1         R-2                  R-3
(J) Maximum Lot        35%         35%                  45%
Coverage:
(K) Signs:             Signs shall not exceed height and content hereafter
                       provided:
   No flashing signs are allowed in any residential district.
   Lighted signs are permitted in any residential district only by
authorization of the Building Administrator.
   Non-Flashing SignArea        Height               Content
                                   1-story, maximum 15' Name or address of
      Residential1 sq. ft.2  above curb level     occupant or a permitted
                                                        occupation
      Multiple fa30 sq. ft.2 1-story, maximum 15' Name or address of
                                   above curb level     occupant
      Non-residen2 sq. ft.2  1-story, maximum 15' Name and address of
                                   above curb level     occupant
                                                        Name and address of the
                                                        building may be
                                                        displayed
                                                        No non- residential
                                                        sign is allowed without
                                                        written authorization
                                                        of the Building
                                                        Administrator
 NON-RESIDENTIAL
 R-1 R-2 R-3
                                 NON-RESIDENTIAL
                                 R-1         R-2              R-3
   Non-Flashing Signs:        Area        Height           Content
                                                              Quantity allowed
                                                              = 1
                                             1-story, maximum Advertising the
      "For sale" and "to re6 sq. ft.2  15' above curb   sale of rental
                                             level            property on which
                                                              the sign is
                                                              located; or
                                                              The sale of
                                                              agriculture
                                                              products grown or
                                                              produced on such
                                                              property
   Signs accessory to parking             6' maximum above Quantity allowed
areas1                           2 sq. ft.2  curb level       = 1 sign for each
                                                              ENTRANCE or EXIT
                                                              Quantity allowed
                                                              = 1 per parking
                                             6' maximum above area, designating
                                 9 sq. ft.2  curb level       the conditions of
                                                              use or identity
                                                              of such parking
                                                              area
                                             1-story, maximum Quantity allowed
   Church bulletins1          16 sq. ft.3 15' above curb   = 1 per zoning
                                             level            lot
 
1   On a corner lot, two such signs - one facing each street are permitted.
2   Includes framing.
3   The sign will not exceed 16 sq. ft. in net area, and with the surrounding
frame will not exceed 50 sq. ft. in net area.
PROJECTION: No sign shall project beyond the property line into the public way.
NOTE: Signs are permitted in front yards.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
MH-1 MOBILE HOME DISTRICT
§ 151.060 TRAILERS AND MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   Shall not be permitted in any district as accessory buildings.
   (B)   May be used as temporary offices or storage space incidental to
construction of a building development for the period of time such construction
is actively undertaken, provided the trailer is located on the same or
continuous lot as the building development.
   (C)   Shall not be occupied for dwelling or lodging purposes except in a
mobile home or trailer park meeting state requirements. A mobile home/trailer
may be parked or occupied for lodging purposes on a vacant lot or on the same
lot as a dwelling, but not for more than 72 hours in any consecutive 30 day
period.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.061 PLANNED MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   (A)   Continuation of existing parks. Any mobile home or trailer park now in
operation may be continued in operation under the supervision of the Building
Administrator, provided, however, that the owner of the premises or the
authorized representative of such owner shall, on or before July 1st, next, and
thereafter, pay to the City Clerk the annual license fee provided in this
chapter.
   (B)   Application procedure.  
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or extend any
mobile home park unless a valid building permit has been issued by the Building
Administrator in the name of such person for the specific construction,
alteration, or extension proposed.
      (2)   The permit application is to be accompanied by plan documents
prepared by a registered engineer or architect licensed to practice in the
State of Illinois with registration seal affixed. The plan documents must
contain the information in conformance with Illinois Statutes.
      (3)    Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the
sum as set forth in §
151.166(C)(1) for each ten acres of land or fraction thereof, proposed to be
used as a mobile home trailer park.
      (4)   If the application for a permit to construct or an original license
is declined, the Building Administrator shall give the reasons therefore in
writing to the applicant; and if the objection can be corrected, the applicant
may amend his or her application and resubmit it for approval without
additional fee.
      (5)   No change in any sanitary facilities, methods of water supply,
sewer, drainage, garbage or waste disposal, and no change in the plot plan
shall be made without first making a written application to the city and
receiving a written permit therefrom. Such application shall be made in the way
and manner herein before set forth; such change or changes shall comply with
such safety and sanitary code, rules and regulations as are applicable thereto.
The fee to accompany such an application shall be in the sum as set forth in §
151.166(C)(2). Such permit does not relieve the applicant from securing
building permits or from complying with any other ordinance applicable thereto.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 07-21, passed 7-9-07 )
§ 151.062 USE REGULATIONS.
   All mobile homes/trailers shall be established upon or within a Mobile Home
Zoning District, and those not in said district shall be considered
nonconforming uses. Such use shall be permitted until such mobile home or
trailer is moved from its present location.
   (A)   Nonconforming use. All trailers in a nonconforming use status and
outside a designated mobile home park shall be removed by January 1, 1989.
Whenever a trailer is moved from any existing mobile home park, the lot or
space left vacant shall not again be occupied by another trailer except that
the lot or space be made to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Annual license fee.  
      (1)    The mobile home park licensee shall pay to the City Clerk on or
before July 1st each year, an annual license fee which shall be in the sum as
set forth in §
151.166(C)(3) for each trailer space in the mobile home park which is occupied
or developed for occupancy as of July 1st of each year. All licenses shall
expire on July 1st of each year unless renewed as herein provided. Each license
fee paid to the city shall not be refunded. Continued operation after
expiration of the license shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
      (2)   Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or
suspension by the city. However, the Building Administrator shall first serve
or cause to be served upon the licensee a written notice in which shall be
specified the way or ways in which such licensee has failed to comply with the
chapter, or any rules or regulations promulgated by the city pertaining
thereto. Said notice shall require the licensee to remove or abate such
nuisance, unsanitary or objectionable condition specified in such notice,
within the time specified or such extended period of time, the Building
Administrator may revoke or suspend such license.
      (3)   All permits to construct, all licenses to operate, and all permits
to make alterations therein shall be prominently displayed in the office of the
mobile home park.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88 ; Am. Ord. 07-21, passed 7-9-07 )
§ 151.063 SIZE AND DENSITY OF MOBILE HOME PARK.
   (A)   Minimum requirements.
      (1)   Area of mobile home/trailer   10 acres
      (2)   Number of spaces completed and ready for
         occupancy before first occupancy is permitted   25 spaces
      (3)   Lot size   4,000 sq. ft.
      (4)   Width   40 ft.*
      *   Any mobile home/trailer unit greater than 12 feet in width, the
minimum lot width shall be 45 feet.
   The lot width shall be maintained between points ten feet in front of and
five feet to the rear of the stand.
      (5)   Distance between mobile homes/trailers   15 ft.
      (6)   Yard requirements:
         Front yard   15 ft.
         Side yards - each side minimum   7.5 ft.
         Rear yard   7.5 ft.
      (7)   Setback requirements. Distance from the line or corner of the
mobile home stand. Right-of-way line of United States or State of Illinois
highways   45 ft.
         Right-of-way line of other highway, street or road which borders the
mobile home park   35 ft.
      (8)   Fences. All mobile home/trailer park boundaries adjacent to
existing residential development shall be provided with a six-foot high fence
that has 50% of the surface open for free air.
      (9)   Mobile home stand.
         (a)   A mobile home/trailer stand shall be solid continuous concrete
slab constructed so as not to shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the
mobile home or other forces due to frost, vibration, wind, or water.
         (b)   The mobile home/trailer shall be secured to the ground with an
approved tiedown or anchoring device.
      (10)   Base enclosure. All mobile homes which are placed on foundations
or piers shall have the entire perimeter enclosed. The enclosure shall be of a
material approved by the city. The metal panels manufactured for mobile home
enclosures shall be considered to meet these standards.
      (11)   Distance mobile homes to be located from park boundary   15 ft.
         Park boundary is either the:
         (a)   Lot or parcel line; or
         (b)   Right-of-way line of a public street or road.
      (12)   Markers for mobile home lots. Every mobile home lot shall be
clearly defined on the ground by permanent markers. There shall be posted and
maintained in a conspicuous place on each lot as shown on the plot plan
submitted as required herein so that each lot may be easily identified.
      (13)   Patio.
         (a)   Each mobile home lot shall provide an appropriate outdoor living
space to supplement the limited interior space of a mobile home. The minimum
size of each mobile home/trailer patio living space shall be 180 feet.
         (b)   Construction shall provide a useful outdoor surface constructed
or formed either monolithically or in movable units with weather resistant
materials placed sufficiently close together to create a paved area.
      (14)   Tenant storage. If storage facilities are provided, they shall be
conveniently located near each mobile home lot:
         (a)   For the active storage of outdoor equipment, furniture or tools.
         (b)   For the inactive storage of such other material as is used only
seasonally or infrequently by the typical tenant and cannot be conveniently
stored in the typical mobile home.
            1.   Size. There shall be a minimum of 90 cubic feet provided for
general storage for each mobile home lot.
            2.   Design and location of storage facilities. Storage facilities
shall be provided on the lot, or in compounds located within a reasonable
distance, not more than 500 feet from each stand and located not closer to
private streets and public streets than the mobile home itself. Storage
facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of
the court and shall be constructed of suitable weather resistant materials
appropriate under the use and maintenance contemplated.
      (15)   Streets and walks. All publicly dedicated streets shall conform to
the requirements of the subdivision regulations of this chapter.
         (a)   Private streets. Where private streets are provided within the
mobile home park, the minimum private street width on which an individual
mobile home fronts shall be 24 feet and:
            1.   Shall be located approximately in the center of a parcel of
property equal to the width of right-of-way for a local residential street.
            2.   All future private streets constructed in connection with a
mobile home park shall be designed and laid out in accordance with the
subdivision regulations of this chapter. This requirement shall not apply to
mobile home parks existing at the time of the passage of this chapter.
         (b)   Walks. Walks shall be provided for safe, convenient, all-season
pedestrian access; of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient
to maintain. There shall be:
            1.   Individual walks to each mobile home stand from a paved street
or from a paved driveway or parking space connecting to an approved street.
            2.   Walks shall be constructed in accordance with §§
151.120 and
151.121.
               a.   Entrance walks on individual walks   width = 3 ft.
               b.   Common walks   width = 5 ft.
               c.   Thickness with solid base material   4 inches
               d.   Required walks are not to be used for drainage ways.
      (16)   Parking spaces.
         (b)   Each parking space shall be:
            1.   Width   10 ft.
            2.   Length   20 ft.
            3.   Each parking space shall be surfaced for its entire area with
concrete or asphaltic concrete.
      (17)   Service buildings. Each mobile home park may provide service
buildings to house such toilet, bathing or other sanitation facilities and such
laundry facilities as are hereinafter more particularly prescribed.
         (a)   All service buildings shall be permanent structures complying
with all applicable laws and ordinances regulating the construction of
buildings.
         (b)   All service buildings shall be adequately lighted at all times
of day and night.
         (c)   All service buildings shall be well-ventilated and with screens
on all openings.
         (d)   All service buildings shall be constructed of such moisture-
proof material, including painted woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning
and washing and shall be maintained at a temperature of not less than 68
degrees (Fahrenheit) during the period of September 1st to May 15th.
         (e)   Floors of all service buildings shall be of water-impervious
material, shall contain a drain or drains and shall be constructed as to assure
efficient drainage to such drain or drains.
         (f)   All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be
maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that
will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance
or fire hazard.
      (18)   Laundry facilities. When laundry facilities are provided, such
facilities shall conform to the following standards:
         (a)   Hot and cold water outlets shall equal not less than the number
of laundry trays and washing machines.
         (b)   An ample number of electrical outlets shall be provided
supplying current sufficient to operate each such machine.
         (c)   The laundry facilities shall be in a separate service building,
or, if in the same building where sanitation facilities are housed, shall be
separated from the area housing sanitation facilities by a soundproof wall.
      (19)   Garbage and trash disposal.
         (a)   Corrosion resistive metal garbage cans or other noncombustible
containers, with tight- fitting covers, shall be provided in quantities
adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Each mobile home lot
shall have at least one garbage can within 100 feet of it. The cans shall be
kept in a sanitary condition as determined through inspection of proper city
officials.
         (b)   Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as
frequently as may be necessary, but not less than weekly, to insure that the
garbage cans shall not overflow.
      (20)   Electric lighting and outlets.
         (a)   All entrances, exits and driveways shall be lighted at night.
Not less than a 100 watt electric light shall be provided for each 200 lineal
feet of private street and at each entrance and exit to the mobile home park.
         (b)   At least one receptacle outlet for each mobile home space shall
be provided. This exterior receptacle and other electric wiring shall conform
to the requirements of the National Electric Code.
      (21)   Storage tanks. No individual storage facilities for gasoline, oil,
gas, liquefied petroleum or other fuels shall be permitted within the mobile
home park.
      (22)   Playgrounds.
         (a)   The size of the recreational area shall be not less than 8% of
the gross site area, generally provided in a central location, including
suitable landscaping, fencing and benches. In larger courts, decentralization
will be allowed.
         (b)   Recreation areas shall include space for community buildings and
community use facilities, such as adult recreation, child playgrounds and
natural open space.
      (23)   Additions to mobile homes.
         (a)   No permanent or semi-permanent structure shall be affixed to any
mobile home as an addition to such mobile home, nor shall any accessory
structure be permitted on any mobile home lot or in any mobile home park except
those accessory structures required by this section and a structure to house an
office.
         (b)   If an office structure is provided, its construction shall
comply with all applicable laws and ordinances.
         (c)   The prohibition herein against any addition or accessory to a
mobile home shall not apply to a canopy or awning designed for use with a
mobile home, nor to any expansion unit or accessory structure specifically
manufactured for mobile homes. The lot coverage of a mobile home together with
an expansion or accessory structure permitted thereto by this chapter, shall
not exceed 40% of the total mobile home lot area.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.064 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following shall not be considered as
obstructions when located in the yards indicated:
   (A)   In any yards. Chimneys, overhanging roof eaves, open terraces and
awnings adjoining the mobile home if they do not exceed 10% of the depth of the
yard; and ornamental light standards and flagpoles, fences, trees and shrubs,
except that on corner lots, fences, trees and shrubs shall not be higher than
30 inches above the centerline grade of the intersecting streets if located in
that portion of a required front or side yard situated within 20 feet of the
lot corner formed by the intersection of any two street lines.
   (B)   In front yards. Six feet wide parking bays may occupy that part of the
front yard. Driveways are not considered as an obstruction in a front yard. No
other obstructions shall be permitted.
   (C)   In side yards. Open accessory off-street parking spaces, except in a
side yard abutting a street.
   (D)   In rear yards. Private garages or carports, if attached or
structurally a part of the mobile home, open accessory off-street parking
paces, accessory sheds, tool rooms, or other similar accessory buildings;
private swimming pools in accordance with the regulations of the city.
Accessory buildings or structures may occupy not more than 30% of a rear yard.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.065 SCREENING.
   (A)   Planting shall be hardy, appropriate for use and location, and planted
so as to thrive with normal maintenance. There shall be provided planting
adequate to screen views effectively.
   (B)   Views to be screened shall include:
      (1)   Laundry drying yards;
      (2)   Garbage;
      (3)   Trash collection stations;
      (4)   Non-residential uses; and
      (5)   Yards of all adjacent properties.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.066 CERTIFICATION OF USE OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   (A)   No mobile home/trailer unit and/or park shall be occupied until a
certificate of use and occupancy shall have been issued by the Building
Administrator to the effect that the mobile home park or the portion thereof
for which such certificate is requested is in compliance with all provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   Every mobile home occupied as a dwelling unit located in the city
after the date of adoption of this chapter shall meet the minimum standards for
plumbing, heating and electrical systems as defined by the American Standards
Association project A 119.1 approved 1974. Mobile homes that display the
official seal and register number of the Mobile Home Manufacturers Association
and the Trailer Coach Association will be considered to comply with the
American Standards Association standard 119.9. Mobile homes that do not meet
these minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems will not
be issued a certificate of use and occupancy permit by the Building
Administrator.
   (C)   The minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems as
defined by the American Standards Association Project A 119.1 approved 1974,
are hereby made a part of and incorporated by reference into this chapter.
   (D)   This requirement will not apply to occupied mobile homes in the city
prior to the adoption of this chapter, nor to units built prior to March 12,
1963.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
§ 151.075 PERMITTED USES.
   The uses permitted in these districts are listed in Appendix B to this
chapter.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.076 CONDITIONS OF USE.
   All uses permitted in the business districts, except residential district
uses, shall be retail establishments dealing directly with consumers and shall
be subject to the following conditions:
 B-1 B-2 B-3
                                                                    B-1 B-2 B-3
Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted below the second x   x   x
floor, except in hotels and motels.
The sale of foodstuffs or articles intended for human consumption   x
shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building.
Establishments of the "drive-in" type, offering goods or services
directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles, are not     x
permitted.
There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products
other than those which are clearly incidental and essential to the  x   x
retail business conducted on the same premises.
Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to x   x
odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, or other similar causes.
That any exterior sign displayed shall pertain only to a use        x
conducted within the building.
Not more than five persons (exclusive of manager, clerk and
drivers) shall be engaged in said manufacturing, processing, or         x
treatment of products including catering, cleaning, laundering,
plumbing, upholstering, and other similar permitted uses.
 
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.077HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed
a height of:
 
                                                                  B-1 B-2 B-3
Central Business District - three stories, nor shall it exceed 45 x   x   x
feet.
Other business areas - five stories, nor shall it exceed 65 feet. x   x   x
 
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.078 TRANSITIONAL YARDS.
   Where a business district adjoins a residential district, transitional yards
shall be provided in accordance with the following:
 
                                                                    B-1 B-2 B-3
Where lots in a business district front on the street and at least
80% of the frontage directly across the street between two
consecutive intersecting streets is in a residential district the   x   x   x
front yard regulations for the residential district shall apply to
the said lots in the business district.
Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line of
property in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be
provided along such side lot line. Such yard shall be equal in      x   x   x
dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required herein
for a residential use on the adjacent property in a residential
district.
Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line of property in
an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along
such rear lot line. Such yard shall be equal in dimension to the    x   x   x
minimum side yard which would be required herein for a residential
use on the adjacent property in the residential district.
Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line of property in
an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along
such rear lot line. Such yard shall be 20 feet in depth, but may    x   x   x
begin at a height of 15 feet or one story above grade, whichever is
lower.
Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with the
front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residential
district, a yard equal in depth to the minimum front yard required
herein on such adjacent lot in the residential district shall be    x   x   x
provided along such front or side lot line for a distance of at
least 25 feet, including the width of any intervening alley, from
such lot in the residential district.
Transitional yards shall be unobstructed from lowest level to sky.  x   x   x
 
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.079 SIGNS.
   Signs shall not exceed height and content hereafter provided:
   (A)   Signs are permitted in front yards.
   (B)   No signs shall project beyond the property line into the public way.
   (C)   No flashing signs are allowed in any business district.
   (D)   Lighted signs are permitted in any business district only by
authorization of the Building Administrator.
   (E)   Signs may relate only to the name and use of buildings or premises
upon which they are placed. Advertising signs and outdoor billboards
advertising products or matters not related to the occupancy and use of the
premises shall not be permitted.
   (F)   Signs attached to a building or buildings shall not project more than
18 inches from the wall upon which they are attached. Signs must be attached to
parapet walls or other wall surfaces made a part of the main structure. Signs
erected on a separate superstructure attached to the roof of the building or to
any other part of the building above the roof line shall not be permitted. No
sign shall project higher than four feet above the parapet line or the roof
line, whichever is higher.
   (G)   The gross surface area of all business signs on a zoning lot shall not
exceed in square feet of area two times the lineal frontage of such zoning lot.
Each side of a building which abuts upon more than one street shall be
considered as a separate frontage.
   (H)   For integrated shopping centers in single ownership and management, or
under unified control, one additional sign may be erected not exceeding 100
square feet in area advertising only the name and the location of the
integrated shopping center.
   (I)   Such sign shall be placed so as to be entirely within the property
lines of the premises upon which the sign is located and the bottom edge of
such sign shall be at least eight feet above the level of the ground and the
overall height shall not exceed 20 feet above curb level, or above the
adjoining ground level if such ground level is above the street level.
   (J)   No sign shall be permitted to be placed on any wall, fence or standard
facing the side of any adjoining lot located in a residential district.
   (K)   Signs attached to, or hung from, a marquee or canopy shall be
completely within the borderline of the outer edge of the marquee or canopy,
and shall in no instance be lower than eight feet above the ground or surface
over which the marquee or canopy is constructed.
   (L)   Signs, clocks or other advertising devices erected upon standards or
separate supports shall be placed as to be entirely within the property lines
of the premises upon which it is located, and no part of the sign or standard
shall have a total height greater than 20 feet above the level of the street
upon which the sign faces, or above the adjoining ground level if such ground
level is above the street level, nor shall the surface of any such sign exceed
an area of 100 square feet.
   (M)   Signs which may be in conflict with public traffic signals shall not
be permitted. Illuminated signs shall be shaded so as not to shine on adjacent
residential properties.
   (N)   Traffic or directional signs designating entrances, exits and
conditions of use of parking facilities accessory to the main use of the
premises may be maintained provided they are located within the property lines
of the subject lot.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
§ 151.090 PERMITTED USES.
   The uses permitted in these districts are listed in Appendix C of this
chapter.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.091 CONDITIONS OF USE.
   All permitted uses are subject to the following conditions:
 
                                                             M-1   M-2  M-3
Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing,
repair or storage of materials, goods or products shall
conform to the performance standards set forth herein and
shall not be injurious or offensive to the occupants of      x     x    x
adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of
noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter,
toxic and noxious materials, odors, fine or explosive
hazards or glare or heat.
All business, production, servicing, processing and storage
shall take place within completely enclosed buildings unless x     x
otherwise specified.
Within how many feet of a residential district must all            150' 200'
storage be in completely enclosed buildings or structures.
Storage located elsewhere in this district may be open to
the sky but shall be enclosed by solid walls or fences
(including solid doors or gates thereto) at least feet high,       x    x
but in no case lower in height than the enclosed storage and
suitably landscaped.
Open off-street loading facilities and open off-street
parking of motor vehicles of how many ton capacity may be
unenclosed throughout the district, except for such
screening of parking and loading facilities as may be        1 ton
required under the provisions of
§§ 151.120 and
151.121.
NOTE: Within 200' of a residential                                      1.5 ton
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.092 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
 
                                                                    M-1 M-2 M-3
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered   2   3   4
to exceed a height of how many stories nor shall it exceed how many        
feet - except as provided herein.                                   35' 45' 60'
 
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.093 LOT COVERAGE.
 
                                                                    M-1 M-2 M-3
The maximum ground area occupied by all buildings shall be not more
than what percent of the area of the lot or tract on which a        50% 60% 60%
building permit has been issued.
 
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.094 YARD AREAS.
   There shall be a:
 
                                                                    M-1 M-2 M-3
Front yard. There shall be a front yard wherein there shall be no
structure of any kind, open storage of materials or equipment, or   40' 30' 30'
the parking of vehicles.
Side yard. There shall be a minimum side yard on both sides of the  20' 15' 15'
building or buildings.
Where the property is adjacent to a residential district, there
shall be a side yard of not less than how many feet on the side     35' 25' 25'
nearest to residential lots.
The parking of private automobiles may be permitted within the side
yard areas, but not closer than how many feet to any lot zoned for  15' 5'  5'
residential use.
Rear yard.
A rear yard is not required except where lots abut upon a           40' 25' 25'
residential district, in which case there shall be a rear yard of          
not less than how many feet; and                                           
There will be no storage of materials or equipment, or the parking         
of automobiles within how many feet closest to any residential lot  15' 10' 10'
or lots.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.095 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   The following requirements shall apply:
 
                                                                    M-1 M-2 M-3
Noise. The sound pressure level, to be measured as described below,
shall not exceed the following decibel levels in the designated
octave bands when adjacent to the designated types of use
districts:
Octave Band
Cycles per second               Sound Level
                     in Decibels
All Residential      All Business
Districts         Districts                                x   x   x
0 to 75             72            79
75 to 150          67            74
150 to 300          59            66
300 to 600          52            59
600 to 1,200          46            53
1,200 to 2,400          40            47
2,400 to 4,800          34            41
Over 4,800          32            39
NOTE. Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature which are not
easily measured shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance
to adjacent uses.
Method of Measurement. Measurement is to be made at the nearest
boundary of the nearest residential area or any other point along
the boundary where the level is higher. The sound levels shall be
measured with a sound meter and associated octave band filter as
prescribed by the American Standards Association.
 M-1 M-2 M-3
                                                                         M- M-2 M-3
                                                                         1
Smoke and Particulate Matter. The emission of smoke and dusts by
manufacturing plants in an amount sufficient to create a general
nuisance to adjoining properties shall be prohibited. Total emission of
smoke and particulate matter shall be limited to the following:
   Ringelmann Requirements. All smoke and the emission of all other
particulate matter in quantities sufficient to produce an opacity at any 2  3
point greater than what Ringelmann level is prohibited.
   The emission of smoke or dusts in an amount sufficient to create a
general nuisance to occupants of adjoining properties or to the                 x
occupants in the general area wherein the use is located shall be
prohibited.
Odors. No odor shall be emitted by any use permitted in this district in
such quantities as to be detectable by an average observer at any point  x  x   x
on the boundary line of the premises or beyond the nearest residential
or business district.
Noxious Gases. Processes and operations of uses capable of dispersing    x
noxious gases or toxic particulates into the atmosphere are prohibited.
Processes and operations of permitted uses capable of dispersing noxious    x   x
gases or toxic particulates into the atmosphere must be hooded or               
otherwise suitably enclosed. The emission of such noxious gases or toxic        
particulates shall be from a stack not less than how many feet in               
height?                                                                     35' 25'
Glare and Heat. Operations producing intense light or heat shall be
performed within an enclosed building and shall not be visible beyond    x  x
any lot line bounding the property whereon the use is conducted.
When adjacent to a residential or business district, the operations
producing intense light or heat shall be performed within an enclosed           x
building and not be visible beyond the boundary separating the subject
premises from the adjoining residential or business district.
Vibrations. There shall be no uses which create earthshaking vibrations
which are noticeable at the property line of the subject premises any    x  x   x
district boundaries separating residential and business districts from
an M-3 Manufacturing District.
 
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.096 SIGNS.
   Signs shall not exceed height and content hereafter provided:
   (A)   Signs are permitted in front yards, set back a minimum of 15 feet from
the front lot line, or from the roadway right-of-way line, whichever applies.
   (B)   No sign shall project beyond the property line into the public way. No
flashing signs are allowed in any manufacturing district.
   (C)   Lighted signs are permitted in any manufacturing district only by
authorization of the Building Administrator.
   (D)   Signs may relate only to the name and use of buildings or premises
upon which they are placed. Advertising signs and outdoor billboards
advertising products or matters not related to the occupancy and use of the
premises shall not be permitted.
   (E)   Signs attached to a building or buildings shall not project more than
18 inches from the wall upon which they are attached. Signs must be attached to
parapet walls or other wall surfaces made a part of the main structure. Signs
erected on a separate superstructure attached to the roof of the building or to
any other part of the building above the roof line shall not be permitted. No
sign shall project higher than four feet above the parapet line or the roof
line, whichever is higher.
   (F)   The gross surface area of all business signs on a zoning lot shall not
exceed in square feet of area two times the lineal frontage of such zoning lot.
Each side of a building which abuts upon more than one street shall be
considered as a separate frontage.
   (G)   For integrated shopping centers in a single ownership and management,
or under unified control, one additional sign may be erected not exceeding 100
square feet in area advertising only the name and the location of the
integrated shopping center.
   (H)   Such sign shall be placed so as to be entirely within the property
lines of the premises upon which the sign is located and the bottom edge of
such sign shall be at least eight feet above the level of the ground and the
overall height shall not exceed 20 feet above curb level, or above the
adjoining ground level if such ground level is above the street level.
   (I)   No sign shall be permitted to be placed on any wall, fence or standard
facing the side of any adjoining lot located in a residential district.
   (J)   Signs attached to, or hung from, a marquee or canopy shall be
completely within the borderline of the outer edge of the marquee or canopy ,
and shall in no instance be lower than eight feet above the ground or surface
over which the marquee or canopy is constructed.
   (K)   Signs, clocks or other advertising devices erected upon standards or
separate supports shall be placed as to be entirely within the property lines
of the premises upon which it is located, and no part
of the sign or standard shall have a total height greater than 20 feet above
the level of the street upon which the sign faces, or above the adjoining
ground level if such ground level is above the street level, nor shall the
surface of any such sign exceed an area of 100 square feet.
   (L)   Signs which may be in conflict with public traffic signals shall not
be permitted.
   (M)   Illuminated signs shall be shaded so as not to shine on adjacent
residential properties.
   (N)   Traffic or directional signs designating entrances, exits and
conditions of use of parking facilities accessory to the main use of the
premises may be maintained provided they are located within the property lines
of the subject lot.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 151.105 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the
public streets, and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by
establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading and
unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which the property is
put.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.106 GENERAL PROVISIONS; PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   Scope of regulations. The off-street parking and loading provisions
shall apply as follows:
      (1)   For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date of this chapter, accessory parking and
loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of the
district in which such buildings or uses are located. However, where a building
permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, and
provided that construction is begun within one year of such effective date and
diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading facilities as required
herein need not be provided.
      (2)   When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises
shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity, or other unit of measurement specified herein for required
parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required
herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
      (3)   However, no building or structure lawfully erected or use lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be required to
provide such additional parking or loading facilities unless and until the
aggregate increase in units of measurement shall equal to not less than 15% of
the units of measurement existing upon the effective date of this chapter, in
which event parking or loading facilities as required, shall be provided for
the total increase.
      (4)   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall
hereafter be changed to a new use, parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required for such new use. However, if the said building or
structure was erected prior to the effective date of this chapter, additional
parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the
requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the
latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Existing parking and loading facilities. Accessory off-street parking
or loading facilities which are located on the same lot as the building or use
served and which were in existence on the effective date of this chapter or
were provided voluntarily after such effective date shall not hereafter be
reduced below, or if already less than, shall not further be reduced below, the
requirements of this chapter for a similar new building or use.
   (C)   Permissive parking and loading facilities. Nothing herein shall be
deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking or loading
facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings provided that all
regulations herein governing the location, design, improvement, and operation
of such facilities are adhered to.
   (D)   Damage or destruction. For any conforming or legally nonconforming
building or use which is in existence on the effective date of this chapter,
which subsequent thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion,
or other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired, off-
street parking or loading facilities need not be provided, except that parking
or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage
or destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However, in no case
shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in
excess of those required by this chapter for equivalent new uses or
construction.
   (E)   Control of off-site parking facilities. When required parking
facilities are provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the building
or use served by such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the
same possession or ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use
to which the parking facilities are accessory. No such off-site parking
facilities shall be authorized and no occupancy permit shall be issued where
the plans call for parking facilities other than on the same zoning lot until
and unless the Plan Commission has reviewed the plans and heard the applicant
and made findings that the common ownership or possession of the zoning lot and
the site of the parking facilities are reasonably certain to continue and that
the off-site parking facilities will be maintained at all times during the life
of the proposed use or building.
   (F)   Submission of plot plans. Any application for a building permit or for
a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, shall include
therewith a plot plan - drawn to scale and fully dimensioned - showing any
parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance herewith.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.107 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS; PARKING.
   Exceptions to parking regulations. Within the area determined by the Plan
Commission to be the Central Business District the parking regulations set
forth herein shall not apply. However, existing off-street parking in the
Central Business District which is located on the same lot as the building or
use served and which was in existence on the effective date of this chapter or
was provided voluntarily after the date of this chapter, shall not hereafter be
reduced below the requirements of this chapter for a similar new building or
use.
   (A)   Use of parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities accessory to
residential uses and developed in any residential district in accordance with
the requirements herein shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such
facilities are accessory or by guests of said occupants. Under no circumstances
shall required parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used
for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles
belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors, or customers of business
or manufacturing establishments.
   (B)   Joint parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities for different
buildings, structures or uses or for mixed uses may be provided collectively in
any zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each constituent
use would be permitted, provided that the total number of spaces so located
together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each
use.
   (C)   Computation. When determination of the number of off-street parking
spaces required herein results in a requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded while a fraction in excess of
one-half shall be counted as one parking space.
   (D)   Size. A required off-street parking space shall be at least ten feet
in width and at least 20 feet in length, exclusive of access drives or aisles,
ramps, columns or office or work areas. Such space shall have a vertical
clearance of at least seven feet.
   (E)   Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off-street
parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access
to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movements. No driveway across public property nor curb cut shall exceed a width
of 30 feet.
   (F)   In yards. Off-street parking spaces may be allowed in any yards except
required front yards. Driveways into and/or thru front yards may be used as
off-street parking spaces.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.108 DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Open and enclosed parking spaces. Accessory parking spaces located on
the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or enclosed
in a building. Accessory parking spaces located in a residential district
elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use served shall be open to the
sky except when otherwise allowed.
   (B)   Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas, except a single parking
space accessory to a one-family dwelling, shall be improved with some
comparable all-weather dustless material.
   (C)   Screening and landscaping. In a business or M-1 or M-2 Manufacturing
District, all open automobile parking areas containing more than four parking
spaces shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on any
property in a residential district or any institutional premises, by a wall,
fence or densely planted compact hedge not less than five feet nor more than
seven feet in height. Such required screening shall conform with the front and
side yard setback requirements of the district in which the parking is located.
   (D)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas
shall be directed away from the residential properties in such a way as not to
create a nuisance.
   (E)   Repair and service. 
      (1)   No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in
conjunction with accessory off-street parking facilities provided in a
residential district.
      (2)   The sale of gasoline and motor oil in conjunction with accessory
off-street parking facilities is not permitted in any residential district.
   (F)   Maximum number of spaces. The total number of accessory parking spaces
provided for one-, two-, or multiple-family dwellings or hotels shall not
exceed that required herein for such use or for any equivalent new use by more
than 50%, or four spaces, whichever number is greater.
   (G)   Floor area exemptions. When two or more uses are located on the same
zoning lot, only one exception in terms of floor area - as set forth in
§ 151.110, shall be taken.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.109 LOCATION OF ACCESSORY OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES.
   The location of off-street parking spaces in relation to the use served
shall be as prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified shall be walking
distances between such parking spaces and a main entrance to the use served.
   (A)   For uses in a residential district. Parking spaces accessory to
dwellings shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. Spaces
accessory to uses other than dwellings may be located on a lot adjacent to, or
directly across a street or alley from, the lot occupied by the use served, but
in no case at a distance in excess of 300 feet from such use.
   (B)   For uses in business and manufacturing districts. All required parking
spaces shall be within 1,000 feet of the use served, except for spaces
accessory to dwelling units (except those located in a transient hotel) which
shall be within 300 feet of the use served. However, no parking spaces
accessory to a use in a business or manufacturing district shall be located in
a residential district.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.110 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   For the following uses, accessory off-street parking spaces shall be
provided as required hereinafter. Parking spaces required on an employee basis
shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both,
on the premises at any one time.
   (A)   Residential uses, as follows:
 PARKING SPACES PROVIDED
                FOR EACH
                                   PARKING SPACES PROVIDED
                                                  FOR EACH
One-family dwellings and two-      2              dwelling unit
family dwellings
Multiple-family dwellings          3              2 dwelling units
(including apartment hotels)
For lodging rooms located in an    1              2 lodging rooms
apartment hotel.
Tourist courts, tourist homes,     1              dwelling unit or lodging room
motels and motor hotels
Hotels, transient                  1              dwelling unit
                                   1              2 lodging rooms
Lodging houses                     1              2 lodging rooms
                                   1              owner or manager
Private clubs and lodges (with     1              2 lodging rooms
sleeping facilities for guests)
Plus parking space equal in number
to 10% of the capacity in persons
(exclusive of lodging room
capacity) of such club or lodge.
 
   (B)   Retail and service uses, as follows:
 PARKING SPACES PROVIDED
                FOR EACH
                                   PARKING SPACES PROVIDED
                                                  FOR EACH
Retail stores and banks.           1              200 sq. ft. of floor area in
                                                  excess of 2,000 sq. ft.
Drive-in banks or other similar
drive-in establishments shall
provide 3 stacking spaces per
teller or customer service window.
Automobile service station.        1              2 employees
Automobile laundry. 2 stacking     1              4 employees
spaces per each wash rack, plus:
Bowling alleys.                    3              Alley
Plus such additional spaces as may
be required herein for affiliated
uses - bars, restaurants and the
like.
Establishments dispensing food or
beverages for consumption on the   1              300 sq. ft. of floor area
premises.
Furniture and appliance stores,                   600 sq. ft. of floor area in
household equipment or furniture   1              excess of 2,00 sq. ft.
repair shops.
Motor vehicle sales and machinery  1              300 sq. ft. of floor area
sales.
Theaters (indoor).                 1              5 seats
Undertaking establishments,        6              Chapel or parlor
funeral parlors:                   1              Funeral vehicle kept on the
                                                  premises
 
   (C)   Offices - business, professional and governmental. One parking space
provided for each 200 square feet of floor area.
   (D)   Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouses and storage
buildings other than accessory). One parking space provided for each 600 square
feet of floor area in excess of 4,000 square feet.
   (E)   Establishments engaged in production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing or repair of materials, goods or products.
 
  PARKING SPACES PROVIDED
                 FOR EACH
 1              2 employees
  1              vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise
 
   (F)   Warehouses and storage buildings:
 
 PARKING SPACES PROVIDED
                FOR EACH
 1              2 employees
 1              vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise
 
   (G)   Community service uses, as follows:
 PARKING SPACES PROVIDED
                FOR EACH
                                 PARKING SPACES PROVIDED
                                                FOR EACH
Church, school, college and
other institutional auditoriums.
Plus adequate space shall be
provided for buses used in
connection with the activities   1              3 auditorium seats
of the institution, and all
loading and unloading of
passengers shall take place upon
the premises.
                                                3 employees
Colleges, universities and                      4 students based on the maximum
business, professional and trade 1              number of students attending
schools.                         1              classes on the premises at any
                                                one time during any 24-hour
                                                period
Health centers, government-      3              staff and visiting doctors
operated
                                 1              2 hospital beds
Hospitals                        1              2 employees (other than staff
                                1              doctors)
                                                doctor assigned to the staff
Libraries, art galleries and     1              1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor
museums - public                                area
Municipal or privately-owned
recreation buildings or
community centers.               1              2 employees
Plus 15 spaces to serve the
visiting public.
Public utility and public
service uses.                    1              3 employees
Plus 5 spaces to serve the
public.
Schools - nursery, elementary    1              employee
and high
 
   (H)   Places of assembly, as follows:
 
                                  PARKING SPACES PROVIDED
                                                 FOR EACH
Stadiums, arenas, auditoriums,
(other than church, college, or
institutional school), convention Parking spaces equal in number to 25% of the
halls, dance halls, exhibition    capacity in persons shall be provided
halls, skating rinks and other
similar places of assembly.
 
   (I)   Miscellaneous uses, as follows:
 
                                  PARKING SPACES PROVIDED
                                                 FOR EACH
Fraternities, sororities and      1              5 active members
dormitories                       1              manager thereof
Institutions for the care of the
insane or feeble- minded.
Plus spaces equal in number to    1              staff doctor
25% of the capacity in persons
shall be provided to serve the
visiting public.
Private clubs and lodges (without 1              10% of the capacity in persons
sleeping facilities for guests).
                                  1              4 beds
Rest homes or nursing homes       1              2 employees (other than staff
                                  1              doctors)
                                                 doctor assigned to the staff
Sanitariums, convalescent homes   1              4 beds
or institutions for the aged or   1              2 employees (other than staff
for children                      1              doctors)
                                                 doctor assigned to the staff
Theaters - automobile drive-in.
Reservoir parking space equal to
10% of the vehicle capacity of
such theaters shall be provided.
 
   (J)   For the following uses, parking spaces shall be provided in adequate
number to serve persons employed or residing on the premises. Parking spaces
equal in number to 25% of the capacity of the building(s) will be provided to
serve the visiting public.
      (1)   Airports or aircraft landing fields; heliports.
      (2)   Convents and monasteries.
      (3)   Crematories and mausoleums.
      (4)   Fraternal or religious institutions.
      (5)   Outdoor amusement establishments: fairgrounds, permanent carnivals,
kiddie parks and other similar amusement centers.
      (6)   Penal and correctional institutions.
      (7)   Rectories and parish houses.
      (8)   Swimming pools.
      (9)   Mixed uses. When two or more uses are located on the same zoning
lot or within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to the sum of
the separate requirements for each such use shall be provided. No parking space
or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use unless
otherwise authorized by the City Council.
      (10)   Other uses. For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of
parking requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as
required for the most similar listed use.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.111 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS; OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (A)   Location. All required loading berths shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two tons
capacity shall be closer than 50 feet to any property in a residential district
unless completely enclosed by building walls, or a uniformly painted solid
fence or wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet in height. No
permitted or required loading berth shall be located within 25 feet of the
nearest point of intersection of any two streets.
   (B)   Size. Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall be at
least ten feet in width by at least 25 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and
maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
   (C)   Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements.
   (D)   Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches thick, surfaced with not
less than two inches of asphaltic concrete, concrete, or some comparable all-
weather, dustless material.
   (E)   Repair and service. 
      (1)   No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in
conjunction with loading facilities provided in any residential or business
district.
      (2)   Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not while so
allocated be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking
facilities or portions thereof.
      (3)   For special uses other than prescribed for hereinafter, loading
berths adequate in number and size to serve such uses, shall be provided.
      (4)   Uses for which off-street loading facilities are required herein
but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the minimum
prescribed for such required facilities shall be provided with adequate
receiving facilities off any adjacent alley, service drive, or open space on
the same lot which is accessible by motor vehicle.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.112 SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   For the uses listed in the following table, off-street loading berths shall
be provided on the basis of gross floor area of buildings or portions thereof
devoted to such uses in the amounts shown herein.
SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS
USE GROSS FLOOR AREA IN SQUARE FEET REQUIRED NUMBER MINIMUM HORIZONTAL
                                    DIMENSIONS OF BERTHS
                                                                                      REQUIRED
                                                                           GROSS      NUMBER
USE                                                                        FLOOR AREA MINIMUM
                                                                           IN SQUARE  HORIZONTAL
                                                                           FEET       DIMENSIONS
                                                                                      OF BERTHS
                                                                           10,000 to  1 - (10
A.   Hospitals, sanitariums, and other institutional uses.              200,000    ft. x 25
                                                                                      ft.)
                                                                           For each   1
B.   Hotels, clubs and lodges, except as set forth in E. below.         additional additional
                                                                           200,000 or (10 ft. x
                                                                           fraction   25 ft.)
                                                                           10,000 to  1 (10 ft.
                                                                           20,000     x 25 ft.)
                                                                                      
                                                                           20,000 to  1 (10 ft.
C.   Hotels, clubs and lodges when containing any of the following:     150,000    x 25 ft.)
Retail shops, convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business            
or professional offices (other than accessory).                            for each   1
                                                                           additional additional
                                                                           150,000 or (10 ft. x
                                                                           fraction   25 ft.)
                                                                           thereof
                                                                           5,000 to   1 - (10
D.   Retail stores.                                                     10,000     ft. x 25
                                                                                      ft.)
E.   Establishments dispensing food or beverages for consumption on the 10,000 to  2 - (10
premises.                                                                  25,000     ft. x 25
                                                                                      ft.)
                                                                           40,000 to  3 - (10
F.   Motor vehicle and machinery sales.                                 100,000    ft. x 25
                                                                                      ft.)
                                                                                      1 - (10
                                                                           10,000 to  ft. x 25
G.   Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouse and storage  20,000     ft.)
buildings other than accessory).                                                      
                                                                           20,000 to  1 - (10
                                                                           100,000    ft. x 25
                                                                                      ft.)
USE GROSS FLOOR AREA IN SQUARE FEET REQUIRED NUMBER MINIMUM HORIZONTAL
                                    DIMENSIONS OF BERTHS
                                                                                          REQUIRED
                                                                               GROSS      NUMBER
USE                                                                            FLOOR AREA MINIMUM
                                                                               IN SQUARE  HORIZONTAL
                                                                               FEET       DIMENSIONS
                                                                                          OF BERTHS
                                                                               For each   1
                                                                               additional additional
H.   Auditoriums, convention halls, exhibition halls, sports arenas, stadium100,000 or (10 ft. x
                                                                               fraction   25 ft.)
                                                                               thereof.
I.   Bowling alleys.                                                           - -     - -
                                                                               10,000 to  1 - (10
                                                                               100,000    ft. x 25
                                                                                         ft.)
                                                                               For each    
                                                                               additional 1
                                                                               100,000 or additional
                                                                               fraction   (10 ft. x
J.   Banks and offices - business, professional and governmental.           thereof to 25 ft.)
                                                                               500,000     
                                                                                          
                                                                               For each   1
                                                                               additional additional
                                                                               500,000 or (10 ft. x
                                                                               fraction   25 ft.)
                                                                               thereof.
                                                                                          1 - (10
                                                                               5,000 to   ft. x 25
                                                                               10,000     ft.)
                                                                                          
K.   Establishments engaged in production, processing, cleaning, servicing, 10,000 to  1 - (10
testing or repair of materials, goods or products.                             40,000     ft. x 25
                                                                                         ft.)
                                                                               40,000 to   
                                                                               100,000    2 - (10
                                                                                          ft. x 25
                                                                                          ft.)
                                                                               For each   1
                                                                               additional additional
L.   Warehouses and storage buildings.                                      100,000 or (10 ft. x
                                                                               fraction   25 ft.)
                                                                               thereof.
                                                                               8,000 to   1 - (10
                                                                               25,000     ft. x 25
                                                                                         ft.)
M.   Theaters.                                                              For each    
                                                                               additional 1
                                                                               50,000 or  additional
                                                                               fraction   (10 ft. x
                                                                               thereof.   25 ft.)
                                                                               8,000 to   1 - (10
                                                                               100,000    ft. x 25
                                                                                         ft.)
N.   Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.                        For each    
                                                                               additional 1 -
                                                                               100,000 or additional
                                                                               fraction   (10 ft. x
                                                                               thereof.   25 ft.)
 
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
PUBLIC SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND DRIVEWAYS
§ 151.120 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct, reconstruct,
establish or maintain:
      (1)   Any public sidewalk or curb;
      (2)   Any driveway over, across or upon any portion of the public
sidewalk or public parkway, without first having obtained a written permit to
do so from the Building Administrator. No such permit shall be issued for
construction, reconstruction, establishment or maintenance of any such public
sidewalk, curb and/or driveway except in accordance with the provisions herein
contained.
   (B)   Application for a permit must be made in writing upon forms furnished
by the city. Said application shall contain the name and address of the person,
firm or corporation making the application, the name of the contractor or
person who is to construct said public sidewalk, curb and/or driveway and the
proposed location and dimensions of such public sidewalk, curb and/or driveway.
Complete plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Building
Administrator and in accordance with this chapter; and shall be inspected upon
completion by the Building Administrator.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.121 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   All plans and specifications must conform to the following minimum
requirements before the permit for construction, reconstruction, establishment
or maintenance shall be issued.
   (A)   Public sidewalks for all districts shall be constructed of concrete,
having a minimum width of four feet and a thickness of at least four inches.
   (B)   Curbs. Curbs and gutters shall be the integral rolled-type unit of
standard design approved by the City Engineer, not less than:
      (1)   Width = 18 inches.
      (2)   Thickness = 6 inches.
      (3)   Where there is existing curbing in the block, the new curbing must
match and conform to the existing curbing.
   (C)   Driveways. Where paving in the public street is of concrete, and a
concrete driveway is constructed, a one inch bituminous pre-moulded expansion
joint at the back of the curb line and parallel to the center line of the
roadway.
      (1)   Width.
         (a)   Residential or dwelling house   10-18 feet
         (b)   All other districts   10-30 feet
      (2)   Thickness.
         (a)   Concrete   6 inches
         (b)   Asphaltic concrete or all weather surface   3 inches
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.122 RESERVED.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
§ 151.130 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out within
the incorporated limits of the city, the subdivider thereof or his or her agent
shall submit both a preliminary and a final subdivision plan to the city. Said
plans, proposed improvements, and all procedure relating thereto shall in all
respects be in full compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   All lands offered to the city for use as streets, highways, alleys,
parks and other public use shall be referred to the Plan Commission for review
and recommendations before being accepted by the City Council or any other
governing authority.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.131 APPROVALS, INTERPRETATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No land shall be subdivided or filed for record, nor any street laid
out, nor any improvements made to the land, until the plan or plans of the
subdivision or street improvements shall have been duly considered and approved
by action of the City Council. This approval must be in writing and placed on
the original tracing of the final plans.
   (B)   No lot, tract or parcel of land within any such subdivision shall be
offered for sale nor shall any sale, contract for sale, or option be made or
given until such subdivision plans have been properly reviewed by the Plan
Commission and officially approved by the City Council.
   (C)   No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water
drainage, sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service or lighting,
grading, paving or surfacing of streets shall hereafter be made within any such
subdivision by any owner or owners, or his or her or their agent, or by any
public service corporation at the request of such owner or owners or his or her
or their agent until the plans for the subdivision and also the plans for
improvements thereto have been reviewed by the Plan Commission and approved by
the City Council.
   (D)   All interpretations of these rules and regulations are reserved to the
administrative bodies referred to herein.
   (E)   The City Council may vary and make exceptions as set forth herein in
instances where there is sufficient evidence, in its opinion, of hardship
caused by topographic conditions or where any other reasonable deterrents
prevail.
   (F)   Whenever a parcel is divided into lots containing one to three acres,
inclusive, and there are indications that such lots will eventually be
resubdivided into smaller building lots, consideration shall be given to the
street and lot arrangement of the original subdivision so that additional minor
streets can be opened which will permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.132 RULES.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used
in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural, the
singular.
   (B)   The word "building" shall include the word "structure", and the word
"lot" shall include the word "plot".
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.133 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent,
width, grade and location of all streets, alleys or other land to be dedicated
for public use, shall conform to the General Development Plan and to the
Official Map of the city as approved and adopted by the City Council and other
responsible governmental bodies; and shall be considered in their relation to
existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses
of the land to be served by such streets.
   (A)   Streets.
      (1)   All streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety,
and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served
by such streets.
      (2)   Where such is not shown in the General Development Plan or on the
Official Map, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
         (a)   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of
existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or
         (b)   Conform to a plan for the area of neighborhood approved or
adopted by the Plan Commission to meet a particular situation where
topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing
streets impracticable.
      (3)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by thru traffic
will be discouraged.
      (4)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
expressway or primary street, as shown on the General Development Plan or on
the Official Map, the Plan Commission may require marginal access streets,
reverse frontage with screen planting along the rear property line, deep lots
with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of thru
and local traffic.
      (5)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or
expressway, the Plan Commission may require a street approximately parallel to
and on each side of such railroad or expressway, at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential
districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts.
Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of
approach grades and future grade separations.
      (6)   Reserve strips controlling access to streets or alleys shall be
prohibited.
      (7)   All street intersections and confluences should encourage safe
traffic flow.
      (8)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
      (9)   Tangents shall be introduced between reverse curves on all streets
(see Table of Minimum Standards).
      (10)   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a
radius adequate to insure clear sight distances (see Table of Minimum
Standards).
      (11)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60
degrees.
      (12)   No fence, wall, hedge or shrub planting which obstructs sight
lines at elevations between two and six feet above the roadways shall be placed
or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by
the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from the
intersection of the street lines, or in the case of a rounded property corner
from the intersection of the street property lines extended. The same sight
line limitations shall apply on any lot within ten feet from the intersection
of a street property line with the edge of a driveway or alley pavement. No
tree shall be permitted to remain within such distances of such intersections
unless the foliage line, is maintained at a sufficient height to prevent
obstruction of such sight lines.
      (13)   Street right-of-way widths shall be shown in the General
Development Plan and on the Official Map, and where not shown therein shall be
as specified in the Table of Minimum Standards.
      (14)   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations, and where the Plan Commission finds it will
be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within
such tract.
      (15)   Dead-end streets (cul-de-sac) designed to be so permanently, shall
not be longer than 500 feet from the intersection of the origin through the
center of the circle to the end of the right-of-way, and shall be provided at
the closed end with a turnaround having an outside pavement diameter of at
least 80 feet, and a street property line diameter of at least 20 feet greater
than the outside pavement diameter.
      (16)   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused
with the names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be projected
wherever possible. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Plan
Commission.
      (17)   Street gradients and vertical curves shall be as specified in the
Table of Minimum Standards.
      (18)   There shall be sufficient difference in elevation between street
grades and adjoining building sites so that streets can serve as open run-off
channels auxiliary to the storm sewers or as detention ponds without flooding
adjoining building sites.
TABLE OF MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
       RIGHT-OF- WAY ROADWAY WIDTH RADIUS OF  LENGTH OF       TANGENT BETWEEN
STREET WIDTH - NOT   - NOT LESS    HORIZONTAL VERTICAL        REVERSE CURVES,
       LESS THAN     THAN          CURVES,    CURVES, MINIMUM MINIMUM
                                   MINIMUM
               RIGHT-OF- WAY ROADWAY WIDTH RADIUS OF  LENGTH OF TANGENT BETWEEN
STREET         WIDTH - NOT   - NOT LESS    HORIZONTAL VERTICAL  REVERSE CURVES,
               LESS THAN     THAN          CURVES,    CURVES,   MINIMUM
                                           MINIMUM    MINIMUM
Primary        80 ft.        48 ft.        500 ft.    200 ft.   100 ft.
Secondary or   80 ft.        44 ft.        150 ft.    150 ft.   None
Collector
Local - for
Row Houses and 60 ft.        36 ft.        150 ft.    100 ft.   None
Apartments
Local - for
Other          60 ft.        30 ft.        150 ft.    100 ft.   None
Residences
Cul-de-Sac     60 ft.        30 ft.        150 ft.    100 ft.   None
Marginal       60 ft.        24 ft.        150 ft.    100 ft.   None
Access
In Business    80 ft.        56 ft.        150 ft.    100 ft.   None
Districts
 
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
STREET MAXIMUM GRADIENT MINIMUM GRADIENT TANGENT PROPERTY LINES AT STREET
                                         INTERSECTIONS
                                                         TANGENT PROPERTY LINES
STREET                 MAXIMUM GRADIENT MINIMUM GRADIENT AT STREET
                                                         INTERSECTIONS
Primary or Major       5%               0.35%            25 ft.
Secondary or Collector 5%               0.35%            20 ft.
Local - For Row Houses 6%               0.35%            15 ft.
and Apartments
Local - For Other      6%               0.35%            15 ft.
Residences
Cul-de-Sac             6%               0.35%            15 ft.
Marginal Access        6%               0.35%            15 ft.
In Business Districts  2%               0.35%
 
   (B)   Alleys.
      (1)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial, business and industrial
districts, except that the Plan Commission may waive this requirement where
other definite and assured provisions are made for service access, such as off-
street loading, unloading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the
uses proposed.
      (2)    Alleys will be required in all new subdivisions, except as deemed
necessary and on the recommendation of the Plan Commission.
      (3)   The right-of-way width of an alley shall be 30 feet in residential
areas and 40 feet in commercial, business and industrial districts.
      (4)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided, but where necessary corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit
safe vehicular movement.
      (5)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if
unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the
deadend, as determined by the Plan Commission.
   (C)   Easements.
      (1)   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall
be provided for utilities and/or drainage where necessary and shall be at least
15 feet wide.
      (2)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way,
channel or stream, or other body of water, appropriate dedications or easement
provisions, with adequate width or construction to accommodate storm water
drainage through and from the subdivision, shall be made. The width of such
easement or dedication to accommodate a stream or other flood water run-off
channel for operation of maintenance and construction equipment, whichever
width is greater. Such easements and/or dedications shall be drawn on the
subdivision plat and preserved for drainage.
   (D)   Block standards.
      (1)   The maximum lengths of blocks shall be 1,600 feet. Blocks over 600
feet may require cross-walkways. Cross-walk easements not less than ten feet in
width shall be provided where deemed necessary by the Plan Commission at the
approximate centers of the blocks. The use of additional cross-walkways in any
instance to provide safe and convenient access to schools, parks or other
similar destinations will be specified by the Plan Commission or the City
Council.
      (2)   No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made, but blocks
must fit easily into the overall plan of the subdivision and their design must
evidence consideration of lot planning, traffic flow and public areas.
      (3)   Blocks intended for commercial and industrial use must be
designated as such, and the plan must show adequate off-street areas to provide
for parking, loading docks and such other facilities that may be required to
accommodate motor vehicles.
   (E)   Lot standards. All residential lots shall conform to the minimum
requirements of this zoning code.
   (F)   Parks, schools and public areas.
      (1)   Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use area
shown on the General Development Plan or on the Official Map for the city and
adjacent unincorporated areas, is located in whole or in part in a subdivision,
the Plan Commission or the City Council shall require the reservation of such
area for acquisition in whole or in part within the subdivision in those cases
where the Plan Commission and the City Council deem such requirements to be
reasonable. However, in no case shall the total amount of required public areas
which are to be dedicated or reserved for acquisition by the proper governing
authorities exceed 7% of the total gross acreage controlled by one developer.
Such dedication or reservation shall be in addition to any public street
dedications. The acquisition of the additional area needed for parks,
playgrounds, schools or other public use other than streets and alleys, shall
be secured by the proper governing body or arrangements made for securing the
area from the owner within a period not to exceed one year.
      (2)   In subdividing any land within the city due regard shall be shown
for all natural features such as tree growth, water courses, historic spots or
similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to
the proposed development.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88 ; Am. Ord. 95-40, passed 9-11-95)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.134 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Prior to the filing of an application for approval of the preliminary
plan, the subdivider or his or her representative shall submit to the Plan
Commission plans and data as specified below. This step does not require formal
application, fee or submitting of plans to the City Council.
   (B)   The Plan Commission shall request a meeting with the subdivider to
discuss plans and particular problems. At this meeting reference will be made
to the conformity of the subdivider's plans with those of the General
Development Plan and the Official Map.
   (C)   Pre-application information required is as follows:
      (1)   General subdivision information shall describe or outline:
         (a)   The existing conditions of the site and the proposed development
as necessary to supplement the sketch plan as required below.
         (b)   Data on existing covenants, land characteristics, and available
community facilities and utilities.
         (c)   Information describing the subdivision proposal, such as the
number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business
areas, school, playground and park areas.
         (d)   Other public areas, proposed protective covenants, and proposed
utilities and street improvements.
      (2)   Sketch plan on topographic survey shall show in simple sketch form
the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing
conditions.
         (a)   The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch made directly on
a print of the topographic survey.
         (b)   The sketch plan shall include the existing topographic data and
contours of not less than five foot intervals.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.135 PROCEDURE FOR FILING OF PRELIMINARY PLANS.
   (A)   Filing.
      (1)   A preliminary plan for the subdivision of any land within the
corporate limits of the city shall first be submitted in triplicate to the City
Council by a subdivider wishing to divide such land into building lots for sale
or assessment, or both, or wishing to dedicate streets, alleys or other land
for public use. Said preliminary plan shall include all adjacent land held in
ownership or controlled by the subdivider and intended for future development.
      (2)   The City Council shall, by motion, refer the preliminary plan to
the Plan Commission and shall, at the same time, instruct the City Engineer to
collaborate with the subdivider and the Plan Commission in assembling plans for
the design and construction of streets and such other public improvements as
are required herein or any other ordinances. The Plan Commission shall, within
60 days from referral, submit its written recommendations for approval or
disapproval to the City Council.
      (3)   The preliminary plan shall be referred to the Plan Commission at
least ten days prior to the regular meeting of the Plan Commission to receive
action thereon at that meeting.
   (B)   The preliminary plan shall contain the following.
      (1)   Identification and description.
         (a)   Proposed name of the subdivision.
         (b)   Location by township, section, range or by other legal
description.
         (c)   Names and addresses of developer and designer who made the plan.
         (d)   Scale of plan - one inch equals 100 feet, or larger. Tracts of
200 acres or more may be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet.
         (e)   Date.
         (f)   Northpoint.
      (2)   Delineation of existing conditions.
         (a)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision shall be clearly indicated
and the total approximate acreage encompassed thereby.
         (b)   Location, widths and names of all existing or prior platted
streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and
other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, houses and
permanent easements, and section and corporate lines within or adjacent to the
tract.
         (c)   Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided or subdivided
land.
         (d)   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground
facilities within the tract, indicating pipe sizes, manholes and exact
location.
         (e)   Existing zoning of proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts in
zoned areas.
         (f)   Ground elevations on the tract, based on the Paxton datum plane.
For land that slopes less than one-half percent, show not less than one foot
contours; for land that slopes one-half to two percent, show not less than two
foot contours; and for land that slopes more than two percent show not less
than five foot contours.
         (g)   Layout of streets, widths of rights-of-way and also the widths
of cross-walkways and easements.
         (h)   Layout, number and dimensions of lots.
         (i)   Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved
for public use or set aside for use of property owners in the subdivision.
         (j)   Building setback lines, showing dimensions.
         (k)   Easements shall be provided for any and all public utilities
where alleys are not provided. Proper continuity for the utilities from block
to block shall be maintained.
         (l)   Location of surface or subsurface site conditions to ascertain
subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions.
      (3)   The following qualifications shall govern approval of the
preliminary plan.
         (a)   The approval of a preliminary plan by the Plan Commission and
the City Council is tentative only, involving merely the general acceptability
of the layout as submitted.
         (b)   The Plan Commission or the City Council may require such changes
or revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest and needs of the
community.
         (c)   Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering
proposals pertaining to water supply, storm drainage, sewerage and sewage
disposal, gas and electric service, street lighting, telephone service, fire
hydrants, grading, gradients and roadway widths, and the surfacing of streets,
by the City Engineer and the county officials where concerned, prior to the
approval of the final plat by the city.
         (d)   No plan will be approved for the subdivision of land which is
subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely poor drainage
facilities and which would make adequate drainage of the streets impossible.
However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the
opinion of the City Engineer where concerned, make the area completely safe for
residential occupancy and provide adequate street drainage, the preliminary
plan of the subdivision may be approved.
         (e)   Tentative approval shall be effective for a maximum period of 12
months unless, upon application of the developer, the City Council grants an
extension. If the final plat has not been recorded within this time limit, the
preliminary plan must again be submitted for approval.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.136 APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Filing.
      (1)   After the approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council and
the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations, a final plat shall be
submitted to the City Council for approval. The final plat shall be drawn in
ink on tracing cloth, not to exceed 36 inches by 48 inches in size, and shall
be at a scale of 100 feet to the inch. Where necessary, the plat may be on
several sheets with an index map insert showing the location of each sheet in
relation to the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions the final plat may
be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to
the Plan Commission.
      (2)   A final plat submitted to the City Council must be approved or
disapproved within 30 days after the Council's next regular meeting following
the submission.
      (3)   Upon approval of the City Council, the developer shall record the
plat with the Recorder of Ford County within six months. If not recorded within
this time the approval shall be null and void.
      (4)   A print of the final plat, as recorded, will be filed and retained
in the offices of the city.
   (B)   The final plat shall contain the following.
      (1)   Identification and description.
         (a)   Name of subdivision.
         (b)   Location by township, section, range or by other legal
description.
         (c)   Names of owners and certification by a licensed surveyor.
         (d)   Scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger (shown graphically).
         (e)   Northpoint.
         (f)   Date.
      (2)   Delineation.
         (a)   Boundary of plat based on an accurate traverse, with angular and
lineal dimensions.
         (b)   Exact location, width and names of all streets within and
adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all cross-walks.
Proposed street names shall be checked with the proper city officials.
         (c)   True angle and distances to the nearest established street lines
or official monuments (not less than three) which shall be accurately described
in the plat.
         (d)   Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to
the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
         (e)   Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings
and lengths of all arcs.
         (f)   All easements for rights-of-way provided for public services and
utilities.
         (g)   All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths.
         (h)   Accurate location of all monuments, which shall be concrete six
inches by six inches by 30 inches with metal pipe or rod cast in center.
Permanent stone or concrete monuments shall be set at two corners or angles on
the outside boundary. Pipes or other physical markers shall be placed at each
intersection of street center lines. All U.S., state, county or other official
benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property
shall be preserved in precise position.
         (i)   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon, and
of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common use of all property
owners.
         (j)   Building setback lines accurately shown by dimensions.
         (k)   Protective covenants which meet with the approval of the Plan
Commission shall be made a part of the final plat and filed of record with the
County Recorder.
         (l)   Certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that the
plat represents a survey made by him and her and that monuments and markers
shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details
are correct.
         (m)   Notarized certification, by owner or owners or by any mortgage
holder on the record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets
and other public areas.
         (n)   Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments
due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full.
         (o)   Proper form for the approval of the City Council with space for
signature.
         (p)   Approval by signature of city, county and state officials
concerned with the specifications of utility installations.
         (q)   Approval by signature of the Plan Commission. Such approval
shall be as follows:
      I,                                     Chairman of the Paxton Plan
Commission, do certify that on this day of                      , 20     , this
plat of subdivision was duly approved by the Plan Commission of the City of
Paxton, Illinois.
                                                                                
                                    Chairman
This approval of the final plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an
acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other proposed
public way or space shown on the plat.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.137 AGREEMENTS.
   The final plat to be filed of record shall be accompanied by a statement
signed by the owner and subdivider setting forth the following:
   (A)   Plans and specifications for such improvements previously approved by
the City Engineer clearly describing the same.
   (B)   Agreement executed by the owner and the subdivider wherein they agree
to make and install the improvements provided for in this section, in
accordance with the plans and specifications accompanying the final plat.
   (C)   Performance bond executed by the owner and the subdivider and approved
by the City Council. Said performance bond shall be 100% of the estimated cost
of all streets and improvements which this chapter requires and which are shown
on the approved plans and specifications. The amount of the bond shall be fixed
by the City Engineer based on costs which are current in the trades for like
items of construction and installation. All bonds shall be with a company
licensed to do business in the State of Illinois. Performance bonds shall
specify that all the improvements will be installed within a period of two
years.
   (D)   In lieu of the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this section, in
the event that such owner and subdivider shall submit said evidence of the
existence of the binding agreement with a responsible contractor agreeing to
accept all bonds which may be issued under any local improvement proceedings
for the installation of such improvement or a bona fide and subsisting bid by a
responsible person for the purchase for cash of such local improvement bonds at
par value or more, then the requirements of divisions (B) and (C) of this
section may be waived.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.138 REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS.
   No subdivision of land shall be approved without receiving a statement
signed by the City Engineer certifying that the improvements described in the
subdivider's plans and specifications, as prepared by a registered professional
engineer, together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all
ordinances of the city and that they comply with the following.
   (A)   Public water.
      (1)   Per specifications obtained from the City Engineer, water
distribution systems will be provided by the subdivider in all new
subdivisions.
      (2)   All water distribution systems will be connected to the water
distribution system of the city.
   (B)   Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to comply with
specifications established by the City Engineer and shall be connected to the
sanitary disposal system of the city, if reasonably accessible, otherwise to a
specially constructed sanitary sewage disposal plant in accordance with plans
acceptable to the city.
   (C)   Drainage systems.
      (1)   Storm sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision
which shall be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system and which
shall provide an adequate outlet. Adequate facilities for the removal of
surface water shall be provided throughout the entire subdivision.
      (2)   The storm sewer system and its outlet shall be so designed that
when the outlet stream or channel is in full flood, the sewer will not fail to
function.
      (3)   Minimum size of openings for bridges and culverts which are built
or rebuilt must be approved by the City Engineer.
      (4)   Side slopes along a drainage course shall have a minimum slope of
4:1 to facilitate maintenance.
   (D)   Street improvements.
      (1)   Pavements for major streets and alleys and streets or alleys in
areas intended for business, commercial or industrial uses shall be constructed
with either Portland cement concrete with integral curbs or bituminous concrete
with combination concrete curbs and gutters, in accordance with the existing
design criteria and specifications as published by the Department of
Transportation of the State of Illinois. Portland cement pavements shall be not
less than eight inches in thickness. Bituminous concrete pavements shall be
three inches of bituminous concrete laid in two courses over a ten inch minimum
compacted crushed stone (CA-6 or CA-10) base. In the absence of adequate soil
analysis, a soil support (IBR) value of 2.0 shall be used.
      (2)   All other streets and alleys shall be Portland cement pavement,
with integral curbs, not less than six inches in thickness or bituminous
concrete pavement with combination concrete curb and gutters, in accordance
with the existing design criteria and specifications as published by the
Department of Transportation of the State of Illinois, not less than two and
one-half inches in thickness laid in two courses over a seven inch minimum
compacted crushed stone (CA-6 or CA-10) base. In the absence of adequate soil
analysis, a soil support (IBR) value of 2.0 shall be used.
      (3)   The above referenced Design Manual and Highway Design Standards and
any revisions or amendments which may from time to time be made to same, are
hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, to the same extent and with the
same legal effects as if fully set forth therein.
      (4)   All streets within the corporate limits of the city shall be
improved with pavements bounded by integral concrete curbs and gutters.
      (5)   Curbs and gutters on minor residential streets shall be the
integral rolled-type unit of standard design approved by the City Engineer, not
less than 18 inches in overall width and not less than six inches thick where
curb abuts the street pavement.
      (6)   Storm water inlets shall be provided within the roadway improvement
at points specified by the City Engineer.
      (7)   Alleys, where permitted herein, shall be paved full width per city
specifications.
      (8)   All curb corners shall have a radius of not less than 20 feet and
at important intersections not less than 35 feet.
   (E)   Public utilities.
      (1)   All utility lines for telephone and electric services shall be
placed in rear or side line easements when carried on overhead poles.
      (2)   Where telephone and electric service lines are placed underground
entirely throughout a subdivided area, said conduits or cables shall be placed
within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict
with other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be
located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
   (F)   Sidewalks. In the city, concrete sidewalks, having a width of four
feet and a thickness of at least four inches shall be installed along both
sides of all public streets, except cul-de-sacs, as part of street improvements
required by the Plan Commission and/or the City Council.
   (G)   Landscaping.
      (1)   All unpaved areas within the street rights-of-way shall be seeded
or sodded. Before the release of the 15 month maintenance bond can be
recommended by the City Engineer, all unpaved areas between the edge of the
road pavement and the right-of-way line must support an adequate mat of grass.
Provisions shall be made to assure the growth of all landscaping.
      (2)   (a)   Street trees shall be planted on both sides of each proposed
street except where there are existing trees present and preserved as
determined by the City Engineer. Street trees newly planted shall be no further
apart than 50 feet and the type of tree shall be limited to those varieties as
approved by the city.
         (b)   Newly planted street trees shall be at least two and one-half
inches in caliper, measured one foot from the ground.
      (3)   Protective screen planting may be required to secure a reasonably
effective physical barrier between residential properties and adjoining uses to
minimize adverse conditions of sight and sound.
   (H)   Street signs. Street signs of the type approved by the City Council
shall be installed at each intersection and shall indicate the street names as
shown on the final plat. Street signs shall be set in the ground according to
standard details obtainable from the City Engineer.
   (I)   Street lighting. Provisions shall be made for the adequate lighting of
public streets within the proposed subdivision in accordance with the standards
and requirements established by the City Council.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.139 CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   No construction of improvements within the proposed subdivision shall
begin until the final plat has been approved by the City Council.
   (B)   All public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions
herein shall be inspected during the course of construction by the City
Engineer or a duly designated deputy.
   (C)   During the course of construction of the improvements, the subdivider
shall be required to notify the City Engineer 24 hours before each of the
following operations in order that the Engineer or a duly designated deputy may
make required inspections.
      (1)   Before base material is deposited in place for inspection of all
street sub-grades.
      (2)   Before bituminous topping is placed on the base material, for
inspection of the base construction.
      (3)   Before any back-filling operations whatsoever following the
installation of water, sanitary or storm sewers or any other underground
improvement.
      (4)   The subdivider shall pay the cost of all inspections. The fee shall
be established by the city based on current rates and standard engineering
practice.
   (D)   Any trenches, excavations or underground improvements shall be
backfilled with screened aggregates of such character as to prevent sinking and
undermining of surface improvements such as streets, curbs and sidewalks.
   (E)   All service boxes and buffalo boxes shall be located in the parkway
and with due regard for the location of surface improvements such as sidewalks.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.140 ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Acceptance of streets and improvements is conditional, based upon a 15
month maintenance period which commences with the date of the beginning of
actual construction of such streets and improvements. A maintenance bond
running to the City Council is required to be written and accepted by the City
Council at such time as the streets and improvements are accepted. The amount
of the maintenance bond shall be one-tenth the estimated cost of the streets
and improvements and shall be set by the City Engineer. At the end of the 15
month period, all of the accepted improvements being in satisfactory condition,
the maintenance bond shall be released by the City Council.
   (B)   Final acceptance of all streets and improvement is the responsibility
of the City Council.
   (C)   When the subdivider has completed the construction of the improvements
he or she shall notify the City Engineer by letter (four copies) of this fact,
and formally request a final inspection by said party or a duly designated
deputy. In this letter he or she shall briefly describe all improvements and he
or she shall enclose four copies of the subdivision plan which shows these
improvements. No later than 14 days after receipt of this letter by the City
Engineer he or she, or a duly designated deputy, shall make his or her
inspection. The subdivider shall pay the cost of this inspection. The fee shall
be established by the city, based on current rates and standard engineering
practice.
   (D)   No later than seven days after inspection of the subdivision
improvements, the subdivider shall be notified by the City Engineer in writing
of the results of the inspection.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.141 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   The Plan Commission may recommend variations from these requirements in
specific cases which, in its opinion, do not affect the general plan or the
spirit of the zoning code. Such recommendations, in writing with the reasons
therefore, shall be communicated to the City Council. The City Council may then
approve variations from these requirements in specific cases which, in its
opinion, do not affect the general plan or the spirit of the zoning code.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.142 BUILDING PERMIT.
   No building permit shall be issued by any governing official for the
construction of any building, structure or improvement to the land or any lot
within a subdivision as defined herein, which has been approved for platting or
replatting, until all requirements herein have been fully complied with.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.143 OCCUPANCY PERMIT.
   No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the use
of any structure within a subdivision approved for platting or replatting until
required utility facilities have been installed and made ready to service the
property, and that roadways providing access to the subject lot or lots have
been constructed, or that are in the course of construction.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.144 BLASTING.
   No blasting shall take place in connection with any work in a subdivision
until appropriate city authorities have been notified and the appropriate
ordinances complied with.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88) Penalty, see
§ 151.999
§ 151.145 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Building Administrator is designated as the subdivision administrator of
the city to be responsible for enforcing these subdivision regulations. The
Building Administrator shall have the power and shall see that the provisions
of this chapter are properly enforced.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.146 RECORD OF PLATS.
   The Building Administrator shall keep a record of all final plats approved
by the City Council showing the date of approval, the date of recordation, the
subdivision name and the legal description of the property involved. This
record shall be available for inspection by the public during regular business
hours.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM REGULATIONS
§ 151.150 WECS TOWERS.
   Pursuant to the ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-26, the city may regulate wind
farms and electric generating wind devices within its zoning jurisdiction and
within the 1.50 mile radius surrounding its zoning jurisdiction. The city
desires to prohibit WECS towers within its zoning jurisdiction and within
certain areas of the 1.50 mile radius surrounding its city zoning jurisdiction.
All other areas within the 1.50 mile radius surrounding the city’s zoning
jurisdiction that the city has not prohibited WECS towers, the city defers the
construction, erection and installation of WECS towers within this area of Ford
County, Illinois, to the County of Ford regulations which require special use
permits that are regulated by the zoning enforcing officer of the County of
Ford, Illinois. Standards for WECS and WECS towers in these areas are regulated
by Appendix A (Standards for Wind Energy Conversion Systems) to the Ford County
Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 09-07, passed 1-19-09)
§ 151.151 QUADRANTS OF THE CITY FOR WECS PURPOSES.
   (A)   For the purposes of §§
151.150 and
151.152 of this subchapter, the city is hereby divided into four quadrants
determined as follows:
      (1)   The east and west is divided by Route 45, which runs in a northerly
and southerly direction through the city; and
      (2)   The north and south is divided by Route 9, which runs in a easterly
and westerly direction through the city.
   (B)   That part of the city lying north of Route 9 and west of Route 45
shall hereinafter be referred to as Quadrant 1. That part of the city lying
north of Route 9 and east of Route 45 shall hereinafter be referred to as
Quadrant 2. That part of the city lying south of Route 9 and east of Route 45
shall hereinafter be referred to as Quadrant 3. That part of the city lying
south of Route 9 and west of Route 45 shall hereinafter be referred to as
Quadrant 4.
(Ord. 09-07, passed 1-19-09)
§ 151.152 PROHIBITION OF WECS.
   (A)   Quadrant 1. In Quadrant 1, no WECS tower shall be constructed,
erected, installed nor located within the city limits of the city, nor within a
distance of one mile from the legally established boundaries of the city, such
boundary to be determined as of the date 180 days prior to the filing of an
application for a special use permit for a WECS tower with the city or with the
County of Ford, Illinois, which distance shall be measured from the closest
city corporate limit boundary line to the center of the WECS tower foundation.
   (B)   Quadrant 2. In Quadrant 2, no WECS tower shall be constructed,
erected, installed nor located within the city limits of the city nor within a
distance of 1/2 mile from the legally established boundaries of the city such
boundary to be determined as of the date 180 days prior to the filing of an
application for a special use permit for a WECS tower with the city or with the
County of Ford, Illinois, which distance shall be measured from the closest
city corporate limit boundary line to the center of the WECS tower foundation.
   (C)   Quadrant 3. In Quadrant 3, no WECS tower shall be constructed,
erected, installed nor located within the city limits of the city, nor within a
distance of one mile from the legally established boundaries of the city such
boundary to be determined as of the date 180 days prior to the filing of an
application for a special use permit for a WECS tower with the city or with the
County of Ford, Illinois, which distance shall be measured from the closest
city corporate limit boundary line to the center of the WECS tower foundation.
   (D)   Quadrant 4. In Quadrant 4, no WECS tower shall be constructed,
erected, installed nor located within the city limits of the city nor within a
distance of one mile from the legally established boundaries of the city such
boundary to be determined as of the date 180 days prior to the filing of an
application for a special use permit for a WECS tower with the city or with the
County of Ford, Illinois, which distance shall be measured from the closest
city corporate limit boundary line to the center of the WECS tower foundation.
(Ord. 09-07, passed 1-19-09)
§ 151.153 SPECIAL USE VARIATIONS.
   A special use variation to the provisions of §§
151.150,
151.151 and
151.152 may be granted pursuant to and subject to the requirements of §
151.159 of this code.
(Ord. 09-07, passed 1-19-09)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.155 ENFORCING OFFICER.
   The administrator of the zoning code for the city shall be the Building
Administrator, who shall be responsible for enforcing the code.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.156 BUILDING PERMITS, CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE AND USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Building permits. 
      (1)   No building, fence or other structure shall hereafter be erected or
structurally altered until a building permit shall be issued by the Building
Administrator stating that the building, fence or other structure and use of
land comply with the regulations of the ordinances of the city.
      (2)   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a
plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot or lots to
be built upon, the size of the building, fence or other structure to be erected
or structurally altered, its location on the lot or lots in relation to
adjoining streets and lot lines, and such other information as may be necessary
to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A careful record of such
applications and plot plans shall be kept in the office of the Building
Administrator.
      (3)   A building permit is valid for the following time period:
         (a)   Less than 4,000 square feet = one year.
         (b)   More than 4,000 square feet = two years.
         (c)   For just cause, as determined by the Building Administrator,
with the advice and consent of the License, Permit, and Zoning Committee
Chairperson and the Mayor, a building permit may be extended once for six
months. The application for extension must be submitted in writing at least ten
days before the expiration of the initial building permit.
   (B)   Certificate of compliance. No building or structure hereafter erected
or structurally altered shall be occupied and used until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the Building Administrator. The certificate of
compliance shall be issued only after the Building Administrator makes a
finding that the building or structure has been erected or structurally altered
in conformance with the provisions herein and other health and building laws
and in accordance with a building permit.
   (C)   Certificates of compliance shall be applied for coincident with the
application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the
erection and alterations of such building have been satisfactorily completed. A
record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Building
Administrator and copies furnished on request, to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
   (D)   Certificate of continued occupancy of non-conforming uses.
Certificates for the continued occupancy of non-conforming uses existing at the
time of passage of this chapter, or made non- conforming by this chapter shall
state that the use is a non-conforming one and does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter. The Building Administrator shall notify the owners
of the property being used as a non-conforming use and shall furnish said owner
with a certificate of occupancy for such non- conforming use.
   (E)   Continuance of existing uses. Nothing herein shall prevent the
continuance of the present lawful occupancy or lawful use of any existing
building or zoning lot, except as may be necessary for the safety of life and
property and except as provided herein.
   (F)   Administrative occupancy permits. No dwelling unit shall be occupied
as a community residence until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by
the Building Administrator. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a
community residence unless:
      (1)   The community residence is located at least 1,000 feet from any
existing community residence, as measured from lot line to lot line; and
      (2)   (a)   The applicant demonstrates that it has either obtained or is
eligible for state or local licensing or certification to operate the proposed
community residence, or that the proposed community residence is licensed or
certified or eligible for licensing or certification.
         (b)   The Building Administrator may revoke a certificate of occupancy
for a community residence if its license or certification, or the operator's
license or certification to operate community residences, is revoked. A
certificate of occupancy is not transferable to another operator or to another
location. (Changed by Ordinance #90-38).
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 04-07, passed 3-8-04; Am. Ord. 14-15,
passed 7-14-14) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.157 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Planning and Zoning Commission established.
      (1)   There is hereby established a Planning and Zoning Commission. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall serve respectively for the following terms:
         (a)   One for one year;
         (b)   Two for two years;
         (c)   Two for three years;
         (d)   Two for four years.
      (2)   The successor of each member so appointed shall serve for a period
of three years.
      (3)   Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor subject confirmation by the
City Council, for the unexpired term.
      (4)   One of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
designated by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, as Chairperson
of the Commission and shall hold such office as Chairperson until a successor
is appointed. Such Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Acting
Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
   (B)   Authority.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission hereby created shall have the
powers and duties designated by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-12-4 through 11-12-
12, and as more particularly specified in this section. These references
related to the planning portion of the Planning Commission and Zoning Board of
Appeals.
      (2)   In addition, as to the zoning powers and duties of the combined
Planning Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals, they are to be found in ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-13-1 through 11-13-20, § 11-15-1 and §§ 11-15.1-1 through
11-15.1-5.
      (3)   Wherever the City of Paxton Code of Ordinances references "Planning
Commission" and/or "Zoning Board of Appeals," such reference shall mean the
Planning and Zoning Commission referenced herein which shall have the powers,
authority, and duties previously assigned to the Planning Commission and/or
Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (C)   General. In addition to as elsewhere provided, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive plan
of public improvements, looking to the present and future development and
growth of the city. Such a plan, after its adoption by the City Council, shall
include reasonable requirements in reference to streets, alleys and public
grounds within the corporate limits and in contiguous territory outside of the
distance not more than one and one-half miles from such limits, and not
included in a municipality, the requirements to be effective whenever such
lands shall be subdivided after the adoption of such plan.
      (2)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council, from time to time,
such changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by the
City Council.
      (3)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council, from time to time,
plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the
official plan.
      (4)   To give aid to the officials of the city charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the
making of such improvements and generally promote the realization of the
official plan.
      (5)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
      (6)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and
other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
      (7)   To exercise such powers granted under authority of an act of
general assembly of the State of Illinois, entitled the Illinois Municipal
Code, as may be conferred by the City Council.
   (D)   Zoning duties.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet at the call of the
Chair and at such other times as it may determine. All meetings shall be open
to the public. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings including findings of fact, all its determinations and decisions,
which minutes shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be
public record.
      (2)   An appeal may be taken to the Planning and Zoning Commission by any
person, group or organization, public or private, affected by a decision by the
Building Inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within 45 days by filing with
the Building Inspector and with the Planning and Zoning Commission, a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from unless, the Building Inspector
certifies to the Planning and Zoning Commission after the notice of appeal has
been filed with him or her that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in
which case the proceedings shall not stay otherwise than by restraining order,
which may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by a court of
record on application on notice to the Building Inspector and on due cause
shown.
   (E)   Powers. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have all the powers
and duties prescribed by law and by this section, which are more particularly
specified as follows:
      (1)   Interpretation/appeals. Upon appeal from a decision, order,
requirement, or determination by the Building Inspector or other administrative
official to decide any question involving the interpretation of any provision
of this section, including determination of the exact location of any district
boundary if there is uncertainty with respect thereto.
      (2)   Variances.
         (a)   To vary or adapt, subject to the following provisions, the
strict application of any of the requirements of this section in the case of
exceptionally irregular, narrow, or shallow lots or other exceptional physical
conditions, whereby such strict application would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of the
reasonable use of the land or building involved, but in no other case.
         (b)   No variance in the strict application of any provisions of this
section shall be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission unless it finds:
            1.   That there are special circumstances or conditions, fully
described in the findings, applying to the land or building for which the
variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land
or buildings and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the
neighborhood, and that the circumstances or conditions are such that the strict
application of the provisions of this section would deprive the applicant of
the reasonable use of such land or building; and
            2.   That, for reasons fully set forth in the findings, the
granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or
building and that the variance, as granted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, is the minimum variance that will accomplish the purpose; and
            3.   That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this section and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare or in conflict with
the general plan. In granting any variance, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall prescribe any conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable.
      (3)   Planning for Zoning Ordinance, land use, and city growth matters.
      (4)   Consider and act upon any and all matters customarily assigned to a
Municipal Planning Commission and all matters customarily assigned to a
Municipal Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (5)   All matters specifically referred to it by this section, statute,
or the City Council.
   (F)   Procedures.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act in strict accordance
with the procedures specified by law and by this section. All appeals and
applications made to the Commission shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. Every appeal or application shall refer to
the specific provision of the ordinance involved and shall exactly set forth
the interpretation that is claimed, the use for which the special use permit is
sought, or the detail of the variance sought to be granted, as the case may be.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of the appeal or application and give due notice thereof to the
parties and decide the matter within a reasonable time. Hearings and all
proceedings of the Commission shall be in conformity with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-13-1 et seq. All hearings shall be open to the public and any party in
interest may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Commission Chair or
Acting Chair shall have the power to administer oaths and shall conduct the
meeting.
      (3)   Every decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be by
motion or resolution which shall contain the findings of the Commission in the
particular case. Each decision shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk
by case number under one or the other following headings: Interpretations or
Variances or Special Use Applications, together with all documents pertaining
thereto.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify the City Council of
each special use permit application with its recommendation and each variance
granted under the provisions of this section.
      (5)   The concurring vote of four members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission is necessary to revise any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Building Inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant
on any matter upon which it is required to pass, or to affect any variation in
the ordinance, or to recommend any variation or modification in the ordinance
to corporate authorities.
      (6)   The proceedings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
subject to and in compliance with all applicable state laws and other legal
principles. If the provisions of this section conflict with state statute, the
statute shall prevail.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 17-21, passed 5-9-17; Am. Ord. 21-19,
passed 12-14-21)
§ 151.158 VARIATIONS.
   (A)   Application. An application for a variation of the regulations of this
chapter may be made by a property owner or his or her agent to the Zoning Board
of Appeals. Such application shall be made in writing, stating the variation
requested, the location of the property owner, and cause for the requested
variation.
   (B)   Public hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable
time and place for the public hearing and shall give notice of the time and
place of the public hearing, published at least once,
but not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days, before the hearing in one or
more newspapers with a general circulation within the community.
   (C)   Report on findings. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall report its
findings and recommendations to the City Council within 30 days after the
public hearing.
   (D)   City Council action.  
      (1)   Upon receipt of the report and recommendations from the Board of
Appeals to grant or deny the variation, the City Council, by ordinance, without
further public hearing, may adopt the proposed variation or may refer it back
to the Board of Appeals for further consideration, and any proposed variation
which fails to receive the approval of the Board of Appeals shall not be passed
except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of all the members of the City
Council. In making any variation, the City Council shall be governed by the
same considerations and restrictions as set forth above.
      (2)   No variation in any case shall be made by the City Council without
a hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals as required hereinabove nor without a
report thereof having been made by the Board of Appeals to the City Council,
and every such report shall be accompanied by a finding of fact specifying the
reasons for the report.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.159 SPECIAL USE VARIATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The development and execution of a zoning ordinance is based upon
the division of the city into districts within which districts the use of land
and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation
to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there
are uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly
classified in any particular district or districts without consideration, in
each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public
need for the particular use at the particular location. Such uses fall into two
categories;
         (a)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest;
         (b)   Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
      (2)   The special use variations may be recommended by the Zoning Board
of Appeals to the City Council following a public hearing and based upon the
evidence presented at such hearings as prescribed herein for the special use
variation.
   (B)   Initiation of special use variation. Any person owning or having an
interest in the subject property may file an application to use such land for
one or more of the uses provided for herein in the zoning district in which the
land is situated.
   (C)   Application for special use variation. 
      (1)   Any application for a use variation shall be filed with the City
Clerk’s office on a form prescribed by the Building Administrator. A filing fee
of $50 will accompany the filing of the application. The City Clerk’s office
shall provide the Building Administrator with a copy of such application.
      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by such plans and/or data
prescribed by the Building Administrator and shall include a statement in
writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed use
variation will conform to the standards set forth herein.
   (D)   Hearing on application. Upon receipt in proper form, of the
application and statement referred to above, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
hold at least one public hearing. At least 15 days in advance of each hearing,
notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city. In addition, notice of all hearings shall
be sent to each civic or property owners' organization requesting notices of
hearings on use variations or amendments.
   (E)   Authorization. For each application of special use variation, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall report to the City Council it's findings and
recommendations, including the stipulations of additional conditions and
guarantees that such conditions will be complied with when they are deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest. The City Council may grant
or deny any application for a use variation provided, however, that in the
event of written protest against any proposed special use variation, signed and
acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately adjoining the
property proposed for a special use variation, or by the owners of 20% of the
frontage across an alley or directly opposite therefrom, such use variation
shall not be granted except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all the
members of the City Council.
   (F)   Standards. No special use variation shall be recommended by the Zoning
Board of Appeals unless said Board of Appeals shall find that:
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the use will not be
detrimental or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general
welfare.
      (2)   The use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other
property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor
substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
      (3)   The establishment of the use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the
district.
      (4)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and/or other necessary
facilities have been or are being provided.
      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
      (6)   The use shall in all other respects conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations
may in each instance be modified by the City Council pursuant to the
recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 11-07, passed 4-11-11)
§ 151.160 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Planned developments are of such substantially different character
from other special use variations that specific and additional standards and
exceptions are hereby established to govern the recommendations of the Zoning
Board of Appeals and the action of the City Council.
   (B)   In the case of residential, business or manufacturing planned
developments, the Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend, and the City Council
may authorize, that there be in part of the area of such development and for
the duration of such development, specified uses not permitted by the use
regulations for the district in which said development is located, provided the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall find that:
      (1)   The uses permitted by such variation are necessary or desirable and
are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development;
      (2)   The uses permitted by such special use variation are not of such a
nature or so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding
neighborhood;
      (3)   Not more than 20% of the ground area or of the gross floor area of
such development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by said special use
variations;
      (4)   In a manufacturing planned development such additional uses allowed
by use variation shall conform with the performance standards of the district
in which the development is located, as set forth herein;
      (5)   The special use variation so allowed is reflected by the
appropriate zoning district symbols and so recorded on the zoning map.
   (C)   Bulk regulations. In the case of any planned developments, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may recommend and the City Council may authorize, variations
to the applicable bulk regulations of the zoning code within the boundaries of
such development, provided that the Zoning Board of Appeals shall find that:
      (1)   Such variation shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an
integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of such
development, as well as of neighboring properties, than would be obtained under
the bulk regulations of the zoning code for buildings developed on separate
zoning lots.
      (2)   The over-all minimum lot area of maximum lot coverage of a
residential planned development would not exceed by more than 15% the
requirements for individual uses in the district in which such planned
development is located.
      (3)   The minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements herein shall
not be decreased by more than 15% in any such development containing
residential uses, and that there shall be available to each residential
building and immediately adjacent thereto (including the land area upon which
it is erected) the minimum amount of land area required for such building under
the lot area per dwelling unit provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   Spacing between principal buildings shall be at least equivalent to
such spacing as would be required between buildings similarly developed under
terms of this chapter on separate zoning lots, due consideration being given to
the openness normally afforded by intervening streets and alleys.
      (5)   Along the periphery of such planned developments, yards shall be
provided as required by the regulations of the district in which said
development is located.
   (D)   Conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of any use variation,
the Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend and the City Council shall stipulate,
such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance and operation of the special use variation as deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance
with the standards and requirements specified herein. In all cases in which
special use variations are granted, the City Council shall require such
evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be, complied with.
   (E)   Effect of denial of a use variation. No application of a special use
variation which has been denied wholly or in part by the City Council shall be
resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial,
except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to
be valid by the Zoning Board of Appeals and the City Council.
   (F)   Revocation. In any case where a special use variation has not been
established within one year after the date of granting thereof, then without
further action by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the City Council, the special
use variation authorization shall be null and void.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.161 CHANGE OF ZONING.
   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the Zoning
Board of Appeals the power or authority to alter or change the zoning code or
any use district made a part of the zoning map; such power and authority being
reserved to the City Council, and the Board of Appeals shall not have any power
or authority with respect to any alterations or change of the zoning code
except to make recommendations to the City Council in such specific cases as
may properly come before the Board of Appeals.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.162 MISCELLANEOUS.
   (A)   No order for a use variation permitting the erection or alteration of
a building shall be valid for a period longer than six months unless such use
is established within such period; provided, however, that where such use
permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such
order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection
or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is
started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit.
   (B)   No order for a use variation permitting a use of a building or
premises shall be valid for a period longer than six months unless such use is
established within such period; provided, however, that where such use
permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such
order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection
or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is
started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.163 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
   The appeal shall stay all proceedings and furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the Building Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of
Appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property; in which case the proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals or by Court of Record on application, with notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken, and all due causes shown.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.164 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Petition for amendment.  
      (1)   The City Council, the Plan Commission, and other government bodies
and any private petitioner may apply for an amendment in the text herein, and
in the accompanying zoning map made a part hereof. Any petition for an
amendment by a private party shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount
determined by §
151.166, which fee shall be deposited with the City Clerk and no part of the
fee shall be returnable to the petitioner. The City Clerk’s office shall
provide the Building Administrator with a copy of the petition for amendment.
      (2)   The petition for amendment shall state the property location for
which the amendment is requested, the name of the property owner, and a
statement describing the amendment requested.
   (B)   Review of petition. The regulations imposed and the zoning districts
created hereunder may be amended by ordinance, but no amendment shall be made
by the City Council without public notice and without a public hearing before
the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall hold the public hearing and
forward its recommendations to the City Council within 45 days of the date the
petition was submitted to the Plan Commission unless it is withdrawn by the
petitioner.
   (C)   Notice of public hearing. The Plan Commission shall cause notice of
public hearing of petitioner’s application to be given in the following manner:
      (1)   By publishing notice of the time and place of such public hearing
at least once, not more than 30 days and not less than 15 days before the
hearing in one or more newspapers published in the city, or if no newspaper is
published therein, then in one or more newspapers with a general circulation in
the city;
      (2)   By causing said notice to contain the particular location for which
the amendment is requested, as well as a brief statement describing the
proposed amendment;
      (3)   By notifying such property owners, groups or organizations as it
deems desirable of the proposal.
   (D)   Written protest. In the event of written protest against the proposed
amendment, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage
proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately
adjoining or across the alley or rear line therefrom, or by the owners of 20%
of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered as to
such regulations or zoning district, filed with the City Clerk, such amendment
shall not be passed by the City Council except by the favorable vote of two-
thirds of all the elected members of the City Council.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 12-57, passed 11-13-12; Am. Ord. 2024-02-
02, passed 2-13-24)
§ 151.165 INTERPRETATION: PURPOSE AND CONFLICT.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions herein, they shall be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the safety, health, convenience,
comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to
interfere with, abrogate, annul, or repeal any ordinances, rules or regulations
previously adopted, and not in conflict with any of the provisions herein or
which shall be adopted, pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or
premises, nor is it intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, except that where
this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings or
premises or upon the height of buildings or requires large open spaces than are
imposed or required by such other ordinances or such other easements, covenants
or agreements, the provisions here shall control.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
§ 151.166 FEES.
   Fees pertaining to building permits, petitions for zoning amendments, use
permits, certificates of compliance, variations and for appeals to the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be paid to the City Clerk who shall account for same at
regular intervals to the City Council. Each license fee paid to the city shall
not be refunded.
   (A)   Building permits, as follows:
      (1)   New deck                     $20
      (2)   Fence                        $20
      (3)   Shed, less than 200 square feet            $20
      (4)   Permits issued for buildings in a Residential
            District or a Mobile Home District         $.15 per square feet
      (5)   Permits issued for buildings in a Business or a
            a Manufacturing District            $.25 per square feet
      (6)   Permit extension pursuant to §
151.156(A)(3)(c)   $0
      (7)   Square feet is calculated as the outside dimension of the
structure, including a garage, deck or porch.
      (8)   The minimum fee for a building permit is $20.
      (9)   Sheds larger than 200 square feet will be charged the fee as
provided in divisions (A)(4) or (A)(5) above.
   (B)   Petition for the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Planning Commission.
The petition will be accompanied with the following filing fee to the City
Clerk's office:
      (1)   Variation                     $100
      (2)   Rezoning                     $100
      (3)   Zoning amendment                  $100
   (C)   Mobile home/trailer (trailer park only):
      (1)   Application fee                  $50
      (2)   Application to change sanitary facilities fee      $25
      (3)   Annual trailer space license fee            $20
      (4)   Sidewalk, curbing and driveway permit fee, per lot   $5
   (D)   Subdivisions. At the time the required copies of the preliminary plats
are submitted to the City Council, a fee in accordance with the following
schedule, payable to the city, for the cost of examining preliminary plats,
shall be paid:
      (1)   One to ten lots                  $250
      (2)   Eleven lots and over               $250 plus $5 per lot for each
over ten
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. 07-21, passed 7-9-07; Am. Ord. 14-15,
passed 7-14-14; Am. Ord. 2024-02-02, passed 2-13-24)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or
refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not less than $5 and not more than $200 for each
offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
APPENDIX A: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
   (A)   Permitted uses.
 R-1 R-2 R-3
                                                                    R-1 R-2 R-3
One-family detached dwellings                                       x   x   x
Parks, forest preserved and recreation areas, when publicly owned   x   x   x
and operated.
Home occupations.                                                   x   x   x
A temporary real estate office in conjunction with a new housing
development, limited to the selling or renting of new units in such
developments and in no case to be in operation for more than one    x   x   x
year following completion of construction of said housing
development.
Permitted accessory uses, including off-street parking facilities
in accordance with the provisions of §§                           x   x   x
151.105 -
151.112.
Planned developments, residential, as defined herein.               x   x   x
Schools, public, denominational or private, elementary and high,    x   x   x
including playground and athletic fields auxiliary thereto.
Churches, rectories, seminaries, convents, monasteries, and similar
religious institutions, including dormitories and other accessory   x   x   x
uses required for operation.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to   x   x   x
exceed the completion date of such construction.
Family community residences. The sponsoring agency must obtain an
administrative occupancy permit prior to establishing a family      x   x
community residence. (Changed by Ordinance #90-38).
Family or group community residences. The sponsoring agency must
obtain an administrative occupancy permit prior to establishing a           x
community residence. (Changed by Ordinance #90-38).
 R-1 R-2 R-3
                                                                                      R- R- R-
                                                                                      1  2  3
Transitional uses. Any of the following transitional uses shall be permitted on a
zoning lot where the side of such zoning lot abuts upon the side or rear of a
railroad right-of-way or a zoning lot in a business or manufacturing district or is
separated only by an alley, provided such transitional use does not extend more than  x  x  x
100 feet from a railroad right-of-way or from the boundary of a business or
manufacturing district which it adjoins, and provided the location and proposed
development are first approved by the Plan Commission after public hearing.
   1.   Two-family dwelling with the same lot area requirements as in the R-3 Gexerxl x
Residence District.
   2.   Principal offices of professional persons for the practice of medicine,
dentistry, law, architecture, and engineering provided that each such office is
situated in the same dwelling unit as the home of the occupant, with not more than    x  x  x
two persons other than members of the occupant's immediate family being employed and
provided further that the residential character of the exterior of the dwelling is
maintained.
   3.   Public parking areas, when located and developed as required in §§
151.105 -                                                                             x  x  x
151.112.
   4.   Offices of physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, real estate brokers,
and other professional occupations, when conducted in a residential structure used
primarily as a home and when located on lots having a side line adjoining a lot in a        x
business or manufacturing district, or adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, or when
facing a business or manufacturing district or railroad right-of way directly across
a street or alley, provided that:
      a.   The lot on which the transitional use is located does not extend more than
75 feet from the adjoining business or manufacturing district, or more than 120 feet
in depth from the street line in cases where the lot does not adjoin but faces a
business or manufacturing district.
      b.   The home occupations are conducted in conjunction with the use of a
dwelling unit as a home by the occupant thereof, with not more than two employees
other than members of the related family, and that the residential character of the         x
exterior of the dwelling is not changed. Medical clinics are not included or
permitted.
 
   (B)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
in accordance with the provisions of the administrative section.
 R-1 R-2 R-3
                                                                   R-1 R-2 R-3
Cemeteries, including crematories and mausoleums in conjunction    x   x   x
therewith if not located within 500 feet of any dwelling.
Colleges and universities, including dormitories, fraternities,
sororities and other accessory buildings and structures when       x   x   x
located on the college or university grounds, but not including
business colleges or trade schools when operated for profit.
Community residences that fail to meet all requirements for a
certificate of occupancy, excluding community residences or                x
operators denied a required local or state license. (Changed by
Ordinance #90-38).
Family community residences that fail to meet all requirements for
a certificate of occupancy, excluding family community residences  x   x
or operators denied a required local or state license. (Changed by
Ordinance #90-38).
Filling of holes, pits, or lowlands with non-combustible material  x   x   x
free from refuse and food wastes.
Group community residences. (Changed by Ordinance #90-38)          x   x
Half-way houses. (Changed by Ordinance #90-38)                     x   x   x
Hospices for persons with contagious diseases. (Changed by         x   x   x
Ordinance #90-38)
Institutions for the aged and for children.                        x   x   x
 R-1 R-2 R-3
                                                                   R-1 R-2 R-3
Medical and dental clinics.                                        x   x   x
Philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions.                       x   x   x
Planned residential or institutional developments, as regulated in x   x   x
the Administrative Section.
Private clubs or lodges, except those the chief activity of which  x   x   x
is a service customarily carried on as a business.
Private recreational areas or camps, when not operated for profit. x   x   x
Public service uses:
1.   Filtration plant, pumping station and water reservoir;
2.   Sewage treatment plant;
3.   Police and fire station;                                   x   x   x
4.   Telephone exchange;
5.   Telephone booth, public;
6.   Electric substations and booster stations;
7.   Other governmental uses.
Radio and television towers, commercial.                           x   x   x
Railroad rights-of-way and trackage, but not including
classification yards, terminal facilities or maintenance           x   x   x
facilities.
Rest homes, nursing homes, hospitals and sanitariums, for human    x   x   x
beings only.
Sanitary land fill, when operated or supervised by the City        x   x   x
Engineer.
Schools, day or nursery, public or private.                        x   x   x
Off-street parking areas, provided there is a need for this
facility in the interest of public necessity and convenience, and          x
that no appropriate site is available in nearby business or
manufacturing districts.
Funeral homes.                                                             x
Museums and art galleries, public only.                                    x
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
APPENDIX B: BUSINESS DISTRICTS
   (A)   Permitted uses.
 B-1 B-2 B-3
                                                                    B-1 B-2 B-3
Agricultural implement sales and service.                                   x
Air conditioning and heating and sales and service.                 x   x   x
Ambulance service.                                                      x   x
Amusement establishments--bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls,      x   x
skating rinks, and other similar places of recreation.
Antique shops.                                                      x   x   x
Art and school supply stores.                                       x   x   x
Art galleries and studios.                                          x   x   x
Auction rooms.                                                          x   x
Automobile accessory store, where there is no driveway entrance         x   x
across the sidewalk into the main building.
Automobile laundries.                                                   x   x
Automobile service stations.                                            x   x
Automobile washing, including the use of mechanical conveyors,              x
blowers, and steam-cleaning.
Automobile and truck sales and services, including motor and body           x
repair and painting.
Automobile sales and service shops, including painting and etc.         x   x
Bakery shops, including the baking and processing of food products, x   x   x
when prepared for retail use on the premises only.
Banks and financial institutions.                                   x   x   x
Barber shops, beauty parlors, chiropody, massage, or similar        x   x   x
personal service shops.
Battery and tire service stations.                                          x
 B-1 B-2 B-3
                                                                    B-1 B-2 B-3
Blueprinting and photostating establishments.                           x   x
Beverages, non-alcoholic, bottling and distributing.                        x
Bicycle sales and repair.                                               x   x
Bicycle and motorcycle sales and repair.                                    x
Boat showrooms - sales and service.                                     x   x
Book binding.                                                               x
Book and stationery stores.                                         x   x   x
Building materials sales, when conducted wholly within a building.          x
Candy and ice cream shops.                                          x   x   x
Camera and photographic supply shops for retail sales.              x   x   x
Carpet, rug and linoleum stores.                                    x   x   x
Catering establishments.                                                x   x
China and glassware stores.                                         x   x   x
Clubs or lodges (non-profit), fraternal or religious institutions.  x   x   x
Coin and philatelic stores.                                         x   x   x
Costume rental shop.                                                    x   x
Contractors' offices and shops, where no fabrication is done on the
premises and where all storage of materials and equipment is within         x
a building.
Currency exchanges.                                                 x   x   x
Cutting of glass, mirror and glazing establishments.                    x   x
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or shoe repair shops, when x   x   x
conducted for retail sale on the premises only.
Department stores.                                                  x   x   x
Dry goods stores.                                                   x   x   x
Drug stores.                                                        x   x   x
 B-1 B-2 B-3
                                                                    B-1 B-2 B-3
Dry-cleaning and pressing establishments, when employing facilities
for the cleaning and pressing of not more than 750 pounds of dry    x   x   x
goods per day, and when using perchlorethylene or other similar
non-inflammable solvents approved by the Fire Department.
Electrical appliance stores and repairs, but not including          x   x   x
appliance assembly or manufacture.
Employment agencies.                                                x   x   x
Exterminating shops.                                                    x   x
Feed and seed store, wholesale.                                             x
Florist shops and conservatories for retail trade on the premises   x   x   x
only.
Food, meat and fruit stores.                                        x   x   x
Frozen food stores and food lockers.                                x   x   x
Furniture stores, and upholstery when conducted as a part of the    x   x   x
retail operations and secondary to the main use.
Furrier, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only.      x   x   x
Gift shops.                                                         x   x   x
Greenhouse.                                                                 x
Hardware stores.                                                    x   x   x
Haberdasheries.                                                     x   x   x
Heating and air conditioning (fabricating and assembly) shops.              x
Hobby stores.                                                       x   x   x
Hotels and motels, including restaurants and meeting rooms.         x   x   x
Household appliance stores and repair.                              x   x   x
Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of
draperies, slip covers and other similar articles when conducted as x   x   x
a part of the retail operations and secondary to the main use.
Jewelry and watch repair shops.                                     x   x   x
 B-1 B-2 B-3
                                                                    B-1 B-2 B-3
Laundries, automatic self-service types or hand.                    x   x   x
Leather goods and luggage stores.                                   x   x   x
Live bait stores.                                                           x
Locksmith.                                                          x   x   x
Meeting halls.                                                      x   x   x
Millinery shops.                                                    x   x   x
Motels.                                                                     x
Musical instrument sales and repair, retail trade only.             x   x   x
News stand.                                                         x   x   x
Offices, business and professional, including medical clinics.      x   x   x
Optician, optometrist.                                              x   x   x
Orthopedic and medical appliance store, but not including the       x   x   x
assembly or manufacture of such articles.
Package liquor stores.                                              x   x   x
Pet shops, but not including animal hospitals.                      x   x   x
Pet shop or animal hospital when conducted wholly within an                 x
enclosed building.
Photography studios, including the development of film and pictures x   x   x
when done as a part of the retail business on the premises.
Planned developments, business as defined herein.
Plumbing and heating showroom and shops.                            x   x   x
Plumbing, heating and roofing supply shops.                                 x
Picture framing, when conducted for retail trade on the premises.   x   x   x
Photo developing and processing.                                    x   x   x
Printing, publishing and issuing of periodicals, books, stationery,         x
and other reading matter.
Postal sub-stations.                                                x   x   x
 B-1 B-2 B-3
                                                                           B- B- B-
                                                                           1  2  3
Processing or assembly limited to the following, provided that space
occupied in a building does not exceed 6,000 square feet of total floor
space and basement space, and not including stairwells or elevator shafts;
and provided that such processing or assembly can be conducted without           x
noise, vibration, odor, dust, or any other condition which might be
disturbing to occupants of adjacent buildings. When manufacturing
operations of the same or similar products demand space exceeding 6,000
square feet, they shall be located in the M-1 Manufacturing District.
   1.   Advertising displays.                                              x
   2.   Awnings, venetian blinds and window shades.                        x
   3.   Brushes and brooms.                                                x
   4.   Bakeries, wholesale.                                               x
   5.   Cosmetics, drugs and perfumes.                                     x
   6.   Electrical equipment appliances.                                   x
   7.   Food processing, packaging and distribution.                       x
   8.   Jewelry.                                                           x
   9.   Medical and dental supplies.                                       x
   10.   Optical goods and equipment.                                      x
   11.   Pattern making.                                                   x
   12.   Scientific and precision instruments.                             x
   13.   Products from finished materials such as bone, cloth, cork,
feather, felt, fibre, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, plastic, precious         x
or semi-precious stones, paper, rubber, shell or yarn.
Public utility collection offices.                                         x  x  x
Public utility and public service uses, including: Public art galleries
and museums; public libraries, telephone exchanges; repeater stations;
microwave relay towers and stations; mobile transmitting towers and
stations, antenna towers and other outdoor equipment essential to the      x  x  x
operation of the exchange in the interest of public convenience and
necessity; bus terminals or other public transportation terminal
facilities and other similar uses.
 B-1 B-2 B-3
                                                                    B-1 B-2 B-3
Restaurants and taverns - including live entertainment and dancing.         x
Restaurants, tearooms, or cafes, when the establishment is not of
the drive-in type where food is served to occupants remaining in    x   x   x
motor vehicles.
Savings and loan associations.                                      x   x   x
Sewing machine sales and service.                                   x   x   x
Shoe and hat stores, and repairing when done as a part of the       x   x   x
retail business.
Signs, as regulated by §§
151.075 -                                                           x   x   x
151.079.
Sporting goods stores.                                              x   x   x
Storage and warehousing, and wholesale establishments.                      x
Taverns.                                                            x   x   x
Taxidermist shops.                                                          x
Telegraph offices.                                                  x   x   x
Telephone booths, public.                                           x   x   x
Tinsmiths.                                                                  x
Tobacco shops.                                                      x   x   x
Toy stores.                                                         x   x   x
Trailer sales or rental (house trailers) business on an open lot or         x
within a building, not occupancy of trailers.
Travel bureau and transportation ticket offices.                    x   x   x
Typewriter and adding machines sales and services.                  x   x   x
Undertaking establishments.                                                 x
Used passenger automobile sales on an open lot or within a                  x
building.
Wearing apparel shops.                                              x   x   x
 
   (B)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit
in accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Section.
 B-1 B-2 B-3
                                                                                B- B- B-
                                                                                1  2  3
Automobile service stations.                                                    x  x  x
Churches, rectories and parish houses.                                          x  x  x
Clubs or lodges (non-profit), fraternal or religious institutions.              x  x  x
Fairgrounds, circuses, coliseums, race tracks, and other similar exposition and x  x  x
recreational uses.
Hospitals and sanitariums.                                                      x  x  x
Hotels, motels, including restaurants and meeting rooms.                        x  x  x
Medical and dental clinics.                                                     x  x  x
Outdoor theaters (drive-in).                                                          x
Outdoor amusement establishments, fairgrounds, carnivals, circuses, race tracks
and other similar amusement centers and including places of assembly devoted          x
thereto, such as stadiums, and arenas.
Planned developments, business, as defined in the Administrative Section.       x  x  x
Parks, when publicly owned and operated.                                        x  x  x
Public utility and public service uses, including:                              x  x  x
   1.   Electric substations.                                             x  x  x
   2.   Fire stations.                                                    x  x  x
   3.   Police stations.                                                  x  x  x
   4.   Public art galleries and museums.                                 x  x  x
   5.   Public libraries.                                                 x  x  x
   6.   Telephone exchange, repeater stations, microwave relay towers and
stations, mobile transmitting towers and stations, antenna towers and other     x  x  x
outdoor equipment essential to the operation of the exchange in the interest of
public convenience and necessity.
 B-1 B-2 B-3
                                                                    B-1 B-2 B-3
Public utility and public service uses, including:                  x   x   x
   7.   Bus terminal or other public transportation terminal  x   x   x
facilities.
   8.   Water filtration plants.                              x   x   x
   9.   Water pumping stations.                               x   x   x
   10.   Water reservoir.                                     x   x   x
   11.   Other similar uses.                                  x   x   x
Riding academies and public stables.                                        x
Other retail business uses not specifically listed above when found
to have economic compatibility with established uses on adjoining       x
property.
 
   (C)   Residential uses, as follows:
 
                                                                             B- B- B-
                                                                             1  2  3
Dwelling units and lodging rooms, if business uses or premises designed for
such uses occupy the ground floor and provided that either:
1.   Not less than 20% of the frontage on the same street and within the
same block, or 20% of the frontage directly across the street from such
frontage, is already developed with the buildings in which there are         x  x  x
dwelling units or lodging rooms; or
2.   At least two-thirds of the frontage in the entire block is zoned for
business, and not less than 20% of the frontage so zoned for business is
already developed with buildings in which there are dwelling units or
lodging rooms.
(Ord. 88-30, passed 8-8-88)
APPENDIX C: MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
   (A)   Permitted uses.  
      (1)   Since most uses permitted in the manufacturing districts will be in
proximity to residential districts, it is hereby declared that performance
standards will be high and that all manufacturing, processing or assembly of
materials and products must be carried on in a manner not injurious or
offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission of
odors, fumes, or gases, dust, smoke, noise, or vibrations or fire hazards.
Therefore, the following uses may be permitted, provided there is compliance
with the performance standards established in this chapter.
      (2)   Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or
storage of materials, goods or products which conform with the performance
standards set forth in this chapter, and which shall not be injurious or
offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or
creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic
and noxious materials, odors, fire or explosive hazards, or glare or heat.
 M-1 M-2 M-3
                                                                    M-1 M-2 M-3
Agriculture buildings and structure.                                x   x
Air, railroad, and water freight terminals, railroad switching and          x
classification yards, repair shops and round houses.
Aircraft, assembly and testing of fuselage and motors.                      x
Airports and commercial heliports, including aircraft landing
fields, runways, flight strips and flying schools together with             x
hangers, terminal buildings and other auxiliary facilities.
Asphalt mixing plants.                                                      x
Automobile service stations - for the retail sale and dispensing of
fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories and supplies;       x   x
facilities for automobile repair, chassis and gear lubrication are
permitted only if enclosed in a building.
Banks.                                                              x   x
Brass foundries.                                                            x
Brick, tile and terra cotta manufacture.                                    x
Building material sales.                                            x   x
 M-1 M-2 M-3
                                                                    M-1 M-2 M-3
Cartage and express facilities.                                     x   x
Cement products, including concrete batch plants and manufacture of         x
concrete products.
Cooperage works.                                                            x
Contractors', architects', and engineers' offices, shops, and
yards, such as building, cement, electrical, heating, ventilating   x   x
and air conditioning, masonry, painting, plumbing, refrigeration
and roofing.
Corrugated metal products.                                                  x
Currency exchanges.                                                 x   x
Drug stores.                                                        x   x
Dyes, aniline, ink pigments and others.                                     x
Dry-cleaning establishments, with no limitation on the number of    x   x
employees.
Dwelling units, for watchmen and their families, located on the     x   x
premises where they are employed in such capacity.
Food, meat and fruit stores.                                        x   x
Fuel and ice sales.                                                 x   x
Garages - for storage, repair, and servicing of motor vehicles.     x   x
Greenhouses (wholesale).                                            x   x
Highway maintenance shops and yards.                                x   x
Ink from primary raw materials, including colors.                           x
Laundries, more than 1,000 pounds daily capacity, with no           x   x
limitation on the number of employees.
Lodges and offices of labor organizations.                          x   x
Lumber, preserving treatment, processing, sawmills and planing              x
mills.
Mail order houses.                                                  x   x
 M-1 M-2 M-3
                                                                                   M- M- M-
                                                                                   1  2  3
Metal foundries, casting, stamping and extrusion of metal products.                      x
Meat and fish products, packing and processing of, but not including slaughtering        x
or glue and size manufacturing.
Offices, business and professional.                                                x  x  x
Packing and crating.                                                               x  x
Parking lots, other than accessory, and subject to the provisions of §§
151.105 -                                                                          x  x
151.112.
Printing.                                                                          x  x
Public utility and service uses:
   1.   Bus stations, bus terminals, bus turn-arounds (off-street) bus garagex, x
and bus lots.
   2.   Electric substations.                                                x  x
   3.   Fire stations.                                                       x  x
   4.   Gas regulator stations.                                              x  x
   5.   Police stations.                                                     x  x
   6.   Railroad passenger stations.                                         x  x
   7.   Railroad rights-of-way.                                              x  x
   8.   Telephone exchanges, telephone transmission equipment buildings, and x  x
microwave relay towers.
   9.   Utility service substations - electric, gas, telephone and water.    x  x
   10.   Water works, reservoirs, pumping stations and filtration plants.    x  x
Publishing.                                                                        x  x
Radar installations and towers.                                                    x  x
Radio and television studios, stations and towers, transmitting and receiving.     x  x
Railroad equipment - such as railroad car and locomotive manufacture.              x  x
 M-1 M-2 M-3
                                                                    M-1 M-2 M-3
Railroad equipment - such as railroad car and locomotive            x   x
manufacture.
Railroad labor rest homes, hotels, and camps consisting of
sleeping, lodging, eating and related facilities provided for       x   x
railroad personnel or railroad property.
Recreation buildings and community centers, non-commercial.         x   x
Restaurants - entertainment, dancing and serving of alcoholic       x   x
beverages are prohibited.
Retail outlet store, accessory to a manufacturing or wholesale      x   x
establishment.
Rubber products, including tires and tubes and tire recapping.              x
Stadiums, auditoriums and arenas, open or enclosed.                     x
Storage of flammable liquids, fats or oils in tanks, each of 50,000
gallons or less capacity, but only after the location and               x
protective measures have been approved by the City Council.
Telephone booths and coin telephones (outdoor).                     x   x
Temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to  x   x
exceed the duration of such construction.
Temporary real estate tract offices for the purpose of conducting
the sale of lots of the tract upon which such tract office is       x   x
located, for a period not to exceed two years.
Trade schools.                                                      x   x
Water systems, individual, as regulated herein.                     x   x
Wax products, manufactured from paraffin.                                   x
Weighing stations operated by the state.                            x   x
Wholesale establishments.                                           x   x
 
   (B)   Special uses.
 M-1 M-2 M-3
                                                                    M-1 M-2 M-3
Airports and commercial heliports, including aircraft landing
fields, runways, flight strips and flying schools together with         x   x
hangars, terminal buildings and other auxiliary facilities.
Areas for dumping or disposal of garbage, refuse or trash.                  x
Automobile testing grounds.                                             x   x
Extraction of gravel, sand or other raw materials.                          x
Heliports, private.                                                     x   x
Institutions for the care or treatment of alcoholics or drug addict x   x   x
patients.
Institutions for the care or treatment of the insane or             x   x   x
feebleminded.
Junk yards.                                                                 x
Land fill.                                                          x   x   x
Parks and playgrounds.                                              x   x   x
Penal and correctional institutions.                                x   x   x
Planned developments, industrial, as defined in the Administrative  x   x   x
Section.
Race tracks of all kinds.                                               x   x
Railroad and water freight terminals, railroad switching and            x   x
classification yards, repair shops and round houses.
Sewage treatment plants, community.                                     x   x
Signs in excess of 35 feet in height from curb level.               x   x   x
Signs set back less than 15 feet from the front lot line.           x   x   x
Accessory uses, incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a       x   x   x
principle use.
 
APPENDIX D: SELECTED ILLUSTRATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/636e054b2d53c80079aee4d901d3e1a0a3f9a8b9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5888.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/636e054b2d53c80079aee4d901d3e1a0a3f9a8b9/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5891.jpg]
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
      
I.   DEDICATIONS
      
II.   ENTERPRISE ZONES
      
III.   CLOSING STREETS
      
IV.   RENAMING STREETS
      
V.   VACATIONS
      
VI.   SALE OF PROPERTY
      
VII.   FRANCHISES
      
VIII.   ANNEXATIONS
      
IX.   REZONING
      
X.   ZONING VARIANCES
TABLE I: DEDICATIONS
 
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
                       Accepting the dedication of Lot 9 in Block 6 of Kurtz
83-9       3-14-83     First Subdivision, in Patton Township, Ford County, as a
                       municipal park.
                       The east 40 feet, in equal width, of Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4,
                       except the easterly 15 feet of even width of Lots 1, 2
95-13      5-8-95      and 3, and the east 25 feet, in equal width, of Lots 5,
                       6 and 7, all in Block 4 in the original town of Prospect
                       City, now City of Paxton, is dedicated as an alley of
                       the City of Paxton.
                       The east 40 feet, in equal width, of Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4,
                       except the easterly 15 feet of even width of Lots 1, 2
                       and 3, and the east 25 feet, in equal width, of Lots 5,
95-25      6-12-95     6 and 7, all in Block 4 in the original town of Prospect
                       City, now City of Paxton, west of the Illinois Central
                       Railroad, situated in the City of Paxton, is dedicated
                       as an alley of the City of Paxton.
                       Accepting the dedication of a partial street in
Res. 14-04 2-10-14     Cambridge Heights Subdivision, to be used as a public
                       street.
                       Accepting the dedication of part of Allison Drive in the
Res. 23-08 3-14-23     final plat of Highland Ridge Subdivision No. 3 to be
                       used as a public street.
                      
 
TABLE II: ENTERPRISE ZONES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Designating Enterprise Zone No. 1, such area comprising
87-29    12-14-87    the zone and being more particularly described in Exhibit
                     A and as outlined in the map in Exhibit B, which exhibits
                     are attached to Ord. 87-29 and made a part hereof.
88-6     2-8-88      Amending the area designated as Enterprise Zone No. 1.
                    
 
TABLE III: CLOSING STREETS
 
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
      11-10- The State Street Bridge in the City of Paxton, Illinois, which is over and
97-25 97     across the Illinois Central right-of-way in the City of Paxton, be permanently
             closed and abolished upon completion of new Pell’s Street Bridge.
             The south half of Vermilion Street, between Pell’s Street and Center Street be
2000- - -    and is closed to through traffic, except to school buses, for the period
29           commencing at 8:00 a.m. and terminating at 4:00 p.m. on Monday, through and
             including Friday, of each and every week.
            
 
TABLE IV: RENAMING STREETS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
86-  5-12-  The street known as Cambridge Court, located in the Cambridge Heights Subdivision
11   86     of the City of Paxton, is renamed Pheasants Forever Court.
            The street or alley lying immediately west of and adjacent to Blocks 2 and 3 of
89-  6-12-  Toy & Thompson’s Subdivision of Goodrich’s Subdivision of the west half of the
20   89     northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third
            Principal Meridian, also being situated between Franklin Street and Ottawa Street
            is named John Street.
            All of the streets located in Pell’s Park, which is bounded by Pell’s Street on
90-  8-13-  the north, Orleans Street on the south, Winter Street on the east and High Street
21   90     on the west, including but not limited to Center Street, be named and/or renamed
            Memorial Drive.
            Naming an improved street which runs in a north and south direction located
            between the following two parcels of real estate Centennial Drive: Parcel One
     2-12-  begins on the east line of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township 23
96-3 96     North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian and Parcel Two beginning at
            a point at the intersection of the south line of Ottawa Road and the west line of
            the northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the
            Third Principal Meridian.
            All of the streets located in Pell’s Park, which is bounded by Pell’s Street on
96-  6-10-  the north, Orleans Street on the south, Winter Street on the east and High Street
11   96     on the west, including but not limited to Center Street and now named Memorial
            Drive is renamed Independence Drive.
96-  6-10-  The portion of Washington Boulevard, running north and south, which extends four
15   96     blocks south of Summer Street be named and/or renamed Washington Street.
            An improved street which runs in a north and south direction, which street is
96-  7-8-96 presently unnamed and is the street in the Industrial Park between the present
18          United States Department of Agriculture CFSA building and the building presently
            occupied by Comb Laboratories and ITW Deltar is named Industrial Park Drive.
            The portion of Washington Boulevard, running east and west, which extends two
98-3 3-10-  blocks between Vermilion Street and Washington Street, being that part which lies
     98     south of Blocks 8 and 9 in Merchant’s Addition to Paxton be named and/or renamed
            Meuser Drive.
            The portion of County Road 1800 East (being the road between Section 13 and
99-3 2-8-99 Section 18) in Patton Township, south from Illinois Route 9 for a distance of ¼-
            mile be named and/or renamed Technology Lane.
02-  7-8-02 All of Hillcrest Court be named and/or renamed Cambridge Court.
31
04-  12-13- All of the 700 block of West Orleans Street, being that portion of West Orleans
44   04     Street form Cherry Street west to the property owned by the Paxton-Buckley-Loda
            School District, be named and/or renamed Panther Way.
 
TABLE V: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
             Vacating a portion of the alley running easterly and westerly through Block 27
—   8-6-28 in the Original Town of Prospect City, now City of Paxton, east of the
             Illinois Central Railroad.
—   8-2-37 Vacating a portion of the alley in G. J. Johnson’s Subdivision of Block 35 in
             Pell’s Addition to Paxton, east of the Illinois Central Railroad.
—   4-4-38 Vacating an alley in fractional Block 3 in Railroad Addition to the City of
             Paxton, Illinois.
             Vacating the east eight feet of that part of Vermilion Street which lies north
—   6-3-46 of Center Street and south of the centerline of the alley which extends in an
             easterly and westerly direction though the center of Block 12 of the city,
             east of Illinois Central Railroad.
—   3-9-53 Vacating a portion of the alley in G. J. Johnson’s Subdivision of Block 35 in
             Pell’s Addition to Paxton, east of the Illinois Central Railroad.
—   5-11-  Vacating a portion of Main Street in Mix Addition to Paxton which begins at
      53     the northeast corner of Lot 1 of Block 49.
62-9  6-11-  Vacating a portion of alleys in Block 26 of Railroad Addition.
      62
62-22 10-8-  Vacating a portion of the alley in Block C of Prospect City, now City of
      62     Paxton, west of Illinois Central Railroad.
63-25 12-9-  Vacating a portion of American Street and a portion of Walnut Street.
      63
             Vacating all of Enterprise Subdivision, except Lots 25, 26, 27, 28 and 29, all
66-16 8-8-66 that portion of Sunset Drive which lies west of the west line extended of Lots
             21, 22, 23 and 24 and all of Green Street which lies along the north line of
             the Subdivision.
71-3  2-8-71 Vacating a portion of Larch Street in Mix Addition to the City of Paxton.
78-1  1-9-78 Vacating part of the alley in Block 4 of the Original Town of Prospect City.
81-33 11-9-  Vacating a portion of the alley in Block 4 in the Original Town of Prospect
      81     City.
82-8  4-12-  Vacating a portion of the alley in Larson Brothers’ Subdivision.
      82
83-4  2-14-  Vacating a portion of John Street lying south of Franklin Street.
      83
      2-13-  Vacating a portion of Plum Street lying north of State Street and south of the
89-9  89     right-of-way of the Norfolk and Western Railroad situated in the City of
             Paxton.
89-22 6-12-  Vacating the alley in the fractional Block 46 in Mix Addition to Paxton and
      89     extension to the west thereof in Paxton, Illinois.
96-20 8-12-  Vacating a portion of Washington Boulevard adjacent to Block 8 in Merchant’s
      96     Addition.
96-33 11-12- Vacating a portion of College Street adjacent to Block 32 in Pell’s Addition.
      96
98-24 9-14-  Vacating a portion of Washington Boulevard between Vermilion Street and
      98     Washington Boulevard.
2000- 7-10-  Vacating a portion of Vermilion Street to PBL School District Number Ten.
18    00
05-39 11-21- Vacating a portion of Market Street and Larch Street.
      05
09-32 8-10-  Vacating a portion of Larch Street at the westernmost corner of Block 3 in
      09     Mix’s Addition.
13-22 7-8-13 Vacating a portion of Cambridge Drive, Whipple Drive, and Washington
             Boulevard.
19-O- 3-12-  Vacating a portion of an easement located adjacent to 118 S. Maple Street.
3     2019
Res.  7-8-
2025- 2025   Vacating a portion of an alley
07-04
            
 
TABLE VI: SALE OF PROPERTY
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
             Directing the sale of that part of Block 7 of Mix’s Addition to the city
—   6-7-48 which lies south and east of the right-of-way of the public highway or
             street which intersects Block 7 in a southwesterly and northeasterly
             direction.
      9-10-  Directing the sale of land which commences at a point on the south line of
63-20 63     Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal
             Meridian.
      10-14- Directing the sale of land which commences at a point on the south line of
63-24 63     Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal
             Meridian.
69-16 6-9-69 Directing the sale of property commencing at the northwest corner of Lot
             21 and running south on the west line of Lot 21 twelve feet.
69-19 7-14-  Directing the sale of property commencing at the northwest corner of Lot
      69     21 and running south on the west line of Lot 21 twelve feet.
72-9  4-10-  Directing the sale of a 1948 Ford delivery truck, Serial # 87HY 118529.
      72
72-11 - -    Directing the sale of a 1948 Ford delivery truck, Serial # 87HY 118529.
80-16 8-11-  Directing the sale of property beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 4
      80     of Block 5, east of the Illinois Central Railroad.
85-29 7-8-85 Directing the sale of one 1968 Chevy Stepside pickup truck.
             Authorizing the purchase of the east half of the east half of the
90-18 7-9-90 southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 23 North, Range 9 East of the
             Third Principal Meridian, save and except the east 330 feet of even width
             thereof, situated in Ford County.
92-42 11-9-  Directing the sale of a 1979 John Deere Model JD855 Crawler Loader, Serial
      92     # 3222051.
92-43 12-14- Directing the sale of a 1979 John Deere Model JD855 Crawler Loader, Serial
      92     # 3222051.
92-44 12-14- Directing the sale of a 1962 Ford one ton truck, Serial # F35JH301725.
      92
94-31 9-12-  Authorizing the purchase of equipment in order to remodel City Hall.
      94
95-18 5-8-95 Authorizing the purchase of equipment in order to remodel City Hall.
95-19 5-8-95 Authorizing the purchase of equipment in order to remodel City Hall.
—   - -    Agreement for the sale of Lot 15 of Snyder Subdivision.
R.    6-12-
2000- 00     Authorizing the sale of surplus real estate, 204 West Pine Street.
15
2000- 8-14-  Authorizing the sale of surplus real estate, 204 West Pine Street.
19    00
R.    5-14-  Authorizing the purchase of Lots 1 through 7, inclusive, in Block 29 in
2001- 01     Railroad Addition to Paxton from Rex D. Roy and Linda G. Roy.
8
01-13 6-11-  Authorizing the sale of surplus property which is listed on Schedule A
      01     attached to Ord. 01-13.
R.    8-13-  Authorizing the sale of surplus real estate, 235 North Market Street, Lots
01-21 01     4 through 7 inclusive, in Block 29 in Railroad Addition.
             Authorizing the exchange of real estate owned by the city (Lots 1 through
03-48 12-29- 5 in Block 5 in Pell's Addition, and Lot 6 in Block 5 in Pell's Addition)
      03     for real estate owned by Carl Hudson, Jr. (Lots 19 and 20, except the
             north 59 feet of even width thereof, in Snyder Subdivision).
04-02 1-19-  Authorizing the acquisition of Birkey's Farm Store, Inc.
      04
R.    9-27-  Authorizing the sale of surplus real estate containing a water tower and
04-30 04     pump house.
04-33 10-11- Accepting the sale of surplus real estate containing a water tower and
      04     pump house from Resolution 04-30.
06-07 3-13-  Authorizing sale of municipally owned real property, 649 South Market
      06     Street.
06-   5-8-06 Authorizing sale of municipally owned real property, 826 North Market
19A          Street.
08-18 4-28-  Authorizing the sale of vacant lot in 200 block of North Market Street.
      08
08-22 5-27-  Authorizing the sale of municipally owned real estate, 201 North Market
      08     Street.
09-31 8-10-  Authorizing the sale of vacant lot in Block 3 of Mix’s Addition.
      09
09-33 8-10-  Authorizing the sale of municipally owned real estate, 102 West Hunt
      09     Street.
Res.  7-12-  Authorizing the sale of municipally owned real estate, 403 West Holmes
10-25 10     Street.
10-27 8-9-10 Authorizing the sale of municipally owned real estate, 403 West Holmes
             Street.
14-12 6-9-14 Authorizing the sale of municipally owned real estate, 255 West Spruce
             Street.
      10-9-  Approving an option to purchase 3.327 acres of commercial real estate,
18-22 18     Parcel Nos. 11-13-13-200-028 and 11-13-13-200-030, owned by Solar Petro,
             Inc.
20-3  3-10-  Approving a contract for sale of municipally owned real estate, the
      20     airport site.
21-01 1-12-  Approving a contract to sell real estate located at Pine Street.
      21
23-22 9-12-  Approving a contract to sell real estate located at 137 W. Oak Street.
      23
            
 
TABLE VII: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting a franchise to General Telephone Company of
                     Illinois to construct, erect, maintain, replace and
—      12-10-56    operate in the city poles, cables and the like for the
                     conduct of a general telephone system for a period of 50
                     years.
                     Granting a franchise to Eastern Illinois Power Cooperative
72-2     1-10-72     to operate and maintain a system for the transmission,
                     distribution and sale of electric energy.
                     Amending an ordinance granting to Paxton Community Antenna
76-37    12-13-76    System Inc. the privilege to construct, operate and
                     maintain a television signal service.
                     Amending an ordinance granting to Paxton Community Antenna
79-48    12-10-79    System Inc. the privilege to construct, operate and
                     maintain a television signal service.
                     Amending an ordinance granting to Paxton Cablevision,
81-40    12-14-81    Inc., the privilege to construct, operate and maintain a
                     television signal service.
                     Amending an ordinance granting to Paxton Cablevision,
82-7     4-12-82     Inc., the privilege to construct, operate and maintain a
                     television signal service.
                     Amending an ordinance granting to Paxton Cablevision,
83-30    8-8-83      Inc., the privilege to construct, operate and maintain a
                     television signal service.
                     Amending an ordinance granting to Paxton Cablevision,
84-33    10-8-84     Inc., the privilege to construct, operate and maintain a
                     television signal service.
                     Amending an ordinance granting to Paxton Cablevision,
86-4     2-10-86     Inc., the privilege to construct, operate and maintain a
                     television signal service.
                     Amending an ordinance granting to Paxton Community Antenna
86-33    12-8-86     System, Inc., the privilege to construct, operate and
                     maintain a television signal system.
                     Amending an ordinance granting to Paxton Community Antenna
87-7     3-9-87      System, Inc., the privilege to construct, operate and
                     maintain a television signal system.
                     Amending an ordinance granting to Paxton Community Antenna
88-40    10-3-88     System, Inc., the privilege to construct, operate and
                     maintain a television signal system.
                     Granting Star Midwest Cablevision an interim franchise to
88-42    11-14-88    continue operating a cable television system within the
                     city limits.
                     Granting Star Midwest Cablevision an interim franchise to
90-4     2-27-90     continue operating a cable television system within the
                     city limits.
                     Amending an ordinance granting Star Midwest Cablevision an
90-25    8-13-90     interim franchise to continue operating a cable television
                     system within the city limits.
                     Amending an ordinance granting Star Midwest Cablevision an
90-33    10-23-90    interim franchise to continue operating a cable television
                     system within the city limits.
91-27    7-8-91      Amending an ordinance granting a franchise to Paxton Cable
                     Television.
                     Approving the change in control of the current franchise
R. 92-19 6-8-92      of the franchise to operate a cable television system in
                     the city from Star Cablevision Group to D.D. Cable
                     Partners, L.P., a California Limited Partnership.
                     Authorizing the transfer of the cable television
R. 96-13 6-10-96     franchise, whereby DD Partners and DD Holdings will
                     contribute substantially all of their assets to Triax in
                     exchange for limited partnership interests in Triax.
93-38    10-11-93    Amending an ordinance granting a cable television
                     franchise.
                     Granting Mediacom Illinois LLC an interim franchise to
2001-7   4-9-01      continue operating a cable television system within the
                     city.
                     Granting Mediacom Illinois LLC an interim franchise to
2001-17  7-9-01      continue operating a cable television system within the
                     city.
2001-27  10-8-01     Granting a cable television franchise to CONXXUS LLC.
2001-28  10-8-01     Grating a cable television franchise to Mediacom Illinois
                     LLC.
                     Authorizing Northern Illinois Gas Company (d/b/a NICOR Gas
11-26    10-10-11    Company) to construct, operate and maintain a gas
                     distribution system in and through the city.
11-27    10-10-11    Extending the expiration date of the cable television
                     franchise to Mediacom Illinois LLC.
12-12    3-12-12     Extending the expiration date of the cable television
                     franchise to Conxxus LLC.
12-13    3-12-12     Extending the expiration date of the cable television
                     franchise to Mediacom Illinois LLC.
12-27    6-11-12     Extending the expiration date of the cable television
                     franchise to Mediacom Illinois LLC.
12-28    6-11-12     Extending the expiration date of the cable television
                     franchise to Conxxus LLC.
12-47    9-10-12     Extending the expiration date of the cable television
                     franchise to Mediacom Illinois LLC.
12-48    9-10-12     Extending the expiration date of the cable television
                     franchise to Conxxus LLC.
                     Extending the authorization to Ameren Illinois Company to
14-06    3-10-14     construct, operate and maintain an electric utility system
                     in the city.
14-19    9-8-14      Mediacom, Illinois franchise fees for cable television
                     system.
16-03    2-9-16      Authorizing execution of a franchise agreement with MCC
                     Broadband, LLC.
                    
 
TABLE VIII: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
                      Annexing the south one half of the northwest quarter of
—       4-9-56      the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section
                      17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third
                      Principal Meridian, containing five acres more or less.
                      Annexing the north half of the northwest quarter of the
—       8-13-56     southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 17,
                      Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal
                      Meridian, containing five acres more or less.
                      Annexing all that part of the southeast quarter of
—       8-8-60      Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third
                      Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing a parcel of land beginning at a point 7.485
—       8-25-60     chains north of the southeast corner of the northeast
                      quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East
                      of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing a parcel of real estate beginning at the
—       8-25-60     southeast corner of the southeast quarter of the
                      northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North of
                      Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing all that part of the southeast quarter of
—       8-25-60     Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third
                      Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing all that part of the south one-half of the
63-15     7-8-63      southwest quarter of Section 7, Township 23 North, Range
                      10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing a parcel of land beginning at the northeast
65-13     7-12-65     corner of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township
                      23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing the east half of the northeast quarter of the
66-6      4-11-66     northwest quarter of Section 18 in Township 23 North,
                      Range10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing the north half of the southwest quarter of the
66-11     5-9-66      southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 17,
                      Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal
                      Meridian.
                      Annexing the south 440 feet of the east 633 feet of the
66-23     - -         northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 18,
                      Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal
                      Meridian.
                      Annexing the north 600 feet of the southeast quarter of
67-11     4-24-67     the northwest quarter of Section 18 in Township 23 North,
                      Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing the east 600 feet of the north 600 feet of the
67-12     4-24-67     south half of the northeast quarter of Section 13,
                      Township 23 North, Range 9 East of the Third Principal
                      Meridian.
                      Annexing all that part of the south half of the southwest
68-2      2-13-68     quarter of Section 7, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of
                      the Third Principal Meridian.
68-27     11-12-68    Annexing a part of the right-of-way of Illinois S.B.I.
                      Route 25 (U.S. Route 45).
                      Annexing a parcel of land beginning at the intersection
                      of the east right-of-way line of S.B.I. Route 25 (now
68-32     12-9-68     U.S. 45) and the south line of the north half of Section
                      8 in Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third
                      Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing a parcel of land beginning at the intersection
                      of the east right-of-way line of S.B.I. Route 25 (now
68-33     12-9-68     U.S. 45) and the south line of the north half of Section
                      8 in Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third
                      Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing the east 50 feet of Lots A and B and the north
70-3      1-12-70     40 feet of Lot C of the subdivision of Lot 1 of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 19, Township 23 North, Range
                      10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
71-19     11-8-71     Annexing property located in Section 18, Township 23
                      North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
73-30     11-12-73    Annexing property located in Section 13, Township 23
                      North, Range 9 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing all that part of Lot 3 of the subdivision of the
74-17     9-9-74      west half of the southwest quarter of Section 17,
                      Township 23 North, Range 10 East.
                      Annexing a tract of land beginning at the southeast
74-25     11-11-74    corner of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township
                      23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing two tracts of the land to the city: Tract 1
                      commences at the northeast corner of Section 13, Township
                      23 North, Range 9 East of the Third Principal Meridian;
76-19     6-14-76     and Tract 2 begins at a point 1014.56 feet south of, and
                      33 feet east of, the northwest corner of Section 18,
                      Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal
                      Meridian.
                      Annexing the south 300 feet of the north 900 feet of all
76-36     11-8-76     that part of the southwest quarter of the northwest
                      quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East
                      of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing a parcel of land commencing at the northeast
77-4      3-14-77     corner of Section 13, Township 23 North, Range 9 East of
                      the Third Principal Meridian.
78-8      3-13-78     Annexing Lot 29 of Garden Park Subdivision of the County
                      of Ford, State of Illinois, to the city.
78-33     8-31-78     Annexing a parcel of land designated as Exhibit A and
                      attached to Ord. 78-33.
                      Annexing all of Block 3 in Kurtz First Subdivision and
82-5      4-12-82     all of the streets contiguous and adjacent to the Block
                      as set forth in the Plat of the Kurtz First Subdivision.
                      Annexing two tracts of land to the city: Tract 1, the
82-19     7-12-82     west 65 feet of Lot 6 in Schuldt Second Subdivision;
                      Tract II, the east seven feet six inches of Lot 6 and the
                      west 58 feet of Lot 7 in Schuldt Second Subdivision.
                      Annexing the following described territory: Lots 6
                      through 19, inclusive, in Block 4 of Kurtz First
                      Subdivision; all of Block 6 in Kurtz First Subdivision;
82-21     8-9-82      Lot 7, except the east 50 feet and all of Lots 8 through
                      18, inclusive in Block 7 in Kurtz First Subdivision; and
                      all of the streets contiguous to and adjacent to the lots
                      and blocks as set forth in the Plat of Kurtz First
                      Subdivision.
83-1      1-10-83     Annexing Lots 6 through 18, inclusive, in Block 5 in
                      Kurtz First Subdivision.
                      Annexing the following two territories into the city: the
                      north 200 feet of that part of the south half of the
                      northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 23 North, Range
83-15     5-9-83      9 East of the Third Principal Meridian; and the east
                      299.9 feet of the west 365.9 feet of the north 435.5 feet
                      of that part of the southwest quarter of the northeast
                      quarter of Section 13, Township 23 North, Range 9 East of
                      the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing the following described territories to the city:
                      Lots 1 through 9, inclusive, Lot 10, except the west 40
                      feet, the east half of Lot 15 and Lots 16 through 19,
83-23     6-13-83     inclusive, in Block 1 in Kurtz First Subdivision; and all
                      of the streets contiguous and adjacent to the lots and
                      blocks as set forth in the Plat of Kurtz First
                      Subdivision.
                      Annexing the south half of the southwest quarter of the
85-47     11-12-85    southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 17,
                      Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal
                      Meridian.
86-18     7-14-86     Annexing the west half of Lot 6 and the east 50 feet of
                      Lot 7, Block 7 in Kurtz First Subdivision.
                      Annexing a parcel of land commencing at a point of
86-20     8-11-86     intersection of the south line of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 8 in Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the
                      Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing a tract of land beginning at the northwest
86-30     10-13-86    corner of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter
                      of Section 13, Township 23 North, Range 9 East of the
                      Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing the following tracts of land to the city: a
                      tract of land beginning at the southwest corner of the
                      southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 8,
                      Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal
87-4      2-9-87      Meridian; and that part of the Illinois State Highway
                      Route 9 contiguous and adjacent to Tract I on the south
                      side of Tract I in the southeast quarter of the southeast
                      quarter of Section 8, in Township 23 North, Range 10 East
                      of the Third Principal Meridian.
88-3      1-11-88     Annexing Lot 27 of Garden Park Subdivision.
                      Annexing a territory of land beginning at the northwest
88-27     7-11-88     corner of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter
                      of Section 13, Township 23 North, Range 9 East of the
                      Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing that part of the southwest quarter of the
88-48     12-27-88    northwest quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range
                      10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing a territory of land beginning at a point of the
89-28     7-10-89     west line of the east half of the southeast quarter of
                      Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third
                      Principal Meridian.
89-46     11-20-89    Annexing Lot 16 in Block 2 in Kurtz First Subdivision.
94-27     9-7-94      Annexing Lots 14 and 15 in Block 2 in Kurtz First
                      Subdivision.
95-6      4-10-95     Annexing Lot 30 in Garden Park Subdivision.
                      Annexing property which begins at the southwest corner of
95-42     10-25-95    the southwest quarter of Section 16, Township 23 North,
                      Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing property which begins on the east line of the
95-43     10-25-95    northwest quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range
                      10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing property which begins at the northwest corner of
96-22     9-9-96      the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section
                      16, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third
                      Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing property which begins at the northwest corner of
96-36     11-12-96    the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section
                      13.
                      Annexing territory beginning on the south line of the
97-16     8-11-97     northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 23 North, Range
                      9 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
98-6      5-11-98     Annexing Lot 26 of Garden Park Subdivision.
                      Annexing the east half of that part of the southeast
98-27     9-14-98     quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 8, in
                      Township 23 North, Range 10 East.
98-39     12-14-98    Annexing the west 38 feet of Lot 6 and the east 52 feet
                      of Lot 7 in Block 2 of Kurtz First Subdivision.
98-40     12-14-98    Annexing Lot 5 and all of Lot 6, except the west 38 feet
                      of Lot 6, in Block 2 of Kurtz First Subdivision.
98-41     12-14-98    Annexing a tract of land beginning at the northeast
                      corner of Lot 13 in Block 2 in Kurtz First Subdivision.
                      Annexing two tracts of land to the city: the west half of
                      that part of the southeast quarter of the southeast
99-20     7-12-99     quarter of Section 8 in Township 23 North, Range 10 East
                      of the Third Principal Meridian; and a tract of land
                      located and lying in Section 8, Township 23 North, Range
                      10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing the east half of that part of the southeast
99-21     7-12-99     quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 8, Township
                      23 North, Range 10 East.
                      Annexing a territory beginning on the west line of the
99-25     8-9-99      southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 16,
                      Township 23 North, Range 10 East.
2000-4    3-13-00     Annexing Lot 5 and the south 12 feet of Lot 4, Block 4 of
                      Kurtz First Subdivision.
                      Annexing a territory beginning at the northeast corner of
00-6      4-10-00     the northeast quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North,
                      Range 10 East.
                      Annexing the south half of the east half of the southeast
01-12     6-11-01     quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 17, Township
                      23 North, Range 10 East.
                      Annexing part of the north half of the southwest quarter
                      of Section 7, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the
02-12     5-13-02     Third Principal Meridian, lying east of the right-of-way
                      of Federal Aid Interstate Route 57 and south of the
                      right-of-way of the Norfolk and Western Railway (now
                      abandoned).
                      Annexing part of the southeast quarter of the northeast
02-48     12-9-02     quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East
                      of the Third Principle Meridian, commonly known as 1105
                      East Summer Street.
02-49     12-9-02     Annexing certain lots in Block 5 of Pell's Addition,
                      commonly known as 501 South Market Street.
                      Annexing territory commonly known as 800 Strong Street,
                      805 Strong Street, 1000 E. Summer Street, 1060 E. Summer
03-44     11-10-03    Street, 1070 E. Summer Street, 1120 E. Summer Street, and
                      Prospect Avenue (Parcel ID # 11-14-17-427-007 and 11-14-
                      17-427-008).
03-45     11-10-03    Annexing territory commonly known as 1045 E. Prospect
                      Avenue.
                      Annexing Lot 2 and the north half of lot 3 in block 4 of
04-22     7-12-04     Kurtz First Subdivision, being a part of Section 17,
                      Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal
                      Meridian.
                      Annexing Lot 2 of Schuldt Second Subdivision being a part
04-23     7-12-04     of Section 17, Township 23, Range 10 East of the Third
                      Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing Lot 4 in Schuldt Second Subdivision being a part
05-21     7-11-05     of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the
                      Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing territory commencing at a stone at the southeast
05-26     8-8-05      corner of the northwest quarter of Section 8, Township 23
                      North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing Lot 5 in Schuldt Second Subdivision being a part
05-27     8-8-05      of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the
                      Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing territory beginning at the northwest corner of
06-29     7-10-06     the southeast quarter of Section 17, Township 23, Range
                      10 East of the Third Principal Meridian, encompassing
                      1.102 acres.
                      Annexing territory known as Lot 1 in Block 4 of Kurtz
07-37     12-10-07    First Subdivision, being a part of the east half of the
                      southeast quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range
                      10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing territory beginning at the northwest corner of
08-41     11-10-08    the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section
                      17, Township 23 North of the base line, Range 10 East of
                      the Third Principal Meridian, encompassing 0.548 acres.
                      Annexing the west 2-1/2 feet of Lot 8 and all of Lot 7,
09-08     3-9-09      except the west five feet thereof, in Schuldt
                      Subdivision, being a part of Section 17, Township 23
                      North, Range 10 East of the Third Principle Meridian.
                      Annexing Lot 8, except the west 2-1/2 feet thereof, in
12-14     3-12-12     Schuldt Subsivision, being a part of Section 17, Township
                      23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
                      Annexing Garrell property being part of the northeast
12-67     12-3-12     quarter of Section 13 and part of the northwest quarter
                      of Section 18.
12-68     12-3-12     Annexing Sanders property being part of the northwest
                      quarter of Section 18.
12-69     12-3-12     Annexing Polen property being part of the northwest
                      quarter of Section 18.
12-70     12-3-12     Annexing the Interstate 57/Illinois Route 9 interchange
                      being part of the northwest quarter of Section 18.
12-71     12-3-12     Annexing Woodridge Trust property being part of the
                      northwest quarter of Section 18.
12-72     12-3-12     Annexing Kulow property being part of the northwest
                      quarter of Section 18.
12-73     12-3-12     Annexing Bender property being part of the northwest
                      quarter of Section 18.
13-03     2-11-13     Correcting legal description for Ordinances 12-69 and 12-
                      71.
13-16     6-10-13     Annexing Shields property known as 1065 W. Ottawa.
                      Annexing Fairfield property being a part of Section 17,
13-30     10-14-13    Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal
                      Meridian.
15-06     4-13-15     Annexing Wheeler property known as 1125 Eastview Drive.
16-8      5-10-16     Annexing Beyer property known as 1006 Park Terrace.
16-9      5-10-16     Annexing Swan property known as 1176 Eastview.
17-20     5-9-17      Annexing property known as 1004 Stockholm Road.
17-31     7-11-17     Annexing property known as 1156 Eastview Drive.
18-04     1-9-18      Annexing property known as 1145 Eastview Drive.
2020-O-15 5-12-20     Annexing property known as 1170 E. Larson, to be zoned R-
                      2 Residential.
2020-O-16 5-12-20     Annexing property known as 1126 Eastview, to be zoned R-
                      2 Residential.
2023-04   2-14-23     Annexing property known as 1155 Roselawn.
                      Annexing Birkey property being a part of the southeast
23-07     - -         quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East
                      to be zoned R-2 Residential.
                     
 
TABLE IX: REZONING
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
64-28 11-9-  Rezoning Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 in Block 3 from R-3 to B-3.
      64
      12-23- Rezoning property commencing at the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of
64-30 64     the northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East, from R-
             2 to R-3.
64-31 12-23- Rezoning Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 in Block 16 of Railroad Addition
      64     from R-3 to M-2.
65-1  1-11-  Rezoning that part of the southeast quarter of the northwest fractional quarter
      65     of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East from R-1 to B-3.
65-17 9-13-  Rezoning land beginning at the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of
      65     Section 18 in Township 23 North, Range 10 East from R-1 to R-2.
      1-10-  Rezoning the north half of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the
66-1  66     northeast quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East from R-2 to
             Recreational.
      4-11-  Rezoning the south 440 feet of the east 633 feet of the northeast quarter of the
66-7  66     northwest quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East from R-1 to B-
             2.
66-13 6-13-  Rezoning Enterprise Subdivision from R-3 to B-3.
      66
             Rezoning Lot 3 in Block 5 in the Original Town of Prospect City, east of the
66-25 12-12- Illinois Central Railroad, from R-2 to B-3; and Lots 6 and 7, except the south
      66     150 feet thereof, and all of Lot 5, except a certain tract, all situated in Block
             5 of the Original Town of Prospect City, from R-2 to B-3.
66-26 12-12- Rezoning land beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 4 in Block 5 from R-2 to
      66     B-3.
67-8  4-19-  Rezoning a part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township
      67     23 North, Range 10 East to M-1.
67-9  4-19-  Rezoning the north 600 feet of the south half of the northeast quarter of Section
      67     13, Township 23 North, Range 9 East to M-1.
67-14 7-3-67 Rezoning land which begins at the point of intersection of the north line of
             Section 5, Township 23 North, Range 10 East from A to M-3.
             Rezoning a parcel of land containing 5.19 acres, located immediately north of
67-15 7-3-67 what is commonly referred to as the Bear Brand Hosiery Company property in
             Section 8, Township 23 North, Range 10 East from M-2 to B-3.
67-16 7-10-  Rezoning the east 400 feet of the part of the southeast quarter of the northwest
      67     quarter of Section 13, Township 23 North, Range 9 East from A to M-3.
68-14 6-10-  Rezoning Lots 15 through 21, inclusive, in Block 1 of Belson’s South Park
      68     Subdivision from B-1 to R-2.
      10-14- Rezoning Lot 12 and the south half of Lots 9, 10 and 11 in Block 23, Pell’s
68-26 68     Addition, and the north half of Lots 9, 10 and 11 in Block 23, Pell’s Addition,
             from R-2 to R-3.
             Rezoning Tract 1 beginning at a point at the intersection of the south line of
      4-14-  Ottawa Road and the west line of the northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 23
69-8  69     North, Range 10 East; and Tract 2, beginning at a point 104 feet east of the
             intersection of the south line of Ottawa Road and the west line of the northeast
             quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East, from R-1 to B-2.
             Rezoning the following three tracts of land from R-2 to R-3: Tract 1, Lot 1 and
      4-14-  the east one half of Lot 2 in Block 42 in Pell’s Addition; Tract 2, the west half
69-9  69     of Lot 2 and all of Lot 3 in Block 42 of Pell’s Addition to Paxton; and Tract 3,
             commencing at a point on the south line of Pell’s Street, 165 feet east from the
             northwest corner of Block 42 in Pell’s Addition.
             Rezoning the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 13, Township
69-22 8-11-  23 North, Range 9 East from A to M-3 for the south 330 feet thereof; M-2 for the
      69     north 330 feet thereof; and all of the rest of the real estate, except the south
             660 feet thereof as R-3.
69-28 10-13- Rezoning Lots 16 and 17 in Block 1 of Merchant’s Addition from R-2 to R-3.
      69
             Rezoning two parcels: Parcel 1, Lots 1 through 8, inclusive, of Block 50 and Lots
             1 through 6, inclusive of Block 51, all in Mix Addition; Blocks 2 and 3 of
70-13 5-11-  Moffett’s Subdivision of Blocks 49 through 54 of Mix’s Subdivision from R-1 to R-
      70     2; and Parcel 2, all that part of the north half of the northwest quarter of
             Section 8 from R-1 to M-2 for the west 20 acres and M-3 for the remainder of the
             tract.
72-13 8-14-  Rezoning Lots 11 through 16, inclusive, of Highland Ridge Subdivision from R-1 to
      72     R-2.
73-13 7-16-  Rezoning the east 70 acres of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 23
      73     North, Range 9 East from A to M-3.
73-16 8-13-  Rezoning property beginning at the northwest corner of Rolling Hills First
      72     Addition to R-2.
73-29 11-12- Rezoning all that part of Lot 3 of the subdivision of the west half of the
      73     southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East to R-4.
      12-10- Rezoning property beginning at the intersection of the south right-of-way line of
73-32 73     S.B.I. Route 9 and the east line of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township
             23 North, Range 10 East to B-3.
73-33 12-10- Rezoning a tract of land beginning at the southeast corner of the northwest
      73     quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East to B-3.
      12-10- Rezoning the south 327.93 feet of a tract of land beginning at the southeast
73-34 73     corner of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East
             to R-3.
      12-10- Rezoning the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 18, except the portion
73-35 73     thereof conveyed to the State of Illinois, and the west 880.0 feet of a parcel of
             land to R-3.
             Rezoning all that part of the southeast quarter of Section 18 lying west of the
73-36 12-10- right-of-way of the Illinois Central Railroad, save and except the south 55 acres
      73     thereof and excepting the west 880.0 feet thereof, all in Township 23 North,
             Range 10 East to M-1.
      12-10- Rezoning the north half of the west 244 feet of the east half of the southwest
73-37 73     quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 18, all in Township 23 North, Range
             10 East to B-3.
73-38 12-10- Rezoning Lots 1 through 35, inclusive, except Lot 23, and the north 50 feet of
      73     Lot 22, of Snyder Subdivision to M-1.
74-1  - -    Rezoning Lots 1 through 20, inclusive, all in Block 7 in Railroad Addition to R-
             4.
74-4  2-11-  Rezoning Parcel 1, beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 1 in Rolling Hills
      74     Addition; and Parcel 2, Lots 1 and 16 in Rolling Hills First Addition to R-3.
74-9  7-8-74 Rezoning Lot 15 in Block 1 of Merchant’s Addition from R-2 to R-3.
74-13 8-12-  Rezoning the south 780 feet of a tract of land beginning at the southeast corner
      74     of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East to R-4.
             Rezoning Lot 12 of the subdivision of the northeast quarter of the southwest
74-14 8-12-  quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East; and Lot 13 of the
      74     subdivision of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 17,
             Township 23 North, Range 10 East to R-3.
      11-11- Rezoning the north 240.0 feet of a tract of land beginning at the southeast
74-24 74     corner of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East
             to R-4.
75-3  1-13-  Rezoning a tract of land commencing at the northeast corner of the southwest
      75     quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East to R-2.
75-10 4-14-  Rezoning Lots 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 in Block 2 of Merchant’s Addition
      75     from R-2 to R-3.
75-13 5-12-  Rezoning Lots 7 and 8 in Block 49 of Mix Addition to R-3.
      75
75-35 12-1-  Rezoning property beginning at a point 1,014.56 feet south of and 33 feet east of
      75     the northwest corner of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East to B-2.
76-8  3-8-76 Rezoning property commencing at the northwest corner of Section 13, Township 23
             North, Range 9 East to B-3.
76-9  3-8-76 Rezoning Lots 6 and 7 in Block 15 in Mix Addition to M-1.
76-22 7-12-  Rezoning the east 98.4 feet of the north 158 feet of Lot 9 of Goodrich’s
      76     Subdivision, more commonly known as 304 West Ottawa Street, to M-1.
76-24 8-9-76 Rezoning property commonly known as 500 West Ottawa Road to B-3.
76-39 12-13- Rezoning all that part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
      76     Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East to M-3.
77-1  2-14-  Rezoning land commonly known as land lying adjacent to Interstate 57 and Illinois
      77     State Route 9 on the southwest corner of the intersection to B-3.
77-19 7-11-  Rezoning land commonly known as 361 West Ottawa to R-3.
      77
78-3  1-9-78 Rezoning Lot 16 of Snyder Subdivision from R-1 to M-1.
78-12 6-12-  Rezoning Lot 1 of Snyder Subdivision, more commonly known as South Market Street,
      78     to M-1.
78-14 6-12-  Rezoning Lot 2 of Snyder Subdivision, more commonly known as West Fulton Street,
      78     to M-1.
78-19 A      7-10-78Rezoning Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 in Block 22 of the Original Town of Prospect
             City to B-1.
78-21 8-14-  Rezoning the west half of Lots 7 and 8 and all of Lots 9, 10 and 11 in Block 26
      78     in Railroad Addition, commonly known as 361 North Railroad Avenue, to B-3.
78-34 8-31-  Rezoning a parcel of land located in the Cambridge Heights Subdivision, described
      78     as Exhibit A, to R-2 for Lots 1 through 37 and to R-3 for Lot 38.
80-24 10-13- Rezoning Lots 8 and 9 of Merchant’s Addition from R-1 to R-3.
      80
      8-10-  Rezoning a part of Lot 3 of Hunt’s Subdivision of that part of the southeast
81-23 81     quarter of the northeast quarter, Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of
             the Third Principal Meridian to B-1.
             Rezoning two parcels of land described as follows to R-2: all of Block 3 in Kurtz
             First Subdivision, being a part of the east half of the southeast quarter of
82-20 8-9-82 Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian; and
             Lot 6 and the west 58 feet of Lot 7 in Schuldt Second Subdivision, being a part
             of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian.
      7-11-  Rezoning Lots 1 through 9, inclusive, Lot 10, except the west 40 feet of even
83-26 83     width, the east half of Lot 15, and Lots 16 through 19, inclusive, in Block 1 in
             Kurtz First Subdivision to R-2.
             Rezoning two parcels of land described as follows to M-2: the north 200 feet of
      7-11-  that part of the south half of the northeast quarter of Section 13, Township 23
83-27 83     North, Range 9 East; and the east 299.9 feet of the west 365.9 feet of the north
             435.5 feet of that part of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
             Section 13, Township 23 North, Range 9 East.
             Rezoning the following two tracts of land to M-2: Tract I, the east 400 feet of
      7-11-  that part of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 13,
83-28 83     Township 23 North, Range 9 East; and Tract II, the southeast quarter of the
             northwest quarter of Section 13, Township 23 North, Range 9 East, except the east
             400 feet, the west 720.5 feet, and the south 220 feet thereof.
      2-13-  Rezoning all of that part of Block 42 in Pell’s Addition, east of the Illinois
84-4  84     Central Railroad, beginning 90 feet east of the northwest corner of Block 42 from
             R-2 to R-3.
85-2  1-14-  Rezoning Lot 20 in Block 30 in Railroad Addition, west of the Illinois Central
      85     Railroad, to M-1.
      8-12-  Rezoning Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 in Block 4 in Toy and Thompson’s Subdivision of
85-31 85     Lots 5 and 6 of Goodrich’s Subdivision of the west half of the northeast quarter
             of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East to B-2.
             Rezoning Lots 1 through 8, inclusive, in Block 4 in Toy and Thompson’s
85-34 9-9-85 Subdivision of Lots 5 and 6 of Goodrich’s Subdivision of the west half of the
             northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10 East to B-3.
      7-14-  Rezoning a tract of land commencing at the southeast corner of Lot 1 of the
86-17 86     southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 8, Township 23 North, Range
             10 East to B-3.
             Rezoning the west half of Lot 6 and the east 50 feet of Lot 7, Block 7 in Kurtz
86-26 9-8-86 First Subdivision to R-2; and land commencing at the point of intersection of the
             south line of the northwest quarter of Section 8 in Township 23 North, Range 19
             East to M-3.
86-34 12-8-  Rezoning Lots 9, 10, 11 and 12 in Block 22 in Mix Addition from R-1 to R-2.
      86
             Rezoning the following properties from Agricultural to R-1: land beginning at the
             southwest corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 8,
87-5  2-9-87 Township 23 North, Range 10 East; and that part of Illinois State Highway Route 9
             contiguous and adjacent to the tract described above on the south side of the
             tract in the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 8 in Township
             23 North, Range 10 East.
             Rezoning the north 94¼ feet of the entire north ends of Lots 1, 2 and 3 in Block
87-19 8-10-  3 in Toy and Thompson’s Subdivision of Lots 5 and 6 in Goodrich’s Subdivision of
      87     the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range 10
             East from R-1 to B-2.
87-25 10-12- Rezoning Lots 18, 19, 20 and 21, except the north 15 feet of Lot 21 in Block 1 of
      87     Belson’s Park Subdivision from R-2 to B-1.
             Rezoning the following parcels of land from M-1 to B-3: land commencing at a
             point on the south line of Ottawa Street and 190 feet easterly from the northeast
88-4  2-8-88 corner of Lot 2 of Hunt’s Subdivision; and land commencing at a stone on the
             south line of Ottawa Street, 268 feet easterly from a stone at the northeast
             corner of Lot 2 of P.E. Hunt’s Subdivision.
             Rezoning the north 66 feet of the west half of the east half of the northwest
88-10 3-14-  quarter lying east of PAI Route 57 and the north 888.12 feet of the east half of
      88     the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter lying west of Rolling Hills First
             and Second Addition from Agriculture to R-2.
             Rezoning the following property from R-1 to B-1: Tract 1, the south 18 rods of
             the east 25 feet of Lot “A” of Lot 1 of the subdivision of the southeast quarter
             of the southwest quarter of Section 8 and the south 19 rods of the west 105 feet
88-16 4-11-  of Lot 1 of the subdivision of said Section 9, all in Township 23 North, Range 10
      88     East; Tract 2, land commencing at a point on the south line of Lot 1 of the
             subdivision of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 8,
             Township 23 North, Range 10 East; and Tract 3, Lot 10 and the east quarter of Lot
             8 of Larson Brother’s Subdivision.
88-26 7-11-  Rezoning Lots 3 through 14, inclusive, Lots 24 through 35, inclusive, all of
      88     Snyder Subdivision, to M-1.
88-46 12-12- Rezoning 1300 South Vermilion Street from B-3 to M-3.
      88
90-41 12-10- Rezoning Lot 7 in Block 13 in the Original Town of Prospect City from R-3 to B-3.
      90
91-30 10-15- Rezoning the east 60 feet of Lots 7 and 8 in Block 26 in Railroad Addition,
      91     commonly known as 210 East Pine, to B-3.
      7-14-  Rezoning the west half of Lot 14 and all of Lot 13, Block B, Original Town, west
93-23 93     of the Illinois Central Railroad, commonly known as 140 West Center Street from
             R-2 to B-2.
             Rezoning the following tracts of land from R-2 to B-2: land commonly known as 206
             South Market Street, land commonly known as 214 South Market Street; land
93-41 11-8-  commonly known as 230 South Market Street; land commonly known as 254 South
      93     Market Street; land commonly known as 209 South Market Street; land commonly
             known as 237 South Market Street; and land commonly known as 251 South Market
             Street.
      11-8-  Rezoning the east 133 feet of the north 100 feet of real estate beginning at the
93-42 93     southeast corner of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 18,
             Township 23 North, Range 10 East from M-1 to R-3.
94-02 1-10-  Rezoning the north half of Lot 18 and the north half of Lot 19 in Block 30,
      94     Railroad Addition to the city to B-2.
94-10 2-21-  Rezoning the north 15 feet of Lot 21, all of Lot 22 and the south 15 feet of Lot
      94     23 in Block 1 of Belson’s South Park Subdivision from B-1 and R-2 to R-3.
95-17 5-8-95 Rezoning land commonly known as 639 South Market Street and 645 South Market
             Street from M-1 to B-3.
95-37 9-11-  Rezoning the north 40 feet of the south 80 feet of Lots 18 and 19 in Block 30 of
      95     Railroad Addition; and Lot 21 in Block 30 in Railroad Addition to M-1.
      1-13-  Rezoning the north 50 feet of Lot 1 of Snyder Subdivision and Lot 2 of Snyder
97-3  97     Subdivision, commonly known as South Market and West Fulton Streets from M-1 to
             B-3.
97-4  2-17-  Rezoning land commonly known as 585 South Market Street from M-1 to B-2.
      97
             Rezoning the north 100 feet of all that part of Lot 3 of the subdivision of the
98-25 9-14-  west half of the southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10
      98     East, lying south of and included in Merchant’s Addition to the city and the
             vacated portion of the street formerly known as Washington Boulevard to R-2.
00-22 9-11-  Rezoning land commonly known as 111 West State Street to B-3.
      00
2001- 8-13-  Rezoning land commonly known as 730 South High Street from R-2 to R-3.
18    01
2001- 11-12- Rezoning Lots 9, 10 and 11 in Block 17 in the Original Town of Prospect City from
37    01     R-2 to R-3.
02-42 11-12- Rezoning two tracts of land commonly known as 615 North Railroad Avenue from M-
      02     3 to R-3 and B-3.
04-21 7-12-  Rezoning land commonly known as 501 South Market St. from M-1 to B-1.
      04
05-19 6-13-  Rezoning land commonly known as 831 South Railroad Ave. from B-1 to B-3.
      05
06-12 4-10-  Rezoning land commonly known as 301 North Union Street from M-1 to R-2.
      06
06-18 5-8-06 Rezoning land commonly known as 785 South Railroad Avenue from M-1 to B-3.
06-23 6-12-  Rezoning land commonly known as 826 Market Street from R-2 to B-3.
      06
06-28 7-10-  Rezoning land commonly known as 1015 South Washington from R-2 to B-3.
      06
06-39 10-9-  Rezoning land commonly known as 304 North Union from M-1 to R-3.
      06
06-46 12-11- Rezoning land commonly known as 821 South Union Street and 418 East Summer Street
      06     from R-2 and R-3.
07-19 6-11-  Rezoning land commonly known as 641 North Market and 649 North Market from M-2 to
      07     R-3.
42    11-10- Rezoning land commonly known as 11XX S. Washington Avenue from R-2 to R-3.
      08
09-45 10-12- Rezoning land commonly known as 830 Market Street from R-2 to B-3.
      09
09-49 10-19- Rezoning land commonly known as 401 North Market Street from M-2 to B-2.
      09
11-11 5-9-11 Rezoning land commonly known as 803 South Railroad Street from R-2 to B-3.
12-74 12-3-  Rezoning land generally located west of Interstate 57, north of Illinois Route 9
      12     and east of Baltimore Drive to B-2.
12-75 12-3-  Rezoning land commonly known as 3 Centennial Drive to B-2.
      12
12-76 12-3-  Rezoning land commonly known as 1 Centennial Drive to B-2.
      12
12-77 12-3-  Rezoning land commonly known as 901 West Franklin to R-2.
      12
12-78 12-3-  Rezoning land commonly known as 902 Jack Street to R-2.
      12
12-79 12-3-  Rezoning land commonly known as 900 Jack Street to R-2.
      12
16-8  5-10-  Rezoning land commonly known as 1006 Park Terrace to R-2.
      16
16-9  5-10-  Rezoning land commonly known as 1176 Eastview to R-2.
      16
16-36 12-13- Rezoning land commonly known as 575 Market Street to B-3.
      16
16-37 12-13- Rezoning land commonly known as 201 E. Pells Street to B-3.
      16
17-2  2-14-  Rezoning land commonly known as Ottawa Roach and Technology Drive to B-2.
      17
18-11 5-8-18 Rezoning land commonly known as 201 S. Railroad to B-3.
20-28 11-10- Rezoning land commonly known as 350 West Ottawa from R-2 to M-1.
      20
21-03 3-9-21 Rezoning land commonly known as 465 West Orleans from R-1 to R-3.
21-11 8-10-  Rezoning land commonly known as 146 W. State from B-1 to R-1.
      21
             Rezoning land commonly known as 335 S. Market and 343 S. Market from B-3 to R-3;
22-04 5-10-  land commonly known as 95 E. Ottawa from M-1 to R-3; land commonly known as 101
      22     W. Ottawa from R-3 to B-3; and land commonly known as 111 W. Ottawa from R-3 to
             B-3.
             Rezoning land commonly known as 639 N. Market, 637 N. Market, 635 N. Market, 615
22-18 10-11- N. Market, and 603 N. Market from M-2 to R-3; land commonly known as 210 W.
      22     Center, 226 W. Center, 242 W. Center, and 258 W. Center from R-3 to R-2; and land
             commonly known as 235 N. Taft and Holmes Street from R-3 to B-1.
             Rezoning land commonly known as 230 E. Holmes, 247 E. Holmes, 249 E. Holmes, 355
      4-11-  E. Holmes, 203 N. Vermillion, 234 N. Vermillion, 200 N. Union, and 201 N. Union
23-12 23     from M-1 to R-3; land commonly known as 301 N. Union and 306 N. Union from R-2 to
             R-3; land commonly known as 252 W. Ottawa from R-1 to R-3; and land commonly
             known as 108 W. State from B-1 to B-3.
             Rezoning land commonly known as 247 N. Railroad Ave, 201 E. State, 149 N.
23-21 8-8-23 Railroad Ave., 205 E. Pells St., 201 E. Pells St., and 131 N. Railroad Ave. from
             M-1 to B-3.
             Rezoning ten parcels of land from R-1 to R-2, seven parcels of land from R-3 to
      11-14- R-2, two parcels of land from M-1 to B-3, two parcels of land from M-1 to R-2,
23-25 23     one parcel of land from R-1 to M-2, one parcel of land from R-3 to B-3, one
             parcel of land from B-1 to R-1, one parcel of land from R-3 to R-2, and one
             parcel of land from M-2 to R-1.
23-37 9-12-  Rezoning 28 parcels of land from R-3 to R-2 and one parcel of land from R-2 to B-
      23     2.
2024- 7-9-24 Rezoning two parcels of land from R-2 to B-2.
07-02
            
 
TABLE X: ZONING VARIANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
      12-23- Granting a variance to Milton R. Schofield and Norma Schofield for Lots
64-32 64     12, 13 and 14 in Block 16 of Railroad Addition to allow the proposed building on
             the lots to be built up to the west lot line of the lots.
65-5  2-8-65 Granting a variance to Lars Rasmussen for a special use permit on the north 105
             feet of Lot 9 in Block 14 of the Original Town of Prospect City.
             Granting a variance to Wayne Natterstad on land commencing at a point 80.10 rods 23
65-6  2-8-65 North, Range 10 East which will allow the lot to be divided into two lots, one lot
             having a frontage of 50 feet on Route 9 and the second having a frontage of 65 feet
             on Route 10.
             Granting a variance to Gerald L. Widmer for the north 59.92 feet of Lot “A” of the
65-22 11-22- southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 18, Township 23 North, Range
      65     10 East, to allow a building to be constructed upon the lot on the north boundary
             line of the lot and to within 9 feet of the south boundary line.
             Granting a variance to the Church of the Nazarene for Lots 1 and 2 in Block 35 of
66-8  4-11-  Railroad Addition and Lots 1 and 2 in Block 34 of Pell’s Addition, except the south
      66     65 feet thereof, allowing a new addition to the present church to be built within 8
             feet of the west line of the Lots and within 12 feet of the south line of the Lots.
             Granting a variance to Ivan M. Eichelberger for Lot 7 and the west half of Lot 8 in
66-10 5-9-66 Block “D” in Pell’s Addition to allow the lot to be divided into two lots, one lot
             having a frontage of 75 feet on Washington Street and the second having a frontage
             of 85 feet on Washington Street.
             Granting a variance to James F. Anderson for all of Lot 4 and the west half of Lot
67-13 5-8-67 3 in Block “D” in Pell’s Addition to permit petitioners to operate a one-operator
             beauty parlor in the house.
             Granting a variance to Wilbert Hamstra allowing construction of a building within
68-12 4-8-68 12 feet of the front lot line and to allow the construction of a building within 1
             foot of the west lot line.
             Granting a variance to James R. Rubarts allowing the addition of a room on the
68-22 9- -68 present dwelling now on the premises, which said room shall be used to operate one
             beauty operator station or beauty parlor.
      12-9-  Granting a variance to William J. Struska allowing the continuing use of the
68-30 68     present existing dwelling located on the premises and also to use a portion of the
             dwelling within which to conduct a business as a photographer.
70-2  1-12-  Granting a variance to Leonard Belson and Doyle M. Dazey allowing the operation of
      70     a one-operator beauty parlor in the house.
70-20 8-10-  Granting a variance to Erma L. Harr and Claude H. Clough allowing Lot 1 and the
      70     north half of Lot 2 in Block “G” in Pell’s Addition to be divided into two lots.
      10-12- Granting a variance to Virgil J. Naugle II allowing the north half of Lot 20 and
70-23 70     all of Lot 21 in Block 37, Pell’s Addition, to be used for a funeral parlor and to
             add on to the building now presently on the premises.
      12-14- Granting a variance to Glynn A. Wolfe allowing the operation of a beauty parlor in
70-24 70     the basement of the residence situated in the south half of Lots 9, 10 and 11 in
             Block 62, Pell’s Addition.
      11-8-  Granting a variance to Vito Frank Alfano allowing the operation of a beauty parlor
71-20 71     in the basement of the residence situated on Lot 3 and the east 18 feet of Lot 4 in
             Block “A” of the Original Town of Prospect City.
      1-10-  Granting a variance to Don S. Jordan allowing a beauty parlor in the breezeway
72-1  72     attached to the residence situated on Lot 1 in Block 3 in Belson’s South Park
             Subdivision.
      11-13- Granting a variance to the Paxton Community Day Care Center allowing the operation
72-22 72     of a child care center on the north 50 feet of Lots 1 and 2 in Block 49 of Mix
             Addition.
      11-13- Granting a variance to Illinois Knights Templar Home for the Aged Infirm, Inc.,
72-23 72     allowing the use of the property owned by it as a nursing home or rest home for the
             aged and infirm.
73-14 8-13-  Granting a variance to Kno-Us Co. allowing the construction and rental of a two
      73     family dwelling on Lot 7 in Block 2, Merchan’ts Addition.
      8-13-  Granting a variance to Charles E. Harris allowing the operation of a one-station
73-15 73     beauty parlor on Lot 14 in Block 8, except the west 12½ feet thereof, in Railroad
             Addition.
74-2  1-14-  Granting a variance to Wendell C. Hegg allowing the maintenance of a mobile home on
      74     Lot 11 in Block 17 of the Original Town of Prospect City.
      1-14-  Granting a variance to William I. Bryant and Thomas Stark allowing the operation of
74-3  74     a one-station beauty parlor on fractional Lot 8 and the west 40 feet of Lot 7,
             Block “D” in Pell’s Addition.
      5-13-  Granting a variance to Scott B. Bayles allowing the operation of a high fidelity
74-7  74     component sales and service center in the house located on the east half of Lot 14
             and the west 10 feet of Lot 15 in Block 14 in the Original Town of Prospect City.
             Granting a variance to D.J. Barr allowing the construction and rental of a number
74-15 8-12-  of two family dwellings, each having not less than 605 square feet of floor area,
      74     on Lot 12 of the subdivision of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
             Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East.
             Granting a variance to Arnold D. Annis Jr. allowing the decoration and finishing of
74-16 8-12-  plaster figurines and displaying them for wholesale and retail sales on Lots 9, 10
      74     and 11 in Block 29 of Mix’s Addition and Lots 6 and 7 and the unnumbered fractional
             lot in Block 4 of Railroad Addition.
75-2  1-13-  Granting a variance to D.J. Barr allowing planned unit developments on land
      75     commonly known as 700 South High Street.
75-14 5-12-  Granting a variance to David V. Trout allowing the construction and rental of two
      75     two family dwelling units on Lots 7 and 8 in Block 49 of Mix Addition.
             Granting a variance to Glen L. Anderson and Sam P. Rady allowing construction
75-15 5-12-  according to plans submitted as a part of the application, subject to the provision
      75     of a 30- foot backyard measured from the alley to the unit of the north portion of
             Lot 13.
75-30 10-13- Granting a variance to Earl and Isabelle L. Nieft allowing the construction of 2
      75     one- family dwelling units on Lots 7 and 8 in Block 43 in Pell’s Addition.
             Granting a variance to Marvin and Shirley Weburg allowing the operation of a beauty
76-1  1-12-  parlor on all of Lots 1 and 2 and the west three feet of Lot 3 of Larson Brother’s
      76     Subdivision of Lots 1 and 2 of the part of the southeast quarter of the southwest
             quarter of Section 8, Township 23 North, Range 10 East.
             Granting a variance to Glen Cemetery allowing the west 200 feet of Lots 11, 12 and
76-5  - -76  13, excepting the north 7 rods of Lot 12, in the subdivision of the northeast
             quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 17, Township 23 North, Range 10 East to
             be used as a cemetery.
             Granting a variance to D.J. and Joanne E. Barr, Nancy Anne Dickey and Grace Niewold
76-6  3-8-76 allowing the construction of one- family dwelling units on Lots 10 and 11 in Block
             3 of Merchants Addition.
76-7  3-8-76 Granting a variance to Marvin and Shirley Weburg allowing the construction of a 34-
             foot by 18-foot garage for their well drilling vehicles.
      5-10-  Granting a variance to Robert L. and Frances O. Yancey allowing the petitioner to
76-14 76     redesign the interior of the elevator building located on all of Lot 5 in Block 3
             of the Original Town of Prospect City.
76-15 6-14-  Granting a variance to Marvin F. and Anita L. Hylbert allowing the operation of a
      76     one-station barber shop in the breezeway situated between the house and garage.
      6-14-  Granting a variance to Leslie F. and Marilyn J. Fields allowing the construction of
76-16 76     a one- family dwelling on the north 70 feet of Lots 9, 10 and 11, except the east
             25 feet of Lot 11, all situated in Block 51 in Pell’s Addition.
      6-14-  Granting a variance to Michael Judge and Rudi Stout allowing the operation of a
76-17 76     motorcycle parts, sales and painting store on the south 37½ feet of Lot 2 and the
             north 12½ feet of Lot 3 in Block 15 in Pell’s Addition.
      6-14-  Granting a variance to Helen Cornelison, Nicholas Fiorillo and Community Resource
76-18 76     and Counseling Center allowing philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions on Lot 6
             in Block A of the Original Town of Prospect City.
      11-8-  Granting a variance to Paul C. and Connie Y. Patterson allowing the parking of a
76-34 76     mobile home on land commonly known as Rt. 45 north to cob plant, 1½ miles east of
             Rt. 45 (formerly Art Flannery residence).
76-35 11-8-  Granting a variance to L. Hon and Norma Jean Lee allowing the house on Lot 11 in
      76     Kreuger Subdivision to be used as a real estate and insurance brokerage office.
77-13 6-13-  Granting a variance to Linda Genzel allowing the owner to operate a one-chair
      77     beauty parlor on land commonly known as 839 South Railroad Avenue.
             Granting a variance to William B. and Marilyn Owens allowing the operation of a
77-38 10-10- one-station barber shop in the garage situated on the rear of the property located
      77     on the west half of Lot 9 and all of Lot 10 in Block 13 in the Original Town of
             Prospect City.
             Granting a variance to Robert and Shirley Thompson allowing the use of a garage on
78-4  1-9-78 the premises as a place of business for servicing and repairing of electrical
             appliances and as a place of storage for parts and electrical appliances on land
             commonly known as 451 East Patton Street.
78-13 6-12-  Granting a variance to Delmar Kingren and First National Bank for property commonly
      78     known as South Market Street.
78-15 6-12-  Granting a variance to Arthur and Marilyn Lammers and First National Bank for
      78     property commonly known as West Fulton Street.
78-29 8-31-  Granting a variance to Joel F. and Sheila L. Burwash and Harris Trust and Savings
      78     Bank allowing the operation of a dog kennel, pet shop and animal hospital.
78-35 8-31-  Granting a variance to Lancaster Development company allowing construction of a
      78     condominium on Lot 38 of the proposed Cambridge Heights Subdivision.
      9-11-  Granting a variance to Darwin, Rey, Jackie and Kathy Roy allowing the erection and
78-37 78     operation of a beauty parlor on the west 100 feet of Lots 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of Block
             25, Railroad Addition.
79-8  4-9-79 Granting a variance to Paxton Community Hospital allowing the construction of a
             hospital addition and the operation of a hospital and medical clinic.
             Granting a variance to Donald Marshall allowing the repair of the present paint
79-22 7-9-79 shop on the premises to make it suitable for the operation of a plumbing shop
             located on land commonly known as 447-49 East Patton Street.
             Granting a variance to Donald L. Wolf, Richard P. Foellner and Alfred L. Sheptock
79-41 9-10-  allowing the subdivision of Lots 8 and 9 and the west one-half of Lot 6 in Block 12
      79     of the Original Town of Prospect City in order to facilitate the construction of a
             single-family dwelling and adjust lot dimensions for existing structures.
80-25 10-13- Granting a variance to John C. and Emma A. Schluter allowing the construction of
      80     single- family dwellings in accordance with the requests.
80-26 10-13- Granting a variance to L & B General Contractors allowing the owners to build
      80     duplex-type units with one each located on Lots 40 and 41, 42 and 43, 44 and 45.
      10-13- Granting a variance to Olin and Carol Ostendorf allowing the construction of
80-27 80     single-family dwellings on Lots 20 and 21 in Block 6 of Merchant’s Addition; Lot 3
             of Block 1 of Merchant’s Addition; and Lot 18 in Block 7 in Merchant’s Addition.
      10-13- Granting a variance to Donald L. and Sally Wolf allowing the construction of a
80-28 80     single-family dwelling on the east 85 feet of Lots 15 and 16 in Block E of Pell’s
             Addition.
             Granting a variance to Donald L. Wolf and Richard P. Foellner allowing a lot area
80-29 10-13- of not less than 6,099 square feet with a minimum building line width of not less
      80     than 57 feet for the northerly 107 feet of Lot 8 and the northerly 107 feet of the
             westerly 7 feet of Lot 7 in Block 12 in the Original Town of Prospect City.
81-2  1-12-  Granting a variance to Rufus L. and Virgie A. Newson allowing the operation of an
      81     auto body repair shop in the garage.
             Granting a variance to Harry E. and Fred R. Leventhal and F.B.C. Corporation
81-34 11-9-  allowing the construction of an addition to the building, the construction of a
      81     truck bay and parking of vehicles on vacation portions of Lots 11, 12 and 13 in
             Block 4 of the Original Town of Prospect City.
82-6  4-12-  Granting a variance to Royce M. and Rhonda M. Baier allowing a reduction in the
      82     side yard requirement to 12 feet along Vermilion Street.
      12-13- Granting a variance to Rural Builders, Inc., Prairieview Apartments Partnership,
82-33 82     and Farmers-Merchants National Bank of Paxton allowing construction of a sign
             bearing the name of the proposed housing project.
82-34 12-13- Granting a variance to First Trust and Savings Bank of Kankakee allowing
      82     construction of a sign setting forth the name of the housing project.
83-8  3-14-  Granting a variance to David D. and Laurie J. Eckerty allowing the construction of
      83     a single-family dwelling having side yards of not less than four feet.
             Granting a variance to Kevin M. Diesburg allowing the construction of an addition
83-24 6-13-  to the existing residence located on Lot 8, except the south 80 feet thereof in
      83     Block 25 in the Original Town of Prospect City, commonly known as 406 East
             Franklin.
83-39 9-12-  Granting a variance to Harold F. and Diane J. Andrew allowing the remodeling of the
      83     interior of the existing premises to provide for 5 one-bedroom apartments.
      1-14-  Granting a variance to James C. Reeder allowing the construction of an unattached
85-3  85     garage structure for use as a woodworking shop on land commonly known as 702 East
             Summer Street.
85-10 2-11-  Granting a variance to Raymond P. and Linda L. Jennings to construct a storage
      85     building on land commonly known as 103 West Fulton Street.
85-15 3-11-  Granting a variance to James R. Benson allowing him to operate a professional
      85     office in his home located at 607 South Washington Street.
             Granting a variance to Jess Ford-Heido, Harry B. Ford, Charlene C. Ford, Steven A.
85-35 9-9-85 Elson, Mark R. Garrell and KBAR, Inc., allowing the construction of a restaurant on
             land commonly known as the north side of the 400 Block of West Ottawa.
85-36 9-9-85 Granting a variance to Elizabeth F. Cole- Pruitt allowing the operation of a beauty
             parlor at 3 Lane Drive.
85-43 10-2-  Granting a variance to Paxton Community Hospital District and Westworld Community
      85     Healthcare allowing the construction of a medical clinic at 709 East Pell’s Street.
85-46 11-12- Granting a variance to Charlie E. and Vicki J. Harris allowing the operation of a
      85     one-beauty operator station at 417 East Larson Street.
      12-14- Granting a variance to Merlin D. Lower allowing the construction of a detached
87-30 87     accessory building closer than ten feet to the principle buildings at 301 South
             High Street.
87-31 12-14- Granting a variance to Glenn W. and Doris G. Miller allowing the construction of an
      87     addition to the existing garage.
      1-11-  Granting a variance to Anthony A. and Ellen M. Lee allowing the use of a portion of
88-2  88     the premises for the operation of a law office and the hanging of a sign at 535
             South Taft.
88-5  - -88  Granting a variance to Gerald and Kathie Houser allowing the operation of a beauty
             parlor at 336 East State Street.
      3-14-  Granting a variance to Thelma Flessner allowing the use of a portion of the
88-9  88     premises for the operation of a real estate office and the hanging of a sign at 635
             South Park.
      4-11-  Granting a variance to Wilford and Deborah Hicks allowing the use of a portion of
88-15 88     the front yard for the purpose of enlarging the existing structure by adding a
             garage at 1155 South Strong Street.
88-25 7-11-  Granting a variance to HCR Corporation allowing the erection of a sign at the 1000
      88     Block of East Pell’s Street, North Side.
88-38 8-12-  Granting a variance to Dave Anderson allowing the construction of a garage at 802
      88     North Market Street.
89-2  1-9-89 Granting a variance to Ford’s Foodliner, Inc. allowing the construction of a retail
             building.
89-7  2-13-  Granting a variance to Francis E. and Dorothy Engdahl allowing the construction of
      89     a garage and storage building on 521 East Franklin Street.
      4-10-  Granting a variance to Mitchell H. Nuss and Terrence E. Lee, doing business as Lee
89-12 89     Agency, allowing the affixation of two signs to the premises at 225 West Ottawa
             Street.
      6-12-  Granting a variance to Stanley Drassler allowing the erection of an outdoor
89-24 89     advertising sign advertising a future McDonald’s restaurant to be located at
             Gilman, Illinois.
89-25 6-12-  Granting a variance to Paxton Ready Mix allowing business to take place outside at
      89     745 North Market Street.
             Granting a variance to Olin Osterdorf allowing a minimum lot area of the western
89-31 8-14-  subdivided portion of the 700 Block of West State Street lying west of the
      89     intersection of Plum and State to be not less than 5,800 square feet and the
             eastern subdivided portion of the property to be not less than 6,400 square feet.
89-36 10-9-  Granting a variance to FBC Corporation allowing the construction of a building on
      89     131 North Railroad Avenue.
      11-13- Granting a variance to Donald and Cordie Sue Combs allowing variations to the
89-43 89     existing mobile home park concerning lots size and dimensions and the like at 434
             West Pine Street.
      12-14- Granting a variance to Howard Thomas, Rob Sickler and Ron Nelson allowing the
89-48 89     operation of a retail videotape rental, sales and accessory business at 442 South
             Market Street.
90-15 6-11-  Granting a variance to Norbert and Louise Luschinski allowing the erection of a
      90     fence at 417 East Larson.
90-16 7-9-90 Granting a variance to Russell H. and Phyllis L. Pitch allowing construction of a
             34-foot wide concrete driveway to a garage at 164 North Elm Street.
      10-8-  Granting a variance to John Munsterman allowing the construction of a garage within
90-32 90     5 feet of the east property line and within 5 feet of the north property line at
             311 West Franklin Street.
      1-14-  Granting a variance to the Ford County Public Building Commission allowing the
91-1  91     property at 209 West State Street to be used for the erection and continued
             operation of a County Sheriff’s Police Department and County Jail.
             Granting a variance to the Paxton Women’s Club and Sidney F. and Martha L. Shanks
91-11 4-8-91 allowing the erection of a patriotic sign and flag pole honoring U.S. service men
             and women in the Desert Storm action and all U.S. Armed Forces veterans at 500 West
             Ottawa.
             Granting a variance to Paxton Printing, Inc. and Shields Pontiac, Oldsmobile,
91-12 4-8-91 Cadillac, Inc. allowing the erection of a corporate identity sign at 109 West State
             Street.
91-13 4-8-91 Granting a variance to Lillian L. Haack allowing the construction of a garage at
             1003 South Vermilion Street.
91-22 6-10-  Granting a variance to Earl Stout allowing the conversion of the second story of
      91     the single family dwelling at 442 West Center Street to an apartment.
91-29 9-9-91 Granting a variance to Stephen S. Burgener allowing the installation of a privacy
             fence made of wood at 139 South Elm Street.
92-4  3-24-  Granting a variance to Eugene and Randy A. Houston allowing the installation of a
      92     sign at 840 East Summer.
      4-13-  Granting a variance to Allen Reckowsky allowing the storage of electrical supplies,
92-6  92     equipment and vehicles on the first floor of the building located at 325 East State
             Street.
92-15 6-8-92 Granting a variance to Frank D. Johnson allowing an apartment in the rear of the
             building and a barber shop in the front at 122 Market Street.
92-16 6-8-92 Granting a variance to William T. and Mildred A. Barksdale allowing the operation
             of a motorcycle and small engine repair shop at 424 East Chestnut Street.
92-24 7-13-  Granting a variance to Ray and Juanita Watson allowing the replacement of a mobile
      92     home at 288 North Maple Street with a new mobile home.
      8-10-  Granting a variance to Harold D. Lay allowing a sign to project more than 18 inches
92-32 92     from the wall and beyond the property line into the public way at 316 North Market
             Street.
92-46 12-14- Granting a variance to Stephen S. and Sandra C. Burgener allowing the operation of
      92     a bed and breakfast.
92-47 12-14- Granting a variance to Terry Collier and the Upper Room Ministry, Inc. allowing the
      92     operation of an antique shop and tea room at 425 West Orleans Street.
93-11 3-8-93 Granting a variance to Ray and Juanita Watson allowing a mobile home to be situated
             at 288 North Maple Street.
93-24 6-14-  Granting a variance to the First of America Bank allowing the owner to retain the
      93     existing sign at its present location at 140 West Center Street.
93-25 6-14-  Granting a variance to John M. Batte allowing the construction of a deck within the
      93     side yard setback area at 450 North Union Street.
93-33 9-14-  Granting a variance to Vera K. Brown allowing an expansion of the present building
      93     housing a body shop at 437 South Washington Street.
             Granting a variance to Illinois Knights Templar Home for the Aged Infirm allowing
93-34 9-14-  the yard requirement to be reduced to 12 feet along the east side of Union Street
      93     between Fulton and Summer Streets and allowing the premises to be used as an
             auxiliary building for an institution for the aged.
93-35 9-14-  Granting a variance to Ursula Kief allowing the owner to assemble and to test
      93     scientific research instruments at 119 North Market Street.
93-36 9-14-  Granting a variance to Michael Albers allowing the construction of a wood frame
      93     garage onto an existing nonconforming structure at 338 East Franklin Street.
93-43 11-8-  Granting a variance to Jeffrey and Carol Goss allowing tenant parking at 246 East
      93     Center Street.
93-44 11-8-  Granting a variance to Loy’s Auto Parts, Inc., allowing for the construction of a
      93     fire station at 300 North Market Street.
94-30 9-12-  Granting a variance to Dan McNamara allowing the construction of a deck within the
      94     rear yard setback area at 333 West Holmes Street.
94-40 11-14- Granting a variance to Virgil D. Koontz allowing an extension to the south end of a
      94     garage located on 674 East Patton Street.
94-41 11-21- Granting a variance to Leslie Foster and Paxton Fire Protection District allowing
      94     the construction of a fire station at 300 Block North Market Street.
94-46 12-12- Granting a variance to First Baptist Church SBC allowing a sign to be placed at 430
      94     South High Street.
95-7  4-10-  Granting a variance to Colonial Pantry allowing the installation of a sign at 45
      95     South Railroad.
95-8  4-10-  Granting a variance to Kevin Diesburg allowing an addition to the present residence
      95     at 406 East Franklin.
95-30 7-10-  Granting a variance to Charles and Mae Vaughn allowing construction of a yard barn
      95     accessory building at 248 West Franklin.
95-31 7-10-  Granting a variance to Kelly and Michelle Swanson allowing construction of a deck
      95     at 926 East Orleans.
95-32 7-10-  Granting a variance allowing a contractor to build two single-family residences on
      95     West Chestnut.
      9-11-  Granting a variance to Carver’s Classic Meat Products, Paxton Fire Protection
95-38 95     District and Evelyn Roth Estate allowing changes in lot coverage to property at 245
             North Taft Street.
96-4  2-12-  Granting a variance to Mrs. Olive White allowing the establishment of a small
      96     business at 138 West Pine Street.
96-8  4-8-96 Granting a variance to Illinois Knights Templar Home for the Aged Infirm allowing a
             medical clinic using existing parking at 450 East Fulton Street.
96-09 4-11-  Granting a variance to Mr. Rex D. Roy allowing the placement of a storage building
      96     at 305 North Market Street.
      6-10-  Granting a variance to Michael L. Stegman allowing the location of a business
96-12 96     enterprise and the placement of a sign close to the entrance off of Rt. 9 onto John
             Street at 580 John Street.
96-25 9-9-96 Granting a variance to Wilbur A. White, II, allowing construction of a deck at 340
             North Taft Street.
      9-26-  Granting a variance to Maurice Baier allowing a garage to be built to serve as a
96-26 96     storage site for serving the nearby funeral home and to provide vehicle storage on
             the property located at 351 East Pell’s Street.
96-35 11-12- Granting a variance to Kevin and Karla Diesburg allowing the construction of a one
      96     and one-half car garage next to the house located at 527 East Center Street.
97-5  2-17-  Granting a variance to Kristi Malone, representing Casey’s General Stores, Inc.,
      97     allowing a logo sign pole at 585 South Market Street.
97-6  3-10-  Granting a variance to Kristi Malone, representing Casey’s General Stores, Inc.,
      97     allowing an increase in the driveway width at 585 South Market Street.
97-9  4-14-  Granting a variance to Dennis Kingren allowing an expansion of an enclosed porch
      97     and expanding a small area for an open slab porch at 120 West Chestnut Street.
             Granting a variance to Dale and Thomas Houston, representing Dalto Corporation,
97-19 9-8-97 allowing a sign to be erected above the maximum height of 20 feet at 1190 West
             Ottawa.
98-7  5-11-  Granting a variance to Eastern Illinois Electric Coop allowing a sign to exceed the
      98     height specifications at 330 West Ottawa.
98-15 6-29-  Granting a variance to Mary Wagner allowing the construction of an attached garage
      98     at 389 West Patton.
98-16 7-13-  Granting a variance to the Upper Room Evangelical Free Church and Frank Fouts
      98     allowing the sale of a tract of land at 465 West Orleans.
98-18 8-10-  Granting a variance to Stanley and Phyllis Allison allowing the replacement of an
      98     existing nonconforming building at 625 East Orleans.
—   10-12- Granting a variance to Dave Frederickson allowing the construction of storage
      98     rental units at 809 South Railroad Avenue.
98-30 10-12- Granting a variance to Brian Stagen allowing the construction of a porch on the
      98     front and east side of the house at 360 East Patton.
99-10 5-10-  Granting a variance to C. Randy Swan allowing a reduction in the front yard
      99     requirement at 230 Stockholm Road.
99-11 5-10-  Granting a variance to Reuben Shilts allowing a reduction in the front yard
      99     requirement at 313 East Larson.
99-22 7-15-  Granting a variance to Allen Litwiller allowing a reduction in the front and rear
      99     requirements at 304 East State.
99-23 8-9-99 Granting a variance to Tim and Mary Scott allowing the construction of a garage 2½
             feet from the side lot line at 528 East Patton Street.
99-24 8-9-99 Granting a variance to Rebecca Williams allowing the operation of a one station
             beauty parlor at 322 East Patton.
99-28 9-13-  Granting a variance to John Cook allowing a new garage to be built on the property
      99     line at 142 West Patton.
99-35 12-13- Granting a variance to Rex D. Roy, Kenneth L. Bussey and Karren L. Bussey allowing
      99     the reduction of the front yard requirements at part of 349 North Market Street.
99-36 12-13- Granting a variance to AIBCI/Tom K. Trumbull allowing the building of a house on
      99     the eastern portion of the property located at 651 East Pell’s Street.
2000- 4-10-  Granting a variance to Illinois PCS LLC allowing a height variance for the
5     00     construction of a wireless telecommunications facility at 330 Cherry Street.
2000- 5-8-00 Granting a variance to L. John Lee allowing a lighted sign at 225 West Ottawa.
10
2000- 6-12-  Granting a variance to Gerald and Kathie Houser allowing the operation of a single-
13    00     station beauty parlor at 1140 East Summer.
2000- 6-12-  Granting a variance to Jeff and Kim Hammel allowing the construction of a garage at
14    00     418 East Ottawa.
2000- 9-11-  Granting a variance to Carif Nuckole allowing a reduction in the side line
21    00     requirements in order to erect a garage at 135 West Franklin Street.
2001- 4-9-01 Granting a variance to Charles L. White allowing a reduction of the side yard on
6            the west side of the property to erect a garage at 259 West Pell’s Street.
2001- 5-14-  Granting a variance to Barbara Gillaspie allowing the construction of a new home
10    01     with an attached garage at 304 Stockholm Road.
2001- 7-9-01 Granting a variance to Russell F.P. Staerkel allowing an additional five feet in
16           height for a garage at 632 West Washington Street.
2001- 8-13-  Granting a variance to Dennis and Darlene Starkey allowing the establishment of a
19    01     beauty shop at 825 East Center Street.
2001- 8-13-  Granting a variance to Dennis and Darlene Starkey allowing an increase in the
20    01     height of a garage at 825 East Center Street.
02-47 12-9-  Granting a variance to First National Bank allowing the installation of a
      02     transmitter/ receiver tower.
03-28 6-9-03 Granting a variance to Dennis Kingren allowing the existing driveway to be used to
             enter a new building and allowing said building to set on west lot line.
04-09 4-12-  Granting a variance to Jackie Wright, allowing the construction of a porch at 15
      04     Parklawn.
04-28 7-12-  Granting a variance to Allen Litwiller decreasing minimum set backs and increasing
      04     maximum lot coverage at 150 North Vermillion Street.
05-23 8-8-05 Granting a variance to Nicor Gas Company for construction to replace structure
             which was demolished.
05-25 8-8-05 Granting a variance to Don and Penny Stevens for a two car attached garage.
      7-10-  Granting variance to 346 West Franklin Street for operation of catalog sales
06-26 06     business relating to repair of musical instruments and sale of supplies related
             thereto.
06-27 7-10-  Granting variance to 346 West Franklin for operation of beauty salon.
      06
06-36 8-14-  Granting variance to 641 and 649 Market Street for sale of Lot 1 in Block 25 in
      06     Mix's Addition.
      2-12-  Granting a variance to Joshua R. Garrell allowing Lot 10, Lot 11 and the east two
07-01 07     feet of Lot 12 of Merchant's Addition to be divided into two lots and to move the
             house located at 821 South Union onto Lot 10.
             Granting a variance to Kenneth A. Beckwith allowing Lot 9 in Block 23 of Railroad
07-07 4-9-07 Addition to be divided into three separate lots and sold to separate buyers or
             individually mortgaged.
45    12-8-  Granting a variance to Charles and Bethel Robertson to build garage on lot at 409
      08     East Patton Street.
      4-13-  Granting a variance to Justin and Amy Swan allowing Lots 1 and 2 in Block 12 in
09-13 09     Mix’s Addition to have a setback of 14 feet as opposed to the current setback of 30
             feet for the east side of lot located at 780 North American.
09-36 9-14-  Granting a variance to Cheryl L. Roy for 130 South Tall Street to build a 16 x 24
      09     foot garage.
09-37 9-14-  Granting a variance to Bonnilyn and Stephen J. Kaeb for 595 S. Elm Street to
      09     relocate and operate Country Thyme Tearoom and Catering.
      4-26-  Granting a variance to William G. and Kathryn A. Killin II for 606 E. Pells Street
10-10 10     for sale of antiques and craft and conduct educational classes on antiques and
             crafts.
10-24 7-12-  Granting a special use to Richard and Martha Bennett for 152 N. Market Street
      10     allowing Vineyard Church campus to use premises for church and related activities.
11-35 12-12- Granting a variance for 114 South Market from B1 to allow the owner to operate and
      11     maintain two first-floor senior citizen handicapped accessible apartments.
12-19 4-25-  Granting a special use permit for 601 S. Fall Street to allow operation of a
      12     nursery school on the premises.
R.    5-14-  Granting permission to Hudson Drug Shop to install an awning at 108 N. Market,
12-22 12     encroaching upon the public right of way.
13-25 9-9-13 Granting a variance to Bobby and Olivia Kingren at 115 W. Chestnut Street to
             operate a one-chair beauty salon.
13-31 10-14- Granting a variance to Paula Kuester-Coy at 762 E. Orleans Street to construct a
      13     six-foot fence along west side yard.
Res.  1-13-  Authorizing the installation of an awning at 102 South Market.
14-1  14
15-01 1-12-  Granting Illinois Central Railroad Historical Society the right to maintain a
      15     railroad siding.
15-20 8-10-  Granting a variance to Ken and Jennifer Massey at 706 E. Orleans St. to construct a
      15     35-foot wide driveway.
      9-14-  Granting a variance to Kirk and Lisa Lockhart and Edmonton Properties at 110 E.
15-23 15     State St. to turn the storage dock area into an art gallery and the remainder of
             the building into a residence for their personal use.
Res.  6-14-  Authorizing a concrete step at 102 S. Market Street.
16-12 16
16-14 6-14-  Granting a variance to Larry and Lori Ernst to allow a one chair beauty salon in
      16     their home at 440 Meuser Drive.
16-0- 8-9-16 Approving a variance for 315 E. Franklin Street.
21
16-25 9-13-  Granting a variance to allow a roof per the building application on file for 653 N.
      16     Taft.
17-5  3-14-  Granting a variance to allow garage/shed roofline height to be 17 feet for 760 S.
      17     High Street.
17-10 4-11-  Granting a variance for a height of 19 feet for accessory building for 301 W.
      17     Center Street.
17-29 7-11-  Granting a variance to add an additional ten feet to the 30-foot driveway.
      17
17-30 7-11-  Granting a variance to increase the driveway width to a maximum of 24 feet.
      17
18-05 2-13-  Granting a variance for church sign at 455 West Orleans Street.
      18
2019- 5-14-  Approving a variance for 247 W. Orleans Street.
O-6   19
21-13 10-12- Granting a variance for 452 E. Summer Street.
      21
21-14 10-12- Granting a variance for the empty lot between 201 E. State Street and 247 N.
      21     Railroad Ave.
2024- 2-13-  Allowing special use permit for 350 E. Center.
02-01 24
2024- 7-9-24 Allowing special use permit for 514 S. Market.
07-03
2024- 7-9-24 Granting a variance for 577 E. Franklin.
07-04
2025- 1-14-  Granting special use permit for 838 E. Orleans Street.
01-03 25
            
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cite Code Section
ILCS Cite                                                    Code Section
Ch. 5, Act 1, § 31.1-1 et seq.                              38.01
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01                                       10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02                                       10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03                                       10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04                                       10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09                                       10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11                                       10.04
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29                                       10.02
Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2                                          10.04
Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq.                             33.01
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-15                                      33.01
Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 10-10 - 10-40                           33.01
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5                                      33.01
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5                                      33.01
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(a)                                   33.01
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c)                                   33.01
Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq.                             135.02
Ch. 20, Act 2910, §§ 0.01 et seq.                          137.02
Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.                             34.07
Ch. 30, Act 225, §§ 0.01 et seq.                           31.034
Ch. 30, Act 235, §§ 0.01 et seq.                           31.034
Ch. 35, Act 105                                              36.33
Ch. 35, Act 115, § 9                                        36.35
Ch. 35, Act 120, § 2-27                                     111.01
Ch. 35, Act 120 § 3                                         36.31
Ch. 35, Act 145, §§ 1 et seq.                              36.36
Ch. 35, Act 145, § 2                                        36.36
Ch. 35, Act 145, § 5                                        36.36
Ch. 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.                              111.01
Ch. 35, Act 635, § 10(d)                                    122.06
Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq.                            111.04
Ch. 35, Act 638, §§ 1 et seq.                              111.01
                                                             36.03,
Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.                               118.65,
                                                             118.66
Ch. 50, Act 150                                              31.018
Ch. 50, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.                              33.29
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-9005                                     137.02
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 5-1127                                     70.01
Ch. 65, Act 5                                                10.02,
                                                             31.027
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2                                      10.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1                                      10.99,
                                                             51.67
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1                                    10.99
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5                                     36.35
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6                                     36.33
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-7                                     36.31
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-8                                     36.32
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-22                                    36.37
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-3                                     36.34
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-6                                     34.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-12-4 - 11-12-12                       151.157
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-13-1 et seq.                          151.157
Ch. 65, Act 5. §§ 11-13-1 - 11-13-20                       151.157
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-26                                   151.150
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-15-1                                    151.157
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-15.1-1 - 11-15.1-5                    151.157
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-7                                    93.61
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-7                                    93.61
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-8                                    93.61
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-12                                   93.61
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-13                                   93.62
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-15                                   93.60
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-20-15.1                                 93.61
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1                                    71.010,
                                                             76.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-76-4                                    37.16,
                                                             37.17
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1303                                    72.99
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 74.4-1 et seq.                           35.06
Ch. 70, Act 1205, § 3-9                                     70.01
Ch. 75, Act 3, § 3-1                                        36.30
Ch. 210, Act 45, §§ 1-101 et seq.                          132.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, §3-105                                      99.32
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-221                                     111.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222                                     111.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222.1                                   111.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-102                                    99.32
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-108.5(i)                               99.32
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(k)                                 122.06
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v)                                 99.02
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)                                 118.62
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401                                    99.02,
                                                             118.60
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6)                              118.61
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801                                    118.60
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)                                 118.60
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)                                 118.03
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi)                          118.60
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(d)                                 118.60
Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.                              99.16
Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4                                        99.02
Ch. 225, Act 447, §§ 5-5 et seq.                           137.02
Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.                              135.02
Ch. 230, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.                              135.02
Ch. 230, Act 20, §§ 1 et seq.                              135.02
Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.                              117.09,
                                                             135.02
Ch. 230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.                              135.02
Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.                              110.01,
                                                             135.01
Ch. 230, Act 40, § 5                                        124.02
Ch. 230, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.                             115.42
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.                               115.16
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 3-12(19)(a)                               115.16
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-27.1                                    115.25
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-28.8                                    115.25
Ch. 255, Act 460                                             122.03
Ch. 255, Act 465                                             122.03
Ch. 320, Act 15, §§ 0.01 et seq.                           132.01
Ch. 325, Act 5, § 4                                         132.01
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.215                                     71.103
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.220                                     71.103
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360                                     71.103
Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3                                       71.103
Ch. 430, Act 30, § 3                                        71.081
Ch. 430, Act 65, §§ 0.01 – 16.3                          Ch. 137
Ch. 510, Act 5                                               91.02
Ch. 515, Act 5                                               137.03
Ch. 520, Act 5                                               137.03
Ch. 520, Act 10, § 11(b)                                    151.015
Ch. 605, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.                           99.02
Ch. 605, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.                             70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-105                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-106                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-107                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-108                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8                                   70.01,
                                                             71.107
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-112                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-113                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-120                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-125                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-130                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-131                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-132                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-135                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-136                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-137                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-138                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-139.1                                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.10                                  70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.15                                  70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-141                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001                                 70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-147                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2                                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3                                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3a-5                                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-151                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-154                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-155                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-156                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-158                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-159.1                                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5                                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-163                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166.1                                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6                                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.8                                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-172                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-174                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-176                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-177                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-178                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-179                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-181                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-182                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.1                                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188                                     10.02,
                                                             70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-193                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-194                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-195                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-196                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-197                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-199                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-200                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-201                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-203                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1                                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-207                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-208                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-209                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-210.01                                  70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01                                  70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-212                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.8                                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217                                     70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609                                     72.39,
                                                             72.40
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616                                     72.40
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203                                     77.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-213(b)                                  77.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101                                     138.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-107                                     138.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303                                     138.02
                                                             71.080,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-500                                     71.081,
                                                             71.083
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 7-601                                     77.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203                                    70.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-205                                    70.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206                                    70.12
                                                             70.01,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301                                    72.39,
                                                             72.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302                                    70.41
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305                                    70.30
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306                                    70.31
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307                                    70.32
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-308                                    70.33
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-309                                    70.34
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310                                    70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-311                                    70.36
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312                                    70.37
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-313                                    70.38
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401                                    77.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402                                    77.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403                                    77.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-404                                    77.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-409                                    77.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-415                                    77.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-500 - 11-502                         80.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501                                    138.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1                                  77.03,
                                                             138.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-502                                    115.25
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503(a)                                 77.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-504                                    77.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-506                                    77.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601                                    71.010
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-604                                    71.010
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605                                    71.011
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(e)                                 70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605(e-5)                               70.99,
                                                             71.011
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a)                                 71.013
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-611                                    71.012
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-701                                    71.040
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-702                                    71.041
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703                                    71.042
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-704                                    71.043
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-705                                    71.044
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-706                                    71.044
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707                                    71.047
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-708                                    71.046
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-709                                    71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-710                                    71.096
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-711                                    71.106
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-801                                    71.020
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-802                                    71.021
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-803                                    71.023
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-804                                    71.024
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-805                                    71.025
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-806                                    71.026
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-901                                    71.060
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-902                                    71.061
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-903                                    71.062
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904                                    71.063
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-905                                    71.064
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-906                                    71.065
                                                             71.040,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907                                    71.048,
                                                             71.066
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907(a), (b)                            71.066
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907.5                                  71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-908                                    71.040,
                                                             71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1001                                   75.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002                                   75.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003                                   75.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1                                 75.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004                                   75.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1                                 75.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005                                   75.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006                                   75.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1007                                   75.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008                                   75.09
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1009                                   75.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1010                                   75.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011                                   70.99,
                                                             75.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201(a) - (d)                          71.080
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201(e)                                70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1202                                   71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204                                   70.41
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1205                                   71.082
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301                                   72.21
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.1                                 72.40
                                                             72.37,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2                                 72.38,
                                                             72.40
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302                                   72.65
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303                                   72.20,
                                                             72.38
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304                                   72.10,
                                                             72.21
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305                                   72.66
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1401                                   72.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402                                   71.095
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403                                   73.20
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1                                 73.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2                                 73.23
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404                                   73.21
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1405                                   73.22
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1406                                   71.097
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1407                                   71.098
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1410                                   71.099
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1411                                   71.100
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412                                   71.100
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1                                 71.101
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1413                                   71.103
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414(a) - (e)                          71.045
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414(f)                                70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416                                   71.104
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1418                                   71.105
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1420                                   71.067
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1425(a), (b)                           71.083
Ch. 625, Act 5, §11-1425(c)                                 71.083
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1426.1(e)                              80.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1428(e)                                80.03 
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1502                                   73.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1503                                   73.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1504                                   73.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505                                   73.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1                                 73.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1506                                   73.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507                                   73.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1                                 73.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101                                    76.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq.                          76.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208                                    71.024,
                                                             71.025
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215                                    70.11,
                                                             72.21
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-601                                    75.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-602.1                                  71.107
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-801                                    70.01,
                                                             71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-802(a)                                 70.01
                                                             70.01,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-803                                    71.045,
                                                             71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-804                                    71.081
                                                             70.01,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805                                    71.045,
                                                             71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101                                    76.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-101 et seq.                          76.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-105                                    76.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-106                                    76.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109                                    76.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-114                                    76.14
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 16-101 et seq.                          70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 18b-101                                   124.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, §18c-7201                                   99.32
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-2                                       130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-3                                       130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-4                                       130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-12                                      130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-4                                       130.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-5                                       130.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-6                                       130.04
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-7                                       130.05
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-4                                       130.06
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 11-6 et seq.                            112.16
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-9                                      134.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20                                     134.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-21                                     134.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-12                                     134.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16D-2                                     135.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1                                      131.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3                                      131.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(1), (2), (2.5), (3) (5), (8), (11)137.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(4)                                137.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(6)                                137.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(7)                                137.01,
                                                             137.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(9)                                137.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(10)                               137.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(c)(2)                                137.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(e)                                   137.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1.9                                    137.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2                                      137.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2(c)                                   137.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1                                    137.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-6(a)                                   137.04
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1                                      132.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1                                      135.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1(a)(4)                                135.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2                                      135.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2(a)(1) – (a)(4)                     135.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-3                                      135.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-5(a)                                   135.04
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-5(b)                                   135.04
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1                                      133.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-8                                      133.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 32-9                                      133.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 36-1(a)(1)                                138.02
Ch. 720, Act 550, § 4                                       138.02
Ch. 720, Act 570, § 402                                     138.02
Ch. 725, Act 5, §112A-3(b)(7)                               131.02
Ch. 725, Act 5, § 112A-14(b)                                131.02
Ch. 725, Act 210, §§ 1 et seq.                             137.02
Ch. 745, Act 10, § 2-201                                    31.017
Ch. 815, Act 205, § 4                                       35.02
Ch. 820, Act 130                                             35.06
                                                             
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.    Date Passed Code Section
62-15       7-9-62      Ch. 78, Sched. VI
62-16       7-9-62      Ch. 79, Sched. VII
62-17       7-9-62      Ch. 78, Sched. V
63-12       4-17-63     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
64-12       6-8-64      Ch. 79, Sched. VII
64-27       - -         Ch. 79, Sched. VII
65-19       10-11-65    Ch. 78, Sched. VI
65-20       10-11-65    Ch. 79, Sched. VII
66-18       9-12-66     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
66-27       12-12-66    Ch. 78, Sched. V
67-36       12-11-67    Ch. 79, Sched. VII
68-19       7-8-68      Ch. 78, Sched. VI
70-17       7-13-70     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
84-6        5-14-84     31.095
85-19       4-8-85      33.04
85-44       10-14-85    31.067
86-1        1-13-86     35.04
87-14       7-13-87     33.04
90-6        4-9-90      32.02
92-19       6-8-92      T.S.O. VII
94-36       10-24-94    31.081
96-13       6-10-96     T.S.O. VII
96-17       7-8-96      36.30
2000-15     6-12-00     T.S.O. VI
2001-8      5-14-01     T.S.O. VI
01-21       8-13-01     T.S.O. VI
02-08       5-13-02     33.02
04-30       9-27-04     T.S.O. VI
08-34       10-13-08    33.27
10-25       7-12-10     T.S.O. VI
11-19       7-11-11     35.03
12-22       5-14-12     T.S.O. X
14-1        1-13-14     T.S.O. X
14-04       2-10-14     T.S.O. I
16-12       6-14-16     T.S.O. X
23-08       3-14-23     T.S.O. I
R2024-12-05 12-10-24    115.18
2025-04-03  4-8-25      115.18
2025-07-04  7-8-25      T.S.O. V
2025-07-06  7-8-25      115.18
2025-07-07  7-8-25      115.18
                       
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.   Date Passed Code Section
          - -         T.S.O. VI
          8-6-28      T.S.O. V
          8-7-33      30.01
                       115.01,
                       115.10,
                       115.11,
                       115.13-
                       115.15,
          3-5-34      115.17,
                       115.20-
                       115.24,
                       115.37-
                       115.41,
                       115.99
          9-4-34      30.01
          8-2-37      T.S.O. V
          4-4-38      T.S.O. V
          11-4-40     136.04
          6-3-46      T.S.O. V
                       97.090,
          7-7-47      97.091,
                       97.999
          6-7-48      T.S.O. VI
          5-7-51      30.01
          3-9-53      T.S.O. V
          5-11-53     T.S.O. V
          3-12-56     110.01
          4-9-56      T.S.O. VIII
          8-13-56     T.S.O. VIII
          12-10-56    T.S.O. VII
          4-13-59     110.01
                       96.05 
          4-22-59     96.08,
                       96.99
          5-22-59     96.56
          7-11-60     115.19
          8-8-60      T.S.O. VIII
          8-25-60     T.S.O. VIII
          8-25-60     T.S.O. VIII
          8-25-60     T.S.O. VIII
          4-10-61     32.03
61-11      9-11-61     110.02
61-16      11-13-61    92.01
61-17      11-13-61    92.02
62-9       6-11-62     T.S.O. V
                       70.01,
                       70.14-
                       70.16,
                       70.42,
                       71.001,
                       71.002,
                       71.022,
                       71.046,
                       71.067,
62-13      7-9-62      71.082,
                       72.01-
                       72.03,
                       72.40-
                       72.42,
                       76.10,
                       77.01,
                       77.04,
                       77.10,
                       77.11
62-22      10-8-62     T.S.O. V
63-7       3-25-63     51.07
63-15      7-8-63      T.S.O. VIII
63-18      8-12-63     71.046
63-20      9-10-63     T.S.O. VI
63-24      10-14-63    T.S.O. VI
63-25      12-9-63     T.S.O. V
64-22      9-25-64     31.105
64-28      11-9-64     T.S.O. IX
64-30      12-23-64    T.S.O. IX
64-31      12-23-64    T.S.O. IX
64-32      12-23-64    T.S.O. X
65-1       1-11-65     T.S.O. IX
65-5       2-8-65      T.S.O. X
65-6       2-8-65      T.S.O. X
65-13      7-12-65     T.S.O. VIII
65-17      9-13-64     T.S.O. IX
                       93.35 
65-18      9-13-65     93.40,
                       93.99
65-22      11-22-65    T.S.O. X
66-1       1-10-66     T.S.O. IX
66-4       2-14-66     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
66-6       4-11-66     T.S.O. VIII
66-7       4-11-66     T.S.O. IX
66-8       4-11-66     T.S.O. X
66-10      5-9-66      T.S.O. X
66-11      5-9-66      T.S.O. VIII
66-13      6-13-66     T.S.O. IX
66-16      8-8-66      T.S.O. V
66-23      - -         T.S.O. VIII
66-25      12-12-66    T.S.O. IX
66-26      12-12-66    T.S.O. IX
67-8       4-19-67     T.S.O. IX
67-9       4-19-67     T.S.O. IX
67-11      4-24-67     T.S.O. VIII
67-12      4-24-67     T.S.O. VIII
67-13      5-8-67      T.S.O. X
67-14      7-3-67      T.S.O. IX
67-15      7-3-67      T.S.O. IX
67-16      7-10-67     T.S.O. IX
                       96.35 
67-29      9-25-67     96.42,
                       96.99
67-34      11-13-67    Ch. 79, Sched. VII
68-2       2-13-68     T.S.O. VIII
68-12      4-8-68      T.S.O. X
68-14      6-10-68     T.S.O. IX
68-20      7-8-68      Ch. 78, Sched. II
68-22      9- -68      T.S.O. X
68-26      10-14-68    T.S.O. IX
68-27      11-12-68    T.S.O. VIII
68-30      12-9-68     T.S.O. X
68-32      12-9-68     T.S.O. VIII
68-33      12-9-68     T.S.O. VIII
69-1       1-13-69     90.01
69-8       4-14-69     T.S.O. IX
69-9       4-14-69     T.S.O. IX
69-16      6-9-69      T.S.O. VI
69-18      7-14-69     Ch. 78, Sched. II
69-19      7-14-69     T.S.O. VI
69-22      8-11-69     T.S.O. IX
69-24      8-11-69     36.35
69-28      10-13-69    T.S.O. IX
69-29      12-8-69     90.01
70-2       1-12-70     T.S.O. X
70-3       1-12-70     T.S.O. VIII
70-13      5-11-70     T.S.O. IX
                       94.01 
70-15      6-8-70      94.10,
                       94.99
70-20      8-10-70     T.S.O. X
70-23      10-12-70    T.S.O. X
70-24      12-14-70    T.S.O. X
71-1       1-11-71     115.99
71-3       2-8-71      T.S.O. V
71-14      7-12-71     115.01
71-18      9-13-71     36.34
71-19      11-8-71     T.S.O. VIII
71-20      11-8-71     T.S.O. X
72-1       1-10-72     T.S.O. X
72-2       1-10-72     T.S.O. VII
72-9       4-10-72     T.S.O. VI
72-11      - -         T.S.O. VI
72-13      8-14-72     T.S.O. IX
72-22      11-13-72    T.S.O. X
72-23      11-13-72    T.S.O. X
73-13      7-16-73     T.S.O. IX
73-14      8-13-73     T.S.O. X
73-15      8-13-73     T.S.O. X
73-16      8-13-72     T.S.O. IX
73-29      11-12-73    T.S.O. IX
73-30      11-12-73    T.S.O. VIII
73-32      12-10-73    T.S.O. IX
73-33      12-10-73    T.S.O. IX
73-34      12-10-73    T.S.O. IX
73-35      12-10-73    T.S.O. IX
73-36      12-10-73    T.S.O. IX
73-37      12-10-73    T.S.O. IX
73-38      12-10-73    T.S.O. IX
74-1       - -         T.S.O. IX
74-2       1-14-74     T.S.O. X
74-3       1-14-74     T.S.O. X
74-4       2-11-74     T.S.O. IX
74-7       5-13-74     T.S.O. X
74-9       7-8-74      T.S.O. IX
74-13      8-12-74     T.S.O. IX
74-14      8-12-74     T.S.O. IX
74-15      8-12-74     T.S.O. X
74-16      8-12-74     T.S.O. X
74-17      9-9-74      T.S.O. VIII
74-18      9-9-74      72.01
74-19      9-9-74      Ch. 79, Sched. VII
74-23      10-14-74    36.33
74-24      11-11-74    T.S.O. IX
74-25      11-11-74    T.S.O. VIII
75-2       1-13-75     T.S.O. X
75-3       1-13-75     T.S.O. IX
75-6       3-10-75     Ch. 78, Sched. V
75-10      4-14-75     T.S.O. IX
75-13      5-12-75     T.S.O. IX
75-14      5-12-75     T.S.O. X
75-15      5-12-75     T.S.O. X
75-16      6-9-75      31.001 
                       31.015
75-17      6-9-75      33.07
75-25      7-14-75     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
75-30      10-13-75    T.S.O. X
75-31      10-13-75    Ch. 79, Sched. VII
75-33      11-10-75    Ch. 78, Sched. VI
75-35      12-1-75     T.S.O. IX
76-1       1-12-76     T.S.O. X
76-5       - -76       T.S.O. X
76-6       3-8-76      T.S.O. X
76-7       3-8-76      T.S.O. X
76-8       3-8-76      T.S.O. IX
76-9       3-8-76      T.S.O. IX
76-12      4-12-76     Ch. 79, Sched. IV
76-14      5-10-76     T.S.O. X
76-15      6-14-76     T.S.O. X
76-16      6-14-76     T.S.O. X
76-17      6-14-76     T.S.O. X
76-18      6-14-76     T.S.O. X
76-19      6-14-76     T.S.O. VIII
76-22      7-12-76     T.S.O. IX
76-24      8-9-76      T.S.O. IX
76-26      8-9-76      130.07
76-28      9-13-76     131.04
76-34      11-8-76     T.S.O. X
76-35      11-8-76     T.S.O. X
76-36      11-8-76     T.S.O. VIII
76-37      12-13-76    T.S.O. VII
76-39      12-13-76    T.S.O. IX
77-1       2-14-77     T.S.O. IX
                       92.20 
77-2       2-14-77     92.31,
                       92.99
77-4       3-14-77     T.S.O. VIII
77-8       4-11-77     Ch. 78, Sched. III
77-10      4-18-77     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
77-13      6-13-77     T.S.O. X
77-17      7-11-77     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
77-18      7-11-77     96.56
77-19      7-11-77     T.S.O. IX
77-30      8-18-77     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
77-32      8-18-77     Ch. 78, Sched. IV
                       114.01,
                       114.02,
                       114.15-
77-36      9-12-77     114.23,
                       114.35-
                       114.44,
                       114.99
77-38      10-10-77    T.S.O. X
78-1       1-9-78      T.S.O. V
78-3       1-9-78      T.S.O. IX
78-4       1-9-78      T.S.O. X
78-6       2-13-78     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
78-8       3-13-78     T.S.O. VIII
                       113.01 
78-10      4-10-78     113.12,
                       113.99
78-12      6-12-78     T.S.O. IX
78-13      6-12-78     T.S.O. X
78-14      6-12-78     T.S.O. IX
78-15      6-12-78     T.S.O. X
78-19A     7-10-78     T.S.O. IX
                       95.20 
78-19      8-14-78     95.29,
                       95.99
78-20      8-14-78     95.01 
                       95.09
78-21      8-14-78     T.S.O. IX
78-23      8-14-78     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
78-29      8-31-78     T.S.O. X
                       97.050 
78-30      8-31-78     97.076,
                       97.999
78-33      8-31-78     T.S.O. VIII
78-34      8-31-78     T.S.O. IX
78-35      8-31-78     T.S.O. X
78-37      9-11-78     T.S.O. X
                       97.035,
78-38      9-11-78     97.036,
                       97.999
78-42      12-11-78    33.07
78-48      12-21-78    Ch. 79, Sched. VII
79-7       4-9-79      Ch. 79, Sched. III
79-8       4-9-79      T.S.O. X
                       93.01 
79-15      6-11-79     93.03,
                       93.99
                       93.20,
79-16      6-11-79     93.21,
                       93.99
79-21      7-9-79      33.07
79-22      7-9-79      T.S.O. X
79-41      9-10-79     T.S.O. X
79-42      10-8-79     Ch. 78, Sched. III
79-43      10-8-79     136.03
79-48      12-10-79    T.S.O. VII
80-14      7-14-80     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
80-16      8-11-80     T.S.O. VI
80-24      10-13-80    T.S.O. IX
80-25      10-13-80    T.S.O. X
80-26      10-13-80    T.S.O. X
80-27      10-13-80    T.S.O. X
80-28      10-13-80    T.S.O. X
80-29      10-13-80    T.S.O. X
81-2       1-12-81     T.S.O. X
81-6       2-9-81      96.55
81-23      8-10-81     T.S.O. IX
81-30      9-14-81     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
                       74.01 
81-32      10-12-81    74.06,
                       74.99
81-33      11-9-81     T.S.O. V
81-34      11-9-81     T.S.O. X
81-40      12-14-81    T.S.O. VII
82-2       1-11-82     36.32
82-3       1-11-82     36.31
82-5       4-12-82     T.S.O. VIII
82-6       4-12-82     T.S.O. X
82-7       4-12-82     T.S.O. VII
82-8       4-12-82     T.S.O. V
82-19      7-12-82     T.S.O. VIII
82-20      8-9-82      T.S.O. IX
82-21      8-9-82      T.S.O. VIII
82-30      11-8-82     110.01
82-33      12-13-82    T.S.O. X
82-34      12-13-82    T.S.O. X
83-1       1-10-83     T.S.O. VIII
83-4       2-14-83     T.S.O. V
83-8       3-14-83     T.S.O. X
83-9       3-14-83     T.S.O. I
83-11      4-11-83     Ch. 78, Sched. V;
                       Ch. 78, Sched. VI
83-15      5-9-83      T.S.O. VIII
83-23      6-13-83     T.S.O. VIII
83-24      6-13-83     T.S.O. X
83-26      7-11-83     T.S.O. IX
83-27      7-11-83     T.S.O. IX
83-28      7-11-83     T.S.O. IX
83-30      8-8-83      T.S.O. VII
83-39      9-12-83     T.S.O. X
83-41      12-12-83    33.07
83-50      12-12-83    Ch. 79, Sched. VII
84-4       2-13-84     T.S.O. IX
84-26      9-10-84     33.06
84-29      10-8-84     35.05
84-33      10-8-84     T.S.O. VII
84-36      11-12-84    11.01
                       97.001 
                       97.003,
85-1       1-14-85     97.005,
                       97.006,
                       97.999
85-2       1-14-85     T.S.O. IX
85-3       1-14-85     T.S.O. X
85-10      2-11-85     T.S.O. X
85-15      3-11-85     T.S.O. X
                       72.35 
85-20      5-13-85     72.39,
                       72.99
85-23      6-10-85     51.65 -
                       51.71
85-29      7-8-85      T.S.O. VI
85-31      8-12-85     T.S.O. IX
85-34      9-9-85      T.S.O. IX
85-35      9-9-85      T.S.O. X
85-36      9-9-85      T.S.O. X
85-43      10-2-85     T.S.O. X
85-46      11-12-85    T.S.O. X
85-47      11-12-85    T.S.O. VIII
86-4       2-10-86     T.S.O. VII
86-7       4-14-86     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
86-8       4-4-86      91.01
86-11      5-12-86     T.S.O. IV
86-12      5-12-86     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
86-17      7-14-86     T.S.O. IX
86-18      7-14-86     T.S.O. VIII
86-19      8-11-86     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
86-20      8-11-86     T.S.O. VIII
86-26      9-8-86      T.S.O. IX
86-30      10-13-86    T.S.O. VIII
86-32      12-8-86     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
86-33      12-8-86     T.S.O. VII
86-34      12-8-86     T.S.O. IX
87-4       2-9-87      T.S.O. VIII
87-5       2-9-87      T.S.O. IX
87-6       3-9-87      Ch. 78, Sched. II
87-7       3-9-87      T.S.O. VII
87-19      8-10-87     T.S.O. IX
87-23      8-10-87     115.12
87-25      10-12-87    T.S.O. IX
87-29      12-14-87    T.S.O. II
87-30      12-14-87    T.S.O. X
87-31      12-14-87    T.S.O. X
88-2       1-11-88     T.S.O. X
88-3       1-11-88     T.S.O. VIII
88-4       2-8-88      T.S.O. IX
88-5       - -88       T.S.O. X
88-6       2-8-88      T.S.O. II
88-9       3-14-88     T.S.O. X
88-10      3-14-88     T.S.O. IX
88-15      4-11-88     T.S.O. X
88-16      4-11-88     T.S.O. IX
88-21      6-13-88     51.05
88-25      7-11-88     T.S.O. X
88-26      7-11-88     T.S.O. IX
88-27      7-11-88     T.S.O. VIII
                       151.001 -
                       151.011,
                       151.020-
                       151.026,
                       151.035-
                       151.039,
                       151.050-
                       151.052,
                       151.060-
                       151.066,
                       151.075-
88-30      8-8-88      151.079,
                       151.090-
                       151.096,
                       151.105-
                       151.112,
                       151.120,
                       151.121,
                       151.130-
                       151.146,
                       151.155-
                       151.166,
                       151.999
88-37      9-12-88     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
88-38      8-12-88     T.S.O. X
88-40      10-3-88     T.S.O. VII
88-42      11-14-88    T.S.O. VII
88-46      12-12-88    T.S.O. IX
88-48      12-27-88    T.S.O. VIII
89-2       1-9-89      T.S.O. X
89-7       2-13-89     T.S.O. X
89-8       2-13-89     115.16,
                       115.18
89-9       2-13-89     T.S.O. V
89-11      3-13-89     Ch. 79, Sched. V
89-12      4-10-89     T.S.O. X
                       118.01 -
                       118.03,
                       118.10 -
89-15      5-8-89      118.16,
                       118.30 -
                       118.37,
                       118.40 -
                       118.52
                       90.02 
                       90.05,
89-16      6-12-89     90.20-
                       90.31,
                       90.99
89-20      6-12-89     T.S.O. IV
89-21      6-12-89     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
89-22      6-12-89     T.S.O. V
89-24      6-12-89     T.S.O. X
89-25      6-12-89     T.S.O. X
89-28      7-10-89     T.S.O. VIII
89-30      8-14-89     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
89-31      8-14-89     T.S.O. X
89-36      10-9-89     T.S.O. X
89-38      10-12-89    Ch. 79, Sched. VII
89-43      11-13-89    T.S.O. X
89-46      11-20-89    T.S.O. VIII
89-48      12-14-89    T.S.O. X
90-4       2-27-90     T.S.O. VII
90-5       3-12-90     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
90-7       4-9-90      Ch. 78, Sched. VI
90-13      6-11-90     Ch. 79, Sched. II
90-15      6-11-90     T.S.O. X
90-16      7-9-90      T.S.O. X
90-18      7-9-90      T.S.O. VI
90-19      7-9-90      Ch. 79, Sched. VII
90-21      8-13-90     T.S.O. IV
90-22      8-13-90     Ch. 78, Sched. IV
90-23      8-13-90     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
90-24      8-13-90     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
90-25      8-13-90     T.S.O. VII
                       70.01,
90-28      9-10-90     72.01,
                       72.40-
                       72.42
90-32      10-8-90     T.S.O. X
90-33      10-23-90    T.S.O. VII
90-37      11-13-90    Ch. 78, Sched. II
90-41      12-10-90    T.S.O. IX
91-1       1-14-91     T.S.O. X
91-11      4-8-91      T.S.O. X
91-12      4-8-91      T.S.O. X
91-13      4-8-91      T.S.O. X
91-22      6-10-91     T.S.O. X
91-27      7-8-91      T.S.O. VII
91-28      8-12-91     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
91-29      9-9-91      T.S.O. X
91-30      10-15-91    T.S.O. IX
91-37      12-9-91     136.02
92-3       2-10-92     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
92-4       3-24-92     T.S.O. X
92-6       4-13-92     T.S.O. X
92-15      6-8-92      T.S.O. X
92-16      6-8-92      T.S.O. X
                       50.01 
                       50.04,
                       50.20-
92-17      6-8-92      50.32,
                       50.45-
                       50.50,
                       50.99
92-24      7-13-92     T.S.O. X
92-25      6-12-95     T.S.O. I
92-29      8-10-92     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
92-30      8-10-92     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
92-31      8-10-91     Ch. 78, Sched. III
92-32      8-10-92     T.S.O. X
92-42      11-9-92     T.S.O. VI
92-43      12-14-92    T.S.O. VI
92-44      12-14-92    T.S.O. VI
92-46      12-14-92    T.S.O. X
92-47      12-14-92    T.S.O. X
93-8       2-8-93      136.01
93-11      3-8-93      T.S.O. X
93-16      4-12-93     Ch. 79, Sched. VI
93-21      6-14-93     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
93-23      7-14-93     T.S.O. IX
93-24      6-14-93     T.S.O. X
93-25      6-14-93     T.S.O. X
93-29      7-12-93     Ch. 78, Sched. III
93-30      7-12-93     33.03
                       51.66,
93-32      9-14-93     51.68,
                       51.70
93-33      9-14-93     T.S.O. X
93-34      9-14-93     T.S.O. X
93-35      9-14-93     T.S.O. X
93-36      9-14-93     T.S.O. X
93-38      10-11-93    T.S.O. VII
93-41      11-8-93     T.S.O. IX
93-42      11-8-93     T.S.O. IX
93-43      11-8-93     T.S.O. X
93-44      11-8-93     T.S.O. X
93-51      12-13-93    Ch. 79, Sched. VII
                       97.020,
93-52      12-13-93    97.021,
                       97.999
93-53      12-13-93    51.06
94-02      1-10-94     T.S.O. IX
94-4       1-18-94     115.35
94-6       2-14-94     Ch. 79, Sched. I
94-10      2-21-94     T.S.O. IX
94-11      3-14-94     35.02
94-13      4-11-94     70.01,
                       71.022
94-27      9-7-94      T.S.O. VIII
94-30      9-12-94     T.S.O. X
94-31      9-12-94     T.S.O. VI
                       51.01 
                       51.04,
                       51.20-
94-39      11-14-94    51.28,
                       51.40-
                       51.53,
                       51.99
94-40      11-14-94    T.S.O. X
94-41      11-21-94    T.S.O. X
94-43      12-12-94    32.01
94-46      12-12-94    T.S.O. X
95-6       4-10-95     T.S.O. VIII
95-7       4-10-95     T.S.O. X
95-8       4-10-95     T.S.O. X
95-13      5-8-95      T.S.O. I
95-14      5-8-95      Ch. 78, Sched. III
95-15      5-8-95      Ch. 79, Sched. VII
95-17      5-8-95      T.S.O. IX
95-18      5-8-95      T.S.O. VI
95-19      5-8-95      T.S.O. VI
95-23      6-12-95     73.35 
                       73.43
95-30      7-10-95     T.S.O. X
95-31      7-10-95     T.S.O. X
95-32      7-10-95     T.S.O. X
                       96.20 
95-33      7-10-95     96.25,
                       96.99
95-34      7-19-95     115.02
95-35      8-14-95     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
95-37      9-11-95     T.S.O. IX
95-38      9-11-95     T.S.O. X
                       151.036,
95-40      9-11-95     151.037,
                       151.133
95-41      10-9-95     Ch. 78, Sched. V
95-42      10-25-95    T.S.O. VIII
95-43      10-25-95    T.S.O. VIII
95-48      11-13-95    132.03,
                       132.04
96-02      1-8-96      Ch. 78, Sched. I
96-3       2-12-96     T.S.O. IV
96-4       2-12-96     T.S.O. X
96-7       4-8-96      72.99
96-8       4-8-96      T.S.O. X
96-09      4-11-96     T.S.O. X
96-11      6-10-96     T.S.O. IV
96-12      6-10-96     T.S.O. X
96-15      6-10-96     T.S.O. IV
96-18      7-8-96      T.S.O. IV
96-20      8-12-96     T.S.O. V
                       150.01 
96-21      8-12-96     150.07,
                       150.99
96-22      9-9-96      T.S.O. VIII
96-24      9-9-96      T.S.O. X
96-25      9-9-96      T.S.O. X
96-26      9-26-96     T.S.O. X
96-33      11-12-96    T.S.O. V
96-35      11-12-96    T.S.O. X
96-36      11-12-96    T.S.O. VIII
97-1       1-13-97     Ch. 78, Sched. II
97-3       1-13-97     T.S.O. IX
97-4       2-17-97     T.S.O. IX
97-5       2-17-97     T.S.O. X
97-6       3-10-97     T.S.O. X
97-9       4-14-97     T.S.O. X
97-11      5-12-97     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
97-16      8-11-97     T.S.O. VIII
97-17      8-11-98     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
97-18      8-11-97     Ch. 79, Sched. VI
97-19      9-8-97      T.S.O. X
                       51.66,
97-24      11-10-97    51.68,
                       51.70
97-25      11-10-97    T.S.O. III
97-27      12-8-97     115.18
98-3       3-10-98     T.S.O. IV
98-6       5-11-98     T.S.O. VIII
98-7       5-11-98     T.S.O. X
98-15      6-29-98     T.S.O. X
98-16      7-13-98     T.S.O. X
98-18      8-10-98     T.S.O. X
98-20      9-14-98     Ch. 78, Sched. III
98-21      9-14-98     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
98-22      9-14-98     Ch. 79, Sched. VI
98-24      9-14-98     T.S.O. V
98-25      9-14-98     T.S.O. IX
98-27      9-14-98     T.S.O. VIII
          10-12-98    T.S.O. X
98-30      10-12-98    T.S.O. X
98-39      12-14-98    T.S.O. VIII
98-40      12-14-98    T.S.O. VIII
98-41      12-14-98    T.S.O. VIII
99-1       1-11-99     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
99-3       2-8-99      T.S.O. IV
99-4       2-8-99      115.35
99-7       4-12-99     33.09
99-9       5-10-99     33.02
99-10      5-10-99     T.S.O. X
99-11      5-10-99     T.S.O. X
99-15      6-14-99     93.40
99-19      7-12-99     110.01
99-20      7-12-99     T.S.O. VIII
99-21      7-12-99     T.S.O. VIII
99-22      7-15-99     T.S.O. X
99-22      B           8-9-99
                       Ch. 78, Sched. VI
99-23      8-9-99      T.S.O. X
99-24      8-9-99      T.S.O. X
99-25      8-9-99      T.S.O. VIII
                       52.001 
                       52.006,
                       52.020-
                       52.026,
                       52.040-
                       52.045,
                       52.055-
                       52.062,
99-26      9-13-99     52.075-
                       52.081,
                       52.095-
                       52.108,
                       52.120-
                       52.122,
                       52.135-
                       52.141,
                       52.999
99-28      9-13-99     T.S.O. X
99-29      9-20-99     115.16
99-32      11-8-99     35.01
99-34      12-13-99    Ch. 78, Sched. V
99-35      12-13-99    T.S.O. X
99-36      12-13-99    T.S.O. X
                       112.01 
                       112.03,
                       112.15-
99-37      12-14-99    112.23,
                       112.35-
                       112.38,
                       112.99
2000-1     1-10-00     52.023
2000-4     3-13-00     T.S.O. VIII
2000-5     4-10-00     T.S.O. X
00-6       4-10-00     T.S.O. VIII
2000-9     5-8-00      96.55
2000-10    5-8-00      T.S.O. X
                       96.01 
2000-12    6-12-00     96.04,
                       96.99
2000-13    6-12-00     T.S.O. X
2000-14    6-12-00     T.S.O. X
2000-18    7-10-00     T.S.O. V
2000-21    9-11-00     T.S.O. X
00-22      9-11-00     T.S.O. IX
2000-23    9-25-00     31.050 
                       31.065
2000-24    9-25-00     31.080
2000-26    9-25-00     96.99
2000-27    9-25-00     96.99
2000-28    9-25-00     Ch. 79, Sched. VI
2000-29    - -         T.S.O. III
2000-37    12-11-00    36.01 
                       36.18
2000-38    12-11-00    Ch. 79, Sched. VII
2001-1     2-12-01     Ch. 78, Sched. I
2001-2     3-12-01     31.025 
                       31.036
2001-4     3-12-01     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
2001-6     4-9-01      T.S.O. X
2001-7     4-9-01      T.S.O. VII
2001-10    5-14-01     T.S.O. X
01-12      6-11-01     T.S.O. VIII
01-13      6-11-01     T.S.O. VI
2001-16    7-9-01      T.S.O. X
2001-17    7-9-01      T.S.O. VII
2001-18    8-13-01     T.S.O. IX
2001-19    8-13-01     T.S.O. X
2001-20    8-13-01     T.S.O. X
01-22      8-13-01     73.36
2001-27    10-8-01     T.S.O. VII
2001-28    10-8-01     T.S.O. VII
01-34      11-12-01    50.04
01-35      11-12-01    Ch. 78, Sched. VI
2001-37    11-12-01    T.S.O. IX
01-38      11-12-01    115.36
                       98.01 
02-01      2-11-02     98.03,
                       98.99
02-02      3-11-02      
                       Ch. 79, Sched. VII
02-12      5-13-02     T.S.O. VIII
02-18      6-10-02     35.06
02-21      6-10-02      
                       Ch. 78, Sched. VI
02-30      7-8-02      Ch. 78, Sched. VII
02-31      7-8-02      T.S.O. IV
02-32      8-12-02     11.01
02-35      9-9-02      111.01 
                       111.05
                       50.49,
02-39      10-14-02    50.51,
                       50.99
02-40      10-14-02    30.02
02-41      10-17-02    115.18
02-42      11-12-02    T.S.O. IX
02-43      12-9-02     31.017
02-45      12-9-02     32.01
02-47      12-9-02     T.S.O. X
02-48      12-9-02     T.S.O. VIII
02-49      12-9-02     T.S.O. VIII
                       51.02 
                       51.05,
                       51.41,
                       51.42,
                       51.46,
                       52.002,
                       52.003,
                       70.42,
                       Ch. 79, Sched. VI,
                       90.01,
                       97.035,
03-02      1-13-03     97.036,
                       97.054,
                       97.055,
                       97.057,
                       97.058,
                       97.060-
                       97.064,
                       97.066-
                       97.068,
                       97.071,
                       97.074,
                       97.076,
                       113.12
03-04      1-13-03     115.35
03-05      2-10-03     33.08
03-07      2-10-03     72.20
03-08      2-10-03     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
03-09      2-10-03     96.43
03-10      2-10-03     96.09
03-12      1-13-03     72.20
03-19      4-28-03     97.036
03-21      5-12-03     94.01,
                       94.02
03-22      5-12-03     93.36,
                       93.39
03-26      6-9-03      Ch. 78, Sched. VI
03-28      6-9-03      T.S.O. X
                       96.05 -
03-33      7-14-03     96.07,
                       96.99
03-35      9-8-03      97.037,
                       97.999
03-36      9-8-03      96.05,
                       96.06
03-37      9-15-03     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
03-38      9-15-03     72.70
03-44      11-10-03    T.S.O. VIII
03-45      11-10-03    T.S.O. VIII
03-48      12-29-03    T.S.O. VI
04-02      1-19-04     T.S.O. VI
04-04      2-9-04      115.16,
                       115.18
04-06      3-8-04      71.107
                       151.004,
04-07      3-8-04      151.012,
                       151.156
04-09      4-12-04     T.S.O. X
04-12      4-12-04     72.20
04-13      4-12-04     94.01
04-14      4-12-04     72.70
04-17      5-10-04     33.01
04-18      6-14-04     35.06
04-19      5-10-04     115.11,
                       115.12
04-21      7-12-04     T.S.O. IX
04-22      7-12-04     T.S.O. VIII
04-23      7-12-04     T.S.O. VIII
04-28      7-12-04     T.S.O. X
04-32      10-11-04    Ch. 78, Sched. VI
04-33      10-11-04    T.S.O. VI
                       51.20.
04-39      11-8-04     51.22,
                       51.23,
                       51.25
04-41      11-8-04     71.011
04-42      11-8-04     Ch. 78, Sched. II
04-44      12-13-04    T.S.O. IV
05-02      1-10-05     70.99,
                       72.99
05-03      1-10-05     72.02,
                       72.40
05-04      1-10-05     72.20
05-07      3-14-05     Ch. 79, Sched. VII
05-10      4-11-05     51.43
05-15      5-23-05     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
05-16      6-13-05     33.07
                       33.07,
05-17      6-13-05     33.10 -
                       33.19
05-19      6-13-05     T.S.O. IX
05-20      6-20-05     51.68
05-21      7-11-05     T.S.O. VIII
05-23      8-8-05      T.S.O. X
05-25      8-8-05      T.S.O. X
05-26      8-8-05      T.S.O. VIII
05-27      8-8-05      T.S.O. VIII
                       51.66,
05-28      8-16-05     51.68,
                       51.70,
                       51.72
05-29      8-16-05     Ch. 78, Sched. III
05-30      8-16-05     72.01,
                       Ch. 79, Sched. III
05-31      8-16-05     Ch. 79, Sched. VI
05-33      9-12-05     35.07
05-34      10-10-05    115.35
05-38      11-14-05    115.18
05-39      11-21-05    T.S.O. V
06-01      1-9-06      51.66 -
                       51.68
                       30.10 -
          3-5-06      30.20,
                       31.016
06-07      3-13-06     T.S.O. VI
06-08      3-20-06     Ch. 79, Sched. VI
                       72.35,
06-09      3-20-06     72.37 -
                       72.40,
                       72.99
06-12      4-10-06     T.S.O. IX
06-14      4-27-06     33.07
                       33.07,
06-16      5-8-06      33.10-
                       33.19
06-18      5-8-06      T.S.O. IX
06-19A     5-8-06      T.S.O. VI
06-20      6-12-06     33.20 -
                       33.26
06-21      6-12-06     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
06-23      6-12-06     T.S.O. IX
06-26      7-10-06     T.S.O. X
06-27      7-10-06     T.S.O. X
06-28      7-10-06     T.S.O. IX
06-29      7-10-06     T.S.O. VIII
06-30      7-10-06     33.08
06-32      7-31-06     33.10
06-36      8-14-06     T.S.O. X
06-39      10-9-06     T.S.O. IX
06-43      11-13-06    Ch. 79, Sched. I
06-45      12-11-06    Ch. 79, Sched. VIII
06-46      12-11-06    T.S.O. IX
06-47      12-18-06    115.18
07-01      2-12-07     T.S.O. X
07-07      4-9-07      T.S.O. X
                       117.01 -
07-08      4-9-07      117.10,
                       117.99
                       33.07,
07-09      5-14-07     33.10 -
                       33.19
07-11      5-7-07      Ch. 79, Sched. VII
                       115.12,
07-12      5-14-07     115.17,
                       115.37
07-15      6-11-07     111.02
                       33.07,
07-18      6-11-07     33.10 -
                       33.19
07-19      6-11-07     T.S.O. IX
                       151.061,
07-21      7-9-07      151.062,
                       151.166
                       31.010,
07-22      7-23-07     33.07,
                       33.10 -
                       33.19
07-25      8-13-07     71.107,
                       71.999
                       51.66,
07-28      9-20-07     51.68,
                       51.70
07-29      9-10-07     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
07-30      9-17-07     Ch. 79, Sched. II
                       117.01 -
07-36      12-10-07    117.10,
                       117.99
07-37      12-10-07    T.S.O. VIII
08-03      3-10-08     118.60 -
                       118.66
08-04      3-10-08     118.70 -
                       118.73
                       99.01 -
08-05      3-10-08     99.22,
                       99.99
08-06      3-10-08     115.18
08-08      4-14-08     76.10
08-11      4-14-08     33.08
08-12      4-14-08     33.07
08-13      4-14-08     33.20
08-14      4-14-08     115.18
08-18      4-28-08     T.S.O. VI
                       33.07,
08-20      5-12-08     33.10 -
                       33.19
08-22      5-27-08     T.S.O. VI
08-26      8-11-08     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
08-29      9-8-08      97.007
08-30      9-8-08      Ch. 78, Sched. VI
08-31      9-8-08      Ch. 78, Sched. VI
08-32      9-8-08      Ch. 78, Sched. VI
                       115.11,
08-36      10-13-08    115.12,
                       115.16, 115.42
08-39      11-10-08    51.01
08-41      11-10-08    T.S.O. VIII
42         11-10-08    T.S.O. IX
45         12-8-08     T.S.O. X
09-06      1-19-09     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
                       151.002,
09-07      1-19-09     151.150 -
                       151.153
09-08      3-9-09      T.S.O. VIII
09-11      4-13-09     33.17
09-13      4-13-09     T.S.O. X
09-25      7-13-09     37.01 -
                       37.05
09-29      8-10-09     138.01 -
                       138.09
09-30      8-10-09     Ch. 78, Sched. V
09-31      8-10-09     T.S.O. VI
09-32      8-10-09     T.S. O. V
09-33      8-10-09     T.S.O. VI
                       80.01 -
09-35      9-14-09     80.07,
                       80.99
09-36      9-14-09     T.S.O. X
09-37      9-14-09     T.S.O. X
09-38      9-14-09     115.18
                       Ch. 78, Scheds. II,
09-44      10-12-09    III;
                       Ch. 79, Sched. IV
09-45      10-12-09    T.S.O. IX
09-46      10-12-09    33.00,
                       33.28
09-46      10-12-09    33.00,
                       33.28
                       31.010,
09-48      10-12-09    33.07,
                       33.10 -
                       33.19
09-49      10-19-09    T.S.O. IX
09-54      12-14-09    33.07
                       33.02,
09-55      12-14-09    33.022,
                       33.07,
                       33.08
09-57      12-14-09    72.70
10-02      2-8-10      138.02
10-05      3-8-10      94.01
10-09      4-26-10     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
10-10      4-26-10     T.S.O. X
10-13      5-10-10     37.15 -
                       37.18
10-18      6-14-10     111.02
                       31.010,
10-20      6-14-10     33.07,
                       33.10 -
                       33.19
10-24      7-12-10     T.S.O. X
10-27      8-9-10      T.S.O. VI
                       53.01 -
10-32      10-11-10    53.03,
                       53.99
10-33      10-11-10    54.01 -
                       54.05
10-36      11-8-10     70.99
11-01      1-10-11     33.29
11-05      2-14-11     51.66
11-07      4-11-11     151.159
                       31.010,
                       31.105,
11-09      5-9-11      33.07,
                       33.10 -
                       33.19
11-11      5-9-11      T.S.O. IX
                       51.66,
11-14      6-13-11     51.68,
                       51.70
                       119.01 -
11-16      6-13-11     119.07,
                       119.99
                       51.51,
11-20      7-11-11     51.54,
                       51.99
11-21      8-8-11      80.01,
                       80.02
11-26      10-10-11    T.S.O. VII
11-27      10-10-11    T.S.O. VII
11-33      12-12-11    115.16
11-35      12-12-11    T.S.O. X
                       120.01 -
11-36      12-12-11    120.03,
                       120.99
12-05      2-13-12     120.02
                       80.02,
12-06      2-13-12     80.04,
                       80.05
12-07      2-13-12     Ch. 79, Scheds. II,
                       VIII
12-09      3-12-12     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
12-10      3-12-12     Ch. 78, Sched. VI
12-12      3-12-12     T.S.O. VII
12-13      3-12-12     T.S.O. VII
12-14      3-12-12     T.S.O. VIII
12-18      4-25-12     51.67
12-19      4-25-12     T.S.O. X
12-21      5-14-12     33.29
12-26      6-11-12     33.11
12-27      6-11-12     T.S.O. VII
12-28      6-11-12     T.S.O. VII
                       31.010,
                       31.105,
12-31      6-25-12     33.07,
                       33.10 -
                       33.19
13-33      7-9-12      33.07
12-34      7-9-12      33.05
12-35      7-16-12     110.01,
                       135.01
                       33.07,
12-39      8-13-12     33.16,
                       35.03,
                       35.05
12-41      8-13-12     115.35
12-47      9-10-12     T.S.O. VII
12-48      9-10-12     T.S.O. VII
                       118.03,
12-49      9-10-12     118.14,
                       118.15,
                       118.33
12-57      11-13-12    151.037,
                       151.164
12-67      12-3-12     T.S.O. VIII
12-68      12-3-12     T.S.O. VIII
12-69      12-3-12     T.S.O. VIII
12-70      12-3-12     T.S.O. VIII
12-71      12-3-12     T.S.O. VIII
12-72      12-3-12     T.S.O. VIII
12-73      12-3-12     T.S.O. VIII
12-74      12-3-12     T.S.O. IX
12-75      12-3-12     T.S.O. IX
12-76      12-3-12     T.S.O. IX
12-77      12-3-12     T.S.O. IX
12-78      12-3-12     T.S.O. IX
12-79      12-3-12     T.S.O. IX
12-80      12-10-12    55.01
13-03      2-11-13     T.S.O. VIII
                       117.01 -
13-07      2-11-13     117.10,
                       117.99
13-11      5-13-13     Repealing 95.30
13-16      6-10-13     T.S.O. VIII
13-17      6-10-13     151.013
                       31.010,
                       31.105,
13-20      6-10-13     33.07,
                       33.10 -
                       33.19
13-22      7-8-13      T.S.O. V
13-23      7-8-13      115.18
13-25      9-9-13      T.S.O. X
13-27      5-13-13     30.02,
                       35.06
13-29      10-14-13    51.29
13-30      10-14-13    T.S.O. VIII
13-31      10-14-13    T.S.O. X
13-34      11-12-13    33.07
13-35      12-9-13     35.02
14-06      3-10-14     T.S.O. VII
                       31.010,
14-10      5-12-14     33.07,
                       33.10 -
                       33.19
14-12      6-9-14      T.S.O. VI
14-14      7-14-14     94.01
14-15      7-14-14     151.156,
                       151.166
14-19      9-8-14      T.S.O. VII
14-20      10-13-14    93.39
14-26      11-10-14    115.11,
                       115.16
15-01      1-12-15     T.S.O. X
15-02      1-12-15     97.092,
                       97.999
                       93.50 -
15-03      3-9-15      93.52,
                       93.99
15-04      4-13-15     96.55
15-06      4-13-15     T.S.O. VIII
                       31.010,
                       31.105,
15-08      6-8-15      33.07,
                       33.10 -
                       33.19
15-15      7-13-15     93.01
15-16      7-13-15     80.05
                       31.010,
                       31.105,
15-18      8-10-15     33.07,
                       33.10 -
                       33.19
15-20      8-10-15     T.S.O. X
15-23      9-14-15     T.S.O. X
15-27      11-9-15     33.04; repealing 33.05
15-28      11-9-15     117.05
15-31      12-14-15    31.120,
                       31.121; repealing 31.122 - 31.130
15-32      12-14-15    30.01
15-33      12-14-15    36.36
                       122.01 -
16-1       1-12-16     122.08,
                       122.99
16-02      1-12-16     30.02
16-03      2-9-16      T.S.O. VII
                       T.S.O.
16-8       5-10-16     VIII,
                       IX
                       T.S.O.
16-9       5-10-16     VIII,
                       IX
16-11      6-14-16     138.07
Res. 16-12 6-14-16     T.S.O. X
16-13      6-14-16     113.04,
                       113.11
16-14      6-14-16     T.S.O. X
                       33.10 -
16-15      6-28-16     33.19,
                       33.30 -
                       33.36
16-17      7-12-16     Ch. 78, Sch. III
16-0-21    8-9-16      T.S.O. X
16-25      9-13-16     T.S.O. X
16-30      10-11-16    30.02
16-36      12-13-16    T.S.O. IX
16-37      12-13-16    T.S.O. IX
                       31.018,
17-1       1-10-17     31.067,
                       33.07
17-2       2-14-17     T.S.O. IX
17-5       3-14-17     T.S.O. X
17-9       4-11-17     32.04
17-10      4-11-17     T.S.O. X
17-15      5-9-17      33.30
                       51.66,
17-18      5-9-17      51.68,
                       51.70
17-20      5-9-17      T.S.O. VIII
17-21      5-9-17      151.157
                       122.01 -
17-26      6-13-17     122.08,
                       122.99
17-29      7-11-17     T.S.O. X
17-30      7-11-17     T.S.O. X
17-31      7-11-17     T.S.O. VIII
17-34      8-8-17      96.56,
                       96.99
17-35      12-12-17    33.30
17-36      9-12-17     115.16
17-43      11-14-17    71.014
17-44      11-14-17    138.07
17-45      11-14-17    91.01,
                       91.02
17-48      12-12-17    96.56
17-49      12-12-17    33.28
18-04      1-9-18      T.S.O. VIII
18-05      2-13-18     T.S.O. X
18-06      4-10-18     51.06
                       80.01 -
18-09      5-8-18      80.07,
                       80.99
18-10      5-8-18      115.18
18-11      5-8-18      T.S.O. IX
18-13      7-2-18   30.03
18-14      7-2-18      35.06
18-18      7-10-18     92.01-
                       92.04
2018-O-20  7-19-18     99.30-
                       99.36
18-21      8-14-18     Ch. 79, Sch. VII
18-22      10-9-18     T.S.O. VI
18-30      12-11-18    33.28    
19-O-3     3-12-2019   T.S.O. V
19-05      5-14-2019   Ch. 78, Sch. VI
2019-O-6   5-14-2019   T.S.O. X
19-0-8     6-11-2019   Ch. 78, Sch. VI
19-10      7-9-19      51.72
19-11      7-9-19      Ch. 79, Sch. VII
19-0-12    7-9-19      Ch. 78, Sch. VI
19-O-15    8-13-19     123.01 -
                       123.09
19-O-16    8-13-19     36.37
19-O-18    10-8-19     151.015
19-22      11-12-19    92.01 -
                       92.03
20-3       3-10-20     T.S.O. VI
20-05      3-18-20     115.16
2020-O-15  5-12-20     T.S.O. VIII
2020-O-16  5-12-20     T.S.O. VIII
                       34.01 -
20-21      8-11-20     34.21,
                       34.99
20-23      9-8-20      151.009
20-28      11-10-20    T.S.O. IX
20-31      12-8-20     96.01
21-01      1-12-21     T.S.O. VI
21-03      3-9-21      T.S.O. IX
                       90.02 -
                       90.05,
21-6       4-13-21     90.20 -
                       90.33,
                       90.99
21-11      8-10-21     T.S.O. IX
21-12      8-10-21     115.16,
                       115.18
21-13      10-12-21    T.S.O. X
21-14      10-12-21    T.S.O. X
21-19      12-14-21    32.03,
                       151.157
                       33.08,
21-20      12-14-21    33.10,
                       33.12
22-04      5-10-22     T.S.O. IX
22-11      8-9-22      115.16,
                       115.36
22-16      10-11-22    138.02
22-17      10-11-22    33.10
22-18      10-11-22    T.S.O. IX
                       93.01,
22-19      10-11-22    93.60 -
                       93.63
23-03      2-14-23     115.18
2023-04    2-14-23     T.S.O. VIII
23-07      -           T.S.O. VIII
23-09      3-14-23     115.18
                       38.01 -
23-10      3-14-23     38.14,
                       38.99
23-12      4-11-23     T.S.O. IX
                       99.02,
23-19      7-11-23     99.04,
                       99.16
23-21      8-8-23      T.S.O. IX
23-22      9-12-23     T.S.O. VI
23-25      11-14-23    T.S.O. IX
23-26      11-20-23    115.16,
                       115.18
23-27      11-20-23    115.18
23-30      12-12-23    33.37
23-31      12-12-23    122.02,
                       122.06
                       138.02 -
23-32      12-12-23    138.05,
                       138.07,
                       138.09
                       116.01 -
23-36      9-12-23     116.07,
                       116.99
23-37      9-12-23     T.S.O. IX
23-38      9-12-23     71.120 -
                       71.123
2024-02-01 2-13-24     T.S.O. X
2024-02-02 2-13-24     151.164,
                       151.166
2024-03-01 3-12-24     30.04
2024-03-02 3-12-24     115.16,
                       115.18
2024-06-01 6-11-24     31.010
2024-06-06 6-11-24     91.01
2024-07-02 7-9-24      T.S.O. IX
2024-07-03 7-9-24      T.S.O. X
2024-07-04 7-9-24      T.S.O. X
2024-09-03 9-10-24     115.25,
                       115.36
2024-11-05 9-10-24     110.01
2025-01-01 1-14-25     51.67
                       Ch. 79, Schs.
2025-01-02 1-14-25     I,
                       VII
2025-01-03 1-14-25     T.S.O. X
                       115.41,
                       115.42,
2025-07-05 7-8-25      115.99,
                       124.01 -
                       124.08,
                       124.99
                      
 
 
