VILLAGE CODE
of the
VILLAGE OF PEORIA HEIGHTS, IL
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-1763, passed 6-3-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the Village of Peoria Heights, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-1763, passed June 3, 2025.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal
                     Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-1770
AN ORDINANCE ADDING NEW ARTICLE E TO CHAPTER 3 OF TITLE 3 OF THE PEORIA HEIGHTS
VILLAGE CODE IMPLEMENTING A
MUNICIPAL GROCERY TAX
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to Public Act 103-0781, signed into law by Governor Pritzker
on August 5, 2024, the State of Illinois repealed the 1.0% state grocery sales
tax, effective as of January 1, 2026; and
 
WHEREAS, the Village of Peoria Heights has relied upon tax monies received from
the state grocery sales tax as a significant source of revenue for funding
Village operations; and
 
WHEREAS, as established under Public Act 103-0781, new Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24) provides that, beginning on January
1, 2026, all Illinois municipalities may impose a tax “upon all persons engaged
in the business of selling groceries at retail in the municipality” (the
“Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax”) in lieu of the repealed State
grocery sales tax; and
 
WHEREAS, the Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax may be imposed “at the
rate of 1.0% of the gross receipts from these sales” (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24); and
 
WHEREAS, Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code requires any
municipality imposing a Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax under
Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code to also impose a Service
Occupation Tax at the same rate, “upon all persons engaged, in the
municipality, in the business of making sales of service, who, as an incident
to making those sales of service, transfer groceries” as “an incident to a sale
of service” (the “Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax”) (together, the
Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax and the Municipal Grocery Service
Occupation Tax shall be referenced as the “Municipal Grocery Taxes”); and
 
WHEREAS, the Municipal Grocery Taxes shall be administered, collected and
enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue; and
 
WHEREAS, in order to compensate for lost revenues as a result of the repeal of
the state grocery sales tax, the Village finds that it is appropriate,
necessary, and in the best interests of the Village and its residents to levy
the Municipal Grocery Taxes as permitted by Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, effective as of January 1, 2026;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF
PEORIA HEIGHTS, PEORIA COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
 
Section 1 . The foregoing recitals shall be and are hereby incorporated as
findings of fact as if said recitals were fully set forth herein.
 
Section 2 . Effective January 1, 2026, a new Article E entitled “Municipal
Grocery Occupation Tax” is hereby added to Chapter 3 of Title 3 of Peoria
Heights Village Code as follows:
 
 
ARTICLE E.
MUNICIPAL GROCERY OCCUPATION TAX
 
SECTION:
 
3-3E -1: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed
3-3E -2: Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax Imposed
3-3E -3: Administration
3-3E -4: Effective Date
 
3-3E-1: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in the Village of Peoria Heights at the rate of 1% of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
Article is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24), as amended from time to time.
 
3-3E-2: MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the Village of Peoria
Heights in the business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to
making those sales of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of
service. The rate of this tax shall be the same rate identified in Section 3-
3E-1 of this Article. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24), as amended from time to time.
 
3-3E-3:  ADMINISTRATION:
 
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this Article.
 
3-3E-4:  EFFECTIVE DATE:
 
The taxes imposed by this Article shall take effect on January 1, 2026.
 
Section 3 . In compliance with Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code,
the Village Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this Ordinance
with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before October 1, 2025.
 
Section 4 . If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any
person or circumstance is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Ordinance
that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and
every invalid provision or invalid application of this Ordinance is severable.
 
Section 5 . This Ordinance is hereby ordered to be published in pamphlet form
by the Peoria Heights Village Clerk and said Clerk is ordered to keep at least
three (3) copies hereof available for public inspection in the future and in
accordance with the Illinois Municipal Code.
 
Section 6 . This Ordinance is in addition to all other ordinances on the
subject and shall be construed therewith excepting as to that part in direct
conflict with any other ordinance, and in the event of such conflict, the
provisions hereof shall govern.
 
Section 7 . This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and ten (10) day period of publication as provided for by
law.
 
PASSED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF PEORIA HEIGHTS, PEORIA
COUNTY, ILLINOIS, IN REGULAR AND PUBLIC SESSION THIS 7 DAY OF OCTOBER, 2025.
 
 
AYES:         ________
NAYS:      ________
ABSTENTIONS:   ________
ABSENT:      ________
 
APPROVED THIS _____ day of _________________, 2025.
 
APPROVED:
 
                  
                        Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:
 
               
Village Clerk
CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION
 
I, STEPHANIE TURNER, and the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am the duly
qualified and acting Clerk of the Village of Peoria Heights, a municipal
corporation of and in the County of Peoria, Illinois, that the foregoing
Ordinance is a true and accurate copy of Ordinance No. ______ passed by the
Village Board and Mayor of the Village Board on ________________, and that the
Ordinance was published by me in pamphlet form this _____ day of
___________________, 2025, by making three (3) copies thereof available on that
date for public inspection.
 
 
_____________________________________
Village Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025 - 1771
 
 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE NUMBER OF AUTHORIZED CLASS “A-2” LIQUOR LICENSES
WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE VILLAGE OF PEORIA HEIGHTS
 
 
   WHEREAS, the Board of Trustees of the Village of Peoria Heights finds that
the regulation of the number of available liquor licenses is essential to the
health, safety and welfare of the community; and
 
   WHEREAS, by Ordinance No. 2023-1790, the Village amended Section 4-1-11 of
the Village Code to provide that in the event that any liquor license holder’s
license lapses for any reason, such license is automatically void and the
number of authorized licenses within the Village shall decrease by the number
of lapsed licenses; and
 
   WHEREAS, as a result of a lapsed liquor license and to otherwise update the
Village Code to accurately reflect the number of Class A-2 licenses within the
Village, the Village Board desires to make the amendment set forth herein.
 
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF PEORIA HEIGHTS, PEORIA COUNTY, ILLINOIS, THAT:
 
   Article 1. Amendment. That Section 4-1-11 of the Village Code of the Village
of Peoria Heights pertaining to the number of available liquor licenses shall
provide for fifteen (15) authorized Class A-2 licenses.
 
   Article 2. Effective Date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect
from and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as
provided by law.
 
   PASSED BY THE VILLAGE BOARD OF THE VILLAGE OF PEORIA HEIGHTS, PEORIA COUNTY,
ILLINOIS, IN REGULAR AND PUBLIC SESSION THIS 16TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2025.
 
APPROVED:
 
 
                                                            ________________________________ 
President
 
ATTEST:
 
 
________________________________
   Village Clerk
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-1472
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE OF PEORIA HEIGHTS, IL VILLAGE CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the president and board of trustees of the village of Peoria
Heights, Illinois, as follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the village
code of the village of Peoria Heights, Illinois prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the village, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the
official code and law of the village as enacted by the president and board of
trustees.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official village code is identified by the proper catchline and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which
shall be maintained in the office of the village clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official
village code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official village code. All
ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in
full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the village code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the
official village code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the village to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
PASSED this 19th day of April, 2016.
APPROVED this 19th day of April, 2016
/s/      
   President
 
ATTEST:
 
/s/      
   Village Clerk
Roll Call Vote:
AYES: 3
NAYS: 0
ABSENT: 3
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
Peoria Heights Village Code   1
Saving Clause   2
Definitions; Interpretation   3
Penalties For Code Violations   4
Miscellaneous Administrative Provisions   5
Village President And Board Of Trustees   6
Village Clerk   7
Village Officers And Personnel   8
Village Administrator   8A
Village Treasurer   8B
Village Attorney   8C
Public Works Officials   8D
Telecommunications Supervisor   8E
Fire Department   8F
Ethics   9
CHAPTER 1
PEORIA HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the village board of trustees, this code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code of Peoria Heights.
This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the PEORIA HEIGHTS VILLAGE
CODE and is hereby published by authority of the village board of trustees and
shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the village
as provided in section
1-1-3  of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title headings, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2016 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of the
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2016 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
numbers of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifier, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2016 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
village board of trustees. The village clerk shall see that the replacement
pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of
the clerk. Any person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall
make every effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner.
He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such
are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the village
clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the village and shall
be returned to the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the
village board of trustees. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Court Proceedings
1-2-3: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances;
   B.   Appropriation ordinances;
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   F.   Salary ordinances;
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   H.   Improvement ordinances;
   I.   Bond ordinances;
   J.   Ordinances relating to elections;
   K.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the village; and
   L.   All special ordinances. (2016 Code)
1-2-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the village herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2016 Code)
   D.   Reviving Repealed Legislation: When any ordinance repealing a former
ordinance, clause or provision, shall itself be repealed, such repeal shall not
be construed to renew such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it
shall be therein so expressly provided. (1914 Code § 30-9)
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code,
or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any codes or portions
of codes adopted herein by reference. The village board of trustees hereby
declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the president and village board of trustees may
be fully carried out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other village officer to do some act or perform
some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or
other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   D.   Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   E.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   F.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   G.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   H.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the village of Peoria Heights".
   I.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   J.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the
village has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to village ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2016 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   CODE: The village code of the village of Peoria Heights.
   COUNTY: The county of Peoria, state of Illinois.
   PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   STATE: The state of Illinois.
   VILLAGE: The village of Peoria Heights, county of Peoria, state of Illinois.
   VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES: Unless otherwise indicated, the village board of
trustees of the village of Peoria Heights. (2016 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2016
Code)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTIES FOR CODE VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalties Established
1-4-2: Optional Settlement Procedure
1-4-3: Application Of Provisions
1-4-4: Nonliability Of Officers And Employees
1-4-1: PENALTIES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   General Penalty: Any other provision of this code to the contrary
notwithstanding and except as otherwise set forth in this section, whenever
there is a violation of any provision of this code, the minimum penalty for
such violation shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the maximum penalty
for such violation shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus costs.
Penalties for the violation of any such provisions paid through the optional
settlement procedure described in section
1-4-2 of this chapter shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 2015-1431,
2-3-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Alcoholic Beverages: Penalties in addition to suspension under section
4-1-24 of this code governing the sale of alcoholic beverages are unaffected by
this section and may be imposed as provided by title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
Any other provisions of title 4, chapter 1 of this code governing the sale of
alcoholic beverages to the contrary notwithstanding, any person, upon
conviction and finding and being adjudged guilty, shall be fined not less than
three hundred dollars ($300.00) and not more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) for each offense, and each day a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. A person found guilty of any violation of title
4, chapter 1 of this code for a second and subsequent violation shall be fined
a minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent violation. In
addition, upon a finding and the entry of a judgment of guilty, the court may
assess, in addition to any fine ordered to be paid, costs of seventy five
dollars ($75.00), payable to the village, which would be in addition to any
costs assessed by the county circuit court clerk. Any and all fines imposed
pursuant to this subsection shall bear interest at a rate of one percent (1%)
per month on the unpaid balance from the date of fine imposition. (Ord. 2014-
1416, 9-16-2014; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Disorderly Conduct: For a violation of section
6-6-3 of this code, which prohibits disorderly conduct, the minimum penalty
shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), and the maximum penalty shall
be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus costs. The penalty for a
violation paid through the optional settlement procedure described in section
1-4-2 of this chapter shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   D.   Possession Of Cannabis And Drug Paraphernalia: Any other provisions of
sections
 6-7-1 and
 6-7-2 of this code prohibiting the possession of cannabis and drug
paraphernalia to the contrary notwithstanding, the penalties for the violation
of said sections shall be as follows, plus costs: (Ord. 2015-1431, 2-3-2015;
amd. 2016 Code)
      1.   Cannabis:
         a.   Penalties for the possession of cannabis shall be:
 
Quantity                                 Minimum Penalty Maximum Penalty
Less than 2.5 grams                      $300.00         $750.00
2.5 grams or more but less than 10 grams 400.00          750.00
10 grams or more but less than 30 grams  500.00          750.00
30 grams or more                         900.00          900.00
 
         b.   Penalties for possession of cannabis paid through the optional
settlement procedure (if available under section
 1-4-2 of this chapter) shall be:
 
Quantity                                 Settlement
Less than 2.5 grams                      $250.00
2.5 grams or more but less than 10 grams 325.00
10 grams or more but less than 30 grams  400.00
30 grams or more                         700.00
 
      2.   Drug Paraphernalia:
         a.   For the possession of drug paraphernalia, the minimum penalty for
a violation shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), and the maximum
penalty shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
         b.   Penalties for possession of drug paraphernalia paid through the
optional settlement procedure (if available under section
1-4-2 of this chapter) shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00).
      3.   Exemptions: Any other provisions of sections
 6-7-1 and
6-7-2 of this code to the contrary notwithstanding, it shall not be unlawful
for any individual who is a registered qualifying patient or a registered
designated caregiver, as those terms are defined in the compassionate use of
cannabis pilot program act found at 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130/1 et
seq. (the "act"), to possess cannabis or drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
engaging or assisting in the medical use of cannabis in accordance with the
provisions of the act.
   E.   Zoning: Penalties for the violation of title 10 of this code as
established by section
10-3-5 of this code are unaffected by this section and shall be imposed as
provided by section
10-3-5 of this code. Penalties for the violation of title 10 of this code paid
through the optional settlement procedure described in section
1-4-2 of this chapter shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 2015-1431,
2-3-2015)
1-4-2: OPTIONAL SETTLEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person having been issued a
citation or notice of violation of any provision of this code may, at the
option of such person, settle the violation by paying the appropriate optional
settlement amount indicated in section
1-4-1 of this chapter within fourteen (14) days of the date of receiving the
citation or notice of the violation. Payments shall be made at the office of
the village clerk, 4901 North Prospect Road, Peoria Heights, Illinois. Upon the
failure of a recipient of the citation or notice of violation to timely pay the
optional settlement amount, a complaint charging the recipient with the
violation shall be filed in the county circuit court. The recipient of a
citation or notice of violation filed in said circuit court shall be required
to appear at the time, date and place set forth in the citation or notice. If
the recipient shall fail to appear at the time and place so noticed, a judgment
of guilty and fine and costs shall be entered against the recipient who fails
to appear.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided herein, the village may agree, at a first
(or continued first) court appearance, to settle a violation of any violation
of this code by accepting the appropriate optional settlement amount pursuant
to a court order. Optional settlement payments made pursuant to court order may
be made at the office of the village clerk, 4901 North Prospect Road, Peoria
Heights, Illinois, or at another location designated in the order. A defendant
shall be required to appear at the time and date and place set forth in said
court order if the optional settlement amount is not paid as agreed. If the
defendant shall fail to appear at the time and place so noticed or if she/he
shall fail to pay the optional settlement amount as agreed, a judgment of
guilty and fine and costs shall be entered against him/her.
   C.   The above notwithstanding, the optional settlement procedure shall not
in any event be available in any form to any person charged with a subsequent
violation of the same provision alleged to have occurred within twelve (12)
months from the date of the first alleged violation, whether or not said person
was convicted of the first violation. (Ord. 2015-1431, 2-3-2015)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalties: The penalties provided in this chapter shall
be applicable to the appropriate sections of this code the same as though they
were a part of said appropriate sections.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2016 Code)
1-4-4: NONLIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the village board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 5
MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Corporate Seal
1-5-2: Village Elections
1-5-3: Firefighter Training
1-5-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
   A.   Description: A seal in circular form, with the words "Village of Peoria
Heights" on the outer circle, and in the interior and center of said circle the
words "Incorporated A.D. 1898", shall be the seal of the village; said seal to
be used in all cases when required by the laws of the United States or of this
state, or by any ordinance of the village, and in all cases in which, by the
laws and customs of nations, it is necessary for a municipal corporation to use
a seal. (1914 Code § 2-1)
   B.   Custodian: The seal shall be and remain in the custody of the village
clerk, to be used by him or the president as provided in subsection A of this
section. (1914 Code § 2-2)
1-5-2: VILLAGE ELECTIONS:
Pursuant to P.A. 87-848, the village shall continue to hold partisan elections
for the offices of president and trustee. (Ord. 1068, 6-2-1992)
1-5-3: FIREFIGHTER TRAINING:
   A.   Participation In Illinois Fire Protection Training Act: The village
hereby elects to participate in the programs provided in the Illinois fire
protection training act.
   B.   Requirements For Firefighters:
      1.   Before an individual may volunteer as a firefighter, he or she must
have been certified by the Illinois state fire marshal as a firefighter II, as
having successfully completed an approved training course as provided in the
act.
      2.   The firefighter II certification must be completed by the trainee
within his or her probationary period of six (6) months. Failure of any trainee
to complete such basic training and certification within the required period
will render that individual and the village ineligible for reimbursement
funding for basic training for that individual in the fiscal year in which his
or her probationary period ends. The individual may later become certified
without reimbursement. (Ord. 2014-1425, 12-16-2014)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: President Powers And Duties
1-6-2: Rules And Order Of Business
1-6-3: Ordinances
1-6-4: Omnibus Voting
1-6-1: PRESIDENT POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The President shall perform all duties pertaining to his office which
are or may be required of him either by the laws of the State of Illinois or by
the ordinances of the Village. (1914 Code § 4-1)
   B.   The President shall appoint, by and with the consent of the Board of
Trustees, all officers whose appointments are not otherwise provided for by the
laws of the State of Illinois or the ordinances of the Village. Whenever a
vacancy occurs in any office which, by law, he is empowered to fill, he shall,
within thirty (30) days after the happening of such vacancy, communicate the
name of his appointee to such office to the Board, and pending the concurrence
of the Board to such appointment, the President may designate some person to
discharge the duties of such office. (1914 Code § 4-2)
   C.   The President shall sign all commissions, licenses and permits granted
by the authority of the Board, except as otherwise provided, and such other
acts and deeds as by law or ordinance may require his official signature. (1914
Code § 4-4)
   D.   The President shall supervise the conduct of all the officers of the
Village, examine the grounds of all complaints made against any of them, and
cause all violations of duty and other neglect to be promptly corrected or
reported to the proper tribunal for punishment. (1914 Code § 4-5)
   E.   Emergency Powers of the Village President.
      1.   Declaration of a State of Emergency: A state of emergency exists
when one (1) or more of the following conditions are present or imminent:
         a.   The Governor of the State of Illinois, or the President of the
United States, has declared that a state of emergency exists, and the
conditions giving rise to that declared state of emergency directly affect the
territory, populace or property of the Village; or
         b.   A natural disaster or act of war or act of rebellion or terrorism
or cyber-attack has overwhelmed, or imminently threatens to overwhelm, the
ability of emergency responders or public health officials to safely,
adequately of efficiently respond to the needs of the Village or protect the
safety of its residents; or
         c.   An epidemic, pandemic, health emergency, or natural disaster
makes it unsafe or imprudent for non-essential Village personnel to report to
work, or for a quorum of the Village Board to meet; or
         d.   Other unforeseen circumstances, of like kind or severity, arise
and affect the safety or welfare of the residents, employees or officers of the
Village.
      Should the President determine that one (1) or more of the above
conditions exists or is imminent, and should the President further determine
that it is in the best interest of the Village to declare a state of emergency,
the President shall sign, under oath, a statement finding that such standards
have been met, setting forth facts to substantiate such findings, describing
the nature of the emergency, and declaring that a state of emergency exists.
Such statement shall be filed with the Village Clerk as soon as practicable.
      2.   Expiration of a State of Emergency: A declaration of a state of
emergency, made pursuant to
1-6-1E.1.a. of this section, shall expire not later than the adjournment of the
first regular meeting of the Village Board after the state of emergency is
declared. If the next scheduled regular session of the Village Board cannot be
held, because conditions make it unsafe or impractical to hold a meeting, or
because a quorum of the Village Board is not present at the appointed time for
its meeting, the state of emergency shall continue until such time that a
quorum of the Village Board can convene, provided further that the President
may, at any time, declare that the state of emergency has ended.
      3.   Emergency Powers of the President: Upon a declaration of a state of
emergency, until the expiration or revocation of the declaration (The
"Emergency Period"), the President shall have and may exercise the following
emergency powers; provided, however, that the lapse of the emergency powers
shall not, as regards to any act or acts occurring or committed within the
Emergency Period or any extension thereof, deprive any person, firm,
corporation, political subdivision, or body politic of any right or rights to
compensation or reimbursement which they may have under the provisions of this
section.
         a.   To enter into contracts, incurring of obligations, the employment
of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and
materials and the appropriate expenditures and disposition of public funds and
property as necessary.
         b.   To suspend the provisions of any regulatory ordinance prescribing
procedures for conduct of Village business, or the orders and rules of any
Village agency, if strict compliance with the provision would in any way
prevent, hinder or delay necessary action, including emergency purchases.
         c.   To utilize all available resources of the Village government as
reasonably necessary.
         d.   To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of Village
departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or
facilitating response and recovery programs.
         e.   To recommend the evacuation of all or part of the population from
any stricken or threatened area within the Village if he deems this action
necessary.
         f.   To prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and destinations in
connection with evacuation.
         g.   To control ingress and egress to and from a disaster area, the
movement of persons within the area, and the occupancy of premises therein.
         h.   To make provision for the availability and use of temporary
emergency housing.
      4.   Public Notification of State of Emergency: Upon the President
issuing the declaration herein authorized, and as soon as may be safe or
practical, the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall notify the news
media situated within the Village and shall cause three (3) copies of the
declaration declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the
following places within the Village: Village Hall, the Police Station, and the
Post Office. However, the failure of the Chief of Police to provide such notice
shall not operate to limit or invalidate the President's emergency powers.
(Ord. 2020-1621, 3-17-2020)
1-6-2: RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
   A.   Meetings:
      1.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees
shall be held on the third Tuesday of each month at five thirty o’clock (5:30)
P.M.
      2.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the Village
President or any three (3) Trustees upon at least forty eight (48) hours'
notice to all members and the President; provided, that if all of the Trustees
are present at a special meeting, no notice of the meeting shall be necessary
and such notice shall be deemed waived.
      3.   Departmental Committee Meetings: Departmental Committee meetings
shall be held on the first Tuesday of each month at five thirty o’clock (5:30)
P.M.
      4.   Meeting Place: The meeting place of the Board shall be at the
Village Hall unless otherwise ordered by the Board.
      5.   Notice Of Meetings: Notice of all meetings of the Village Board and
all committee meetings shall be given in accordance with the provisions of the
Open Meetings Act.
      6.   Agenda. The agenda shall be prepared under the direction of the
Village President and shall include such matters as the Village Administrator
or Village President shall determine, and shall also include such matters
requested at the direction of at least two trustees.
   B.   Presiding Officer: The Village President shall be the presiding officer
of all regular and special meetings of the Board of Trustees and at all times
when the Board meets as a Committee of the Whole.
   C.   Order Of Business: The order of business of the Village Board of
Trustees shall be substantially as follows:
      1.   Call to order.
      2.   Pledge to flag.
      3.   Roll call.
      4.   Approval of preceding meeting minutes.
      5.   Village Clerk correspondence.
      6.   Announcements.
      7.   Trustee reports.
      8.   Comments from audience.
      9.   Old business.
      10.   New business.
      11.   Payment of bills/Treasurer's report.
      12.   Adjourn.
   D.   Rescinded Action: No vote or action of the Board of Trustees shall be
rescinded at any special meeting unless there be present at such meeting as
many members of the Board of Trustees as were present at the meeting when such
vote or action was taken, as provided by statute.
   E.   Ordinances And Resolutions:
      1.   Ordinances: All ordinances shall be submitted to the Board of
Trustees in the written form prescribed by statute and upon legal paper
suitable for insertion in the record book of the Village Clerk. Ordinances may
be passed immediately upon submission to the Village Board and shall take
effect upon their passage, except as otherwise provided by law.
      2.   Resolutions: Any resolution submitted to the Board of Trustees shall
be reduced to writing before being voted upon, on request of any two (2)
members of the Board.
   F.   Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by
statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of the
members present at any meeting.
   G.   Robert's Rules Of Order: "Robert's Rules of Order" shall govern the
deliberations of the Board of Trustees except when in conflict with any of the
foregoing rules.
   H.   Quorum: A majority of the Board of Trustees shall constitute a quorum
to do business.
   I.   Committees:
      1.   Standing Committee: The following shall be the standing committee of
the Board of Trustees: Departmental Committee.
      2.   Special Committees: Special committees shall be created from time to
time as directed by the Board.
      3.   Composition And Appointment: All standing and special committees
shall consist of seven (7) members, including the Chair, unless the Board shall
direct otherwise. All committees shall be appointed by the Village President.
   J.   Disturbing Meetings: It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any
meeting of the Board of Trustees or of any committee thereof. Any person
violating the provisions of this subsection shall be fined as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this title.
   K.   Comments From The Audience:
      1.   Each person speaking at any time set aside during a regular or
special meeting of the Board for comments from the audience shall state his or
her name. Each speaker shall confine comments to five (5) minutes or less,
restrict remarks to matters relevant to the governance of the Village, avoid
repetitious statements and refrain from vulgar or otherwise inappropriate
language or references. Complaints regarding the performance of an employee of
the Village shall if directed by the officer presiding at the meeting be
addressed only in closed session. If the presiding officer concludes that a
speaker has unnecessarily exceeded the five (5) minute limitation, is
addressing areas not relevant to the governance of the Village, has been
needlessly repetitious or has used vulgar or otherwise inappropriate language,
the speaker shall at the request of the presiding officer immediately conclude
his or her comments. The presiding officer may grant additional time to a
speaker upon the request of any member of the Board or the speaker.
      2.   During public hearings, each speaker addressing the matter which is
the subject of the hearing shall state his or her name. Each speaker shall be
allowed a reasonable amount of time to state his or her position on the matter
which is the subject of the public hearing. Each speaker shall restrict his or
her remarks to the matter which is the subject of the public hearing, avoid
repetitious statements and refrain from vulgar or otherwise inappropriate
language or references. If the presiding officer concludes that a speaker has
spoken for a period of time in excess of what is reasonably required to address
the subject of the hearing, has been needlessly repetitious or has used vulgar
or otherwise inappropriate language, the speaker shall at the request of the
presiding officer immediately conclude his or her comments.
   L.   Remote Attendance By Individual Board Members When A Quorum Is
Physically Present: A member of the Village Board may attend a meeting
electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
      1.   The member should notify the Village clerk at least forty eight (48)
hours before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications
equipment can be arranged. Such notice shall be in writing, if possible.
      2.   The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he
or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
         a.   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability; or
         b.   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the village; or
         c.   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
      3.   The clerk or his or her designee, after receiving the electronic
attendance request, shall inform the Village Board of the request for
electronic attendance. After establishing that there is a quorum physically
present at a meeting where a member of the Village Board desires to attend
electronically, the presiding officer shall state that (i) a notice was
received by a member of the Village Board, and (ii) the member will be deemed
authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion objecting to
the member's electronic attendance is made, seconded, and approved by two-
thirds (2/3) of the members of the Village Board physically present at the
meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded or if any such motion fails to
achieve the required vote by the members of the Village Board, physically
present at the meeting, then the request by the member to attend the meeting
electronically shall be deemed approved by the Village Board and the presiding
officer shall declare the requesting member present. After such declaration by
the presiding officer, the question of a member's electronic attendance may not
be reconsidered.
      4.   The member participating electronically and other members of the
Village Board must be able to communicate effectively, and members of the
audience must be able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before
allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the Village Board shall provide
equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site.
(Ord. 2017-1525, 11-7-2017; amd. Ord. 2020-1624, 4-7-2020; Ord. 2022-1673, 4-
19-2022; Ord. 2024-1723, 2-6-2024)
1-6-3: ORDINANCES:
   A.   Style: The style of ordinances passed shall be as follows: "Be it
ordained by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Peoria
Heights, Illinois". (1914 Code § 30-1)
   B.   Submission To Clerk; President Approval Or Veto: All ordinances passed
by the Board shall, before they take effect, be deposited in the Office of the
Village Clerk, and if the Village President approves thereof, he shall sign the
same, and such as he shall not approve, he shall return to the Board at the
next regular meeting of the Board occurring not less than five (5) days after
the passage thereof. Such veto may extend to any one or more items of
appropriation contained in any ordinance making an appropriation, or to the
entire ordinance, and in case the veto only extends to a part of such
ordinance, the residue thereof shall take effect and be in force. In case the
President shall fail to return any ordinance with his objections thereto by the
time aforesaid, he shall be deemed to have approved such ordinance, and the
same shall take effect accordingly. (1914 Code § 30-2)
   C.   Passage Over Veto: Upon return of any ordinance by the President, the
vote by which the same was passed, shall be reconsidered by the Board; and if,
after such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the Trustees elected (4
Trustees) shall vote by yeas and nays to pass the same, it shall go into
effect, notwithstanding the President may refuse to approve the same. The vote
to pass the same over the President's veto shall be taken by yeas and nays and
entered on the journal. (1914 Code § 30-3)
   D.   Passage Of Ordinances: The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the
passage of all ordinances and on all propositions to create any liability
against the Village or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money and,
in all other cases, at the request of any member, which vote shall be entered
on the journal of its proceedings. The concurrence of a majority of all the
Trustees elected shall be necessary to the passage of any such ordinance or
proposition. (1914 Code § 30-4)
   E.   Effect: All ordinances imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or
forfeiture or making any appropriation shall be posted under the supervision of
the Village Clerk, and such ordinance shall take effect immediately after its
passage and publication, and all others shall take effect from and after their
passage unless otherwise provided therein. (1914 Code § 30-7)
   F.   Certification: All ordinances, and the date of publication thereof, may
be proven by the certificate of the Clerk under the Corporate Seal, and when
printed in book or pamphlet form, and purporting to be published by authority
of the Board, the same need not be otherwise published. Such book or pamphlet
shall be received as evidence of the passage and legal publication of such
ordinances, as of the dates mentioned in such book or pamphlet, and in all
courts and places without further proof. (1914 Code § 30-8)
1-6-4: OMNIBUS VOTING:
The Village Board at any meeting may by unanimous consent take a single vote by
yeas and nays on the several questions of the passage on any two (2) or more of
the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions or motions placed together for
voting purposes in a single group, which single vote shall be entered
separately in the minutes of the proceedings of the Village Board under the
designation "omnibus vote" or "consent agenda" and, in such event, the Clerk
may enter the words "omnibus vote" in the journal in each case in lieu of
entering names of the members of Village Board voting "yea" and those voting
"nay" on the passage of each of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions
and motions included in such omnibus group. The taking of such single or
omnibus vote and such entries of the words "omnibus vote" in the journal shall
be a sufficient compliance with the requirements of this section to all intents
and purposes and with like effect as if the vote in each case had been
separately by yeas and nays on the question of the passage of each order,
resolution and motion included in such omnibus group, and separately recorded
in the journal. (Ord. 2020-1626, 4-21-2020)
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE CLERK
SECTION:
1-7-1: Duties
1-7-1: DUTIES:
   A.   The village clerk shall attend every meeting of the board of trustees
and keep a correct record of all proceedings of the board, and safely keep the
corporate seal, and use it in all necessary cases. He shall notify all
committees appointed by the board of their appointment and of the business
referred to them. He shall notify all the judges of election of their
appointment and prepare all orders for elections. He shall perform all other
duties which, by law, usage or custom, devolve upon clerks and secretaries of
incorporated bodies, and to facilitate the discharge of his duties, he may, and
is hereby authorized to, procure for the village such blank forms as may be
necessary for the above purposes. (1914 Code § 5-1; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   The village clerk shall keep all the records, papers, ordinances, votes
and proceedings of the village during the recess of the village board, and all
returns of assessments, and of election of village officers, and all
appointments of village officers, and shall not suffer any of said records or
papers or other instruments of writing to be taken out of his office by any
person other than himself, the president, the village attorney, or persons
authorized by the board, under penalty of a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title, and a further forfeiture of the amount of all damages that
may accrue by the loss or obliteration of any records or papers of the village;
and should any be lost or obliterated, and should the president, village
attorney or other persons as aforesaid suffer any paper or record entrusted to
him or them to be lost or obliterated, he or they shall be responsible for the
damage that may accrue by reason of such loss or obliteration. (1914 Code § 5-
2; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   The village clerk shall keep a regular account of debit and credit
between the village and the treasurer, by charging him with all the sums
received, as exhibited by his receipts, and crediting him with all village
orders paid and returned to him. He shall also keep a regular account of debit
and credit when appropriations are made, and expenditures ordered, and shall
state, in each order drawn on the treasurer, for whom and when the same is
payable, and also to what fund or appropriation the same is chargeable. (1914
Code § 5-3)
   D.   The village clerk shall index all ordinances by their number or title,
and attend to the proper and lawful publication of the same, and he shall keep
a list of all committees appointed by the board, and of business from time to
time referred to them, and note the date and nature of their reports. The clerk
shall attest all deeds, contracts and leases made by the board and, in
conjunction with the president, sign all ordinances, bonds, licenses and orders
on the treasurer and affix the seal of the village thereto, and perform such
other duties as may be required by the board. (1914 Code § 5-4)
   E.   The village clerk shall procure a large, well bound book in which he
shall transcribe all ordinances passed by the board, and, after such ordinances
have been published, shall attach the certificate of publication thereto. At
the end of each ordinance, the clerk shall state concerning the same the
following: when passed, when approved, and when and how published and posted.
He shall file all original documents and vouchers. (1914 Code § 5-5)
   F.   The village clerk shall have the charge, custody and control of all
deeds, leases, warrants, vouchers, books and papers of any kind, the custody
and control of which is not herein given to any other officer. (1914 Code § 5-
10)
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-8-1: Oath Of Office
1-8-2: Terms Of Office
1-8-3: Removal From Office
1-8-4: Property To Successor
1-8-5: Participation In Retirement Fund
1-8-1: OATH OF OFFICE:
All officers of the village, either elected or appointed, shall, before
entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe the
following oath or affirmation, which oath or affirmation, so subscribed, shall
be filed in the office of the village clerk:
I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the
constitution of the United States, and the constitution of the State of
Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of
                 according to the best of my ability.
(1914 Code § 4-8)
1-8-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
   A.   The term of office for all elected village officials shall begin not
later than the first regular or special meeting in the month of May. (Ord. 944,
4-8-1981)
   B.   All officers of the village shall hold their respective offices during
and for the respective terms for which they are elected or appointed and until
their successors are elected or appointed and qualified. (1914 Code § 4-3)
1-8-3: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Any officer appointed under any of the provisions of this code may be removed
at any time as provided by the laws of the state of Illinois. (1914 Code § 4-6)
1-8-4: PROPERTY TO SUCCESSOR:
Every officer of the village shall, upon his resignation, removal, or the
expiration of his term of office, deliver to his successor, within five (5)
days after demand, all papers, books, documents, or other property belonging to
the village and appertaining to his office. (1914 Code § 4-7)
1-8-5: PARTICIPATION IN RETIREMENT FUND:
The village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois municipal
retirement fund, effective January 1, 1972. (Ord. 791, 12-7-1971)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-8A-1: Office Created
1-8A-2: Appointment; Qualifications
1-8A-3: Term Of Office
1-8A-4: Duties
1-8A-5: Compensation
1-8A-6: Effect On Elected Village Officials
1-8A-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of village administrator subject to the
provisions of this article and the provisions of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes. (Ord. 1144, 4-6-1999)
1-8A-2: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS:
The village administrator shall be appointed by the village president, with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. This selection shall be based
solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special
reference to specific professional education for actual experience in and
knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the administration of local
government and to the duties of the office as herein specified. The person so
appointed need not be a resident of the village. Neither the village president
nor any member of the village board shall receive such appointment during their
term of office or within two (2) years after the expiration of that term. (Ord.
1144, 4-6-1999; amd. 2016 Code)
1-8A-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
The village administrator shall be appointed to an indefinite term of office
and shall at all times be subject to the direction of the village president or
as collectively authorized by the board of trustees. (Ord. 1144, 4-6-1999)
1-8A-4: DUTIES:
The village administrator shall be responsible to the village president and
board of trustees for the proper implementation and administration of the
policies and directives of the village president and board of trustees. In
discharging this responsibility, the village administrator shall:
   A.   Attend all meetings of the board of trustees. The village administrator
shall have the right to take part in all discussions, but shall not vote.
   B.   Direct, supervise, and coordinate the administration of all departments
and affairs of the village except as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 1144, 4-
6-1999)
   C.   Exercise a general supervision over all the officers of the village
charged in any manner with the receipt, collection or disbursement of village
revenues, and the collection and return of all such revenues into the treasury.
(1914 Code § 5-9)
   D.   Investigate and prepare or cause to be prepared applications for any
state and federal grant(s) to which the village may be entitled as directed by
the village president and board of trustees.
   E.   Prepare and maintain position descriptions and assist department heads
on personnel matters (selection, training and discipline).
   F.   Make recommendations to the village board concerning compensation for
each appointive office and position in the village classified service,
including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates.
   G.   Recommend to the village president and board of trustees the creating,
consolidating and/or combining of offices, positions, departments, or units of
the administrative and executive departments of the village. (Ord. 1144, 4-6-
1999)
   H.   Keep strict, accurate and detailed accounts of all the monies and funds
of the village, as well as of all the receipts, expenses, outlays,
disbursements and expenditures thereof; the same to be so systematized and
arranged under their proper title or heading that each separate fund and
account will plainly and clearly show its own particular debit and credit, as
well as to or from whom, when and on what account the same was received or paid
out. (1914 Code § 5-6)
   I.   Serve as the village budget officer and prepare and submit to the
village board a recommended annual budget for all village operations and a
recommended capital program. Upon approval by the board of trustees, the
village administrator shall be responsible for the administration of said
budget and/or capital program.
   J.   Review or cause to be reviewed orders and purchases made by any
department and indicate approval or rejection thereof as proper expenditures
before being submitted for payment to the board of trustees.
   K.   Promulgate and administer such purchasing rules and policies to be
followed in the procurement of goods and services.
   L.   Act as liaison between the village president and board of trustees and
the various commissions, boards and offices inside and outside the village.
   M.   Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the government of the village and services maintained by the
various public and private utilities serving the village and determine that all
granted franchises, permits, and privileges are faithfully observed.
   N.   Annually submit to the village president and board of trustees a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the village
for the fiscal year ending.
   O.   Act as the zoning officer of the village.
   P.   Advise the village board of trustees on pending matters of public
policy as may be expedient for the protection of the public health, safety, or
welfare of the community.
   Q.   Cooperate in matters relating to public relations as directed by the
village president and board of trustees.
   R.   Assume no other employment while employed by the village.
   S.   Perform such other duties as may from time to time be assigned by the
village president. (Ord. 1144, 4-6-1999)
1-8A-5: COMPENSATION:
The salary of the village administrator shall be determined by the board of
trustees. (Ord. 1144, 4-6-1999)
1-8A-6: EFFECT ON ELECTED VILLAGE OFFICIALS:
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to diminish or detract from the
statutory powers and authority of the village elected officials. (Ord. 1144, 4-
6-1999)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE TREASURER
SECTION:
1-8B-1: Duties
1-8B-1: DUTIES:
The village treasurer shall:
   A.   Be charged with supervision of all financial functions and financial
records of the village, including the receipt of all moneys belonging to the
village and the keeping of books and accounts in such manner as the village
board may require, in accordance with the law.
   B.   Reconcile all village bank accounts.
   C.   Prepare monthly and annual reports and accounts in such a manner as the
village board may require, in accordance with the law.
   D.   Perform or cause to be performed all of the duties imposed upon him/her
by law. (amd. Ord. 2019-1601, 8-20-2019)
ARTICLE C. VILLAGE ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-8C-1: Authority To Retain
1-8C-1: AUTHORITY TO RETAIN:
The village president and board of trustees may, in their discretion, employ
legal counsel for the current year or from time to time during such year as
they may deem necessary. (1914 Code § 28-1)
ARTICLE D. PUBLIC WORKS OFFICIALS
SECTION:
1-8D-1: Director Of Public Works
1-8D-2: Assistant Director Of Public Works
1-8D-1: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
   A.   Office Established: There is hereby established the office of director
of public works. (Ord. 496, 9-8-1959)
   B.   Duties Generally: Under the general supervision of the mayor and
village board, the director of public works assigns, plans, and supervises the
work crews in the maintenance of village streets, alleys, storm sewers and
water department.
   C.   Essential Job Functions: The following are the essential job functions
of the director of public works:
      1.   Carries out supervisory responsibility in accordance with policies,
procedures and applicable law including: training in job skills; planning,
assigning and directing work; appraising performance; addressing complaints and
resolving problems.
      2.   Administers unit budget and payroll.
      3.   Plans, allocates, and monitors time, people, equipment, and other
resources to ensure efficient organization and completion of work.
      4.   Provides information, advice, feedback, or assistance to others
within the department to refine work outputs; ensures quality standards and
compliance with regulations are maintained; resolves problems.
      5.   Manages the purchasing and inventory control of parts, equipment,
and supplies for unit.
      6.   Provides advice to contractors and others related to area of
assignment.
      7.   Manages water department for all residents.
      8.   Resolves citizen complaints in area of assignment.
      9.   Conducts research and develops cost effective programs for special
projects; administers projects.
      10.   Performs other related duties as assigned.
   D.   Minimum Qualifications: The following shall be the minimum
qualifications of the director of public works:
      1.   Bachelor or associates degree preferred; or
      2.   High school diploma; and
      3.   Four (4) to six (6) years of progressively responsible related
experience.
   E.   Knowledge, Skills And Abilities:
      1.   The director of public works shall be knowledgeable in the
following:
         a.   Must have computer knowledge including Excel, Microsoft Word or
related computer experience.
         b.   Materials, methods and techniques commonly used in public works
maintenance and construction activities including street repair, sewer repair
and water line repair.
         c.   Recordkeeping, report preparation, filing methods and records
management techniques.
         d.   Standard business arithmetic, including percentages and decimals.
         e.   Basic budgetary principles and practices.
         f.   Administration of staff and activities, either directly or
through subordinate supervision.
      2.   The director of public works shall have skill in following:
         a.   Using tact, discretion, initiative and independent judgment
within established guidelines.
         b.   Organizing work, setting priorities, meeting critical deadlines,
and following up on assignments with a minimum of direction.
         c.   Communicating clearly and effectively, both orally and in
writing.
         d.   Planning, organizing, assigning, directing, reviewing and
evaluating the work of staff.
         e.   Selecting and motivating staff and providing for their training
and professional development.
      3.   The director of public works shall have the following mental and
physical abilities:
         a.   Ability to read and interpret documents such as safety rules,
operation and maintenance instructions procedure manuals, and so forth.
         b.   Ability to write reports, correspondence, procedure manuals.
         c.   Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships
with a variety of people.
         d.   Ability to understand and carry out oral and written
instructions, giving close attention to detail and accuracy.
         e.   While performing the essential functions of this job the employee
is regularly required to stand, walk, sit, use hands to finger, handle, or
feel, reach with hands and arms, climb or balance, stoop, kneel, crouch, or
crawl, speak and hear, and lift and/or move up to twenty five (25) pounds.
         f.   While performing the essential functions of this job, the
employee is occasionally required to lift and/or move up to one hundred (100)
pounds.
   F.   Class Title(s) And Number Of Positions Supervised:
         Street leadman.
         Water leadman.
         Street maintenance worker.
         Water maintenance worker.
         Water account technician.
         Total supervised, eight (8).
   G.   Licenses Or Certificates Required:
      1.   Valid state driver's license.
      2.   CDL license desired.
      3.   Class C water license desired.
   H.   Material And Equipment Used:
         Backhoe.
         Loaders.
         Oil distributor.
         Rollers.
         Sewer vactor-set.
         Street sweepers.
         Trucks.
   I.   Salary: Salary shall be commensurate with experience and
certifications. (2016 Code)
1-8D-2: ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
   A.   Office Created: The office of assistant director of public works is
hereby created.
   B.   Appointment And Term: The assistant director of public works shall be
appointed by the president, with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees, to an indefinite term of office or to a term established in an
employment agreement with the village, but shall at all times be subject to
termination by the board of trustees.
   C.   Residency: Due to the technical training and knowledge required for the
office of assistant director of public works, the individual appointed to such
office need not be a resident of the village. (Ord. 2013-1394, 11-19-2013)
   D.   Compensation: The salary of the assistant director of public works
shall be determined by the board of trustees.
   E.   Powers And Duties: The assistant director of public works shall be
responsible for performing such lawful duties as directed by the director of
public works, village administrator or village president, or as required by
law. During the temporary absence or disability of the director of public
works, or vacancy in the office of director of public works, the assistant
director of public works shall automatically assume the powers and duties of
the director of public works until such time as the village president and board
of trustees appoint a new director of public works, or the village president
appoints an interim director of public works.
   F.   Effect On Elected Village Officials: Nothing in this section shall be
deemed to diminish or detract from the statutory powers and authority of the
village elected officials. (Ord. 2013-1394, 11-19-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
ARTICLE E. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SUPERVISOR
SECTION:
1-8E-1: Position Established
1-8E-2: Appointment
1-8E-3: Compensation
1-8E-1: POSITION ESTABLISHED:
The position of supervisor of telecommunications for the village is
established. A copy of the job description is attached as exhibit A to the
ordinance codified herein and made a part hereof. (Ord. 2013-1382, 3-5-2013)
1-8E-2: APPOINTMENT:
The telecommunications supervisor of dispatching shall be appointed by the
village chief of police after posting notice of the opening for the position
and job description and subsequent examination of applications and interviews
of perspective applicants. (Ord. 2013-1382, 3-5-2013)
1-8E-3: COMPENSATION:
The telecommunications supervisor, being a member of a bargaining unit, shall
receive a wage increase of one dollar ($1.00) above the current hourly wage
paid pursuant to the bargaining contract between the union and the village.
(Ord. 2013-1382, 3-5-2013)
ARTICLE F. FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8F-1: Chief Of The Fire Department
1-8F-2: Full Time Members Of The Department
1-8F-3: Department Personnel
1-8F-1: CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Office Established: There is hereby established the office of chief of
the fire department.
   B.   Appointment: The chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, to an indefinite
term of office or to a term established in an employment agreement with the
Village, but shall at all times be subject to termination by the board of
trustees.
   C.   Compensation: The compensation of the chief of the fire department
shall be determined by the Mayor, consistent with the budget and appropriation
approved by the board of trustees.
   D.   Duties Generally: The chief of the fire department shall be the chief
executive officer of the fire department, responsible for directing the
operations and managing the affairs of the Peoria Heights Fire Department,
subject to the supervision and direction of the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 2020-1634, 9-15- 2020; amd. Ord. 2021-1644, 2-2-2021)
1-8F-2: FULL TIME MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the position of full-time firefighter, the number of
whom shall be determined from time to time by the Village Board. They shall be
appointed, retained, disciplined and discharged by the fire chief and board of
fire and police commissioners in accordance with the procedures established by
applicable statutory provisions.
(Ord. 2024-1722, 1-16-2024)
1-8F-3: DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL:
   A.   Part-time Firefighters. The Fire Department may employ part-time
firefighters in such number as approved by the Village Board from time to time.
Part-time fire-fighters shall be at-will, part-time employees of the Village
and shall not be full-time members of the Peoria Heights Fire Department. Part-
time firefighters shall be hired by the Village President, with the advice and
consent of the Village Board, upon the recommendation of the Fire Chief.
   Part-time firefighters shall be subject to operational command and control
by the fire chief, and shall fulfill any firefighting and all additional duties
or functions as may be assigned from time to time.
   Part-time firefighters shall be paid at an hourly rate for time actually
worked, at a rate determined from time to time by the Village Board.
   B.   Paid-on-Call Firefighters. The Fire Department may employ paid-on-call
firefighters in such number as approved by the Village Board from time to time.
Paid on-call firefighters shall be appointed by the Village President, with the
advice and consent of the Village Board, upon the recommendation of the Fire
Chief.
   Paid on call firefighters shall be subject to operational command and
control by the fire chief.
   Paid-on-Call firefighters shall receive pay for services rendered, as
determined from time to time by the Village Board.
   C.   Administrative Staff. The Fire Department may employ part-time
administrative staff in such number as approved by the Village Board from time
to time.
   D.   Operations. All department personnel as set forth in this Section 1-8F-
3 shall be subject to all requirements and provisions set forth in the Village
Employee Handbook, as amended from time to time.
   E.   Training. All firefighting personnel shall have such qualifications and
training as shall be required from time to time by the fire chief, in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord 2024-1722, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 9
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-9-1: State Regulations Adopted
1-9-2: Definitions
1-9-3: Interpretation
1-9-4: Prohibited Acts
1-9-5: Penalty
1-9-6: Amendments
1-9-7: Unconstitutionality Of Provisions
1-9-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the state officials and
employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter
referred to as the "act" in this chapter), are hereby adopted by reference and
made applicable to the officers and employees of the village to the extent
required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5. (Ord. 2004-1229, 5-18-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 - 10-40.
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be
defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c). (Ord. 2004-
1229, 5-18-2004)
1-9-3: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this chapter, however, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a). (Ord. 2004-1229, 5-18-2004)
1-9-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Gifts:
      1.   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited
or accepted under the act by any officer or any employee of the village is
hereby prohibited.
      2.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to
an officer or employee of the village under the act is hereby prohibited.
   B.   Political Activities: The participation in political activities
prohibited under the act by any officer or employee of the village is hereby
prohibited. (Ord. 2004-1229, 5-18-2004)
1-9-5: PENALTY:
The penalty for violations of this chapter shall be as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 2004-1229, 5-18-2004; amd. 2016 Code)
1-9-6: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date hereof
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to
the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited
political activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional
for adoption by the village shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 2004-1229, 5-18-2004)
1-9-7: UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village if the act is found unconstitutional
by the Illinois supreme court.
   B.   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not
address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by
this chapter shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
chapter relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 2004-1229, 5-18-2004)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Planning Commission (Rep. by Ord. 2017-1520, 9-5-2017)   1
Board Of Fire And Police Commissioners   2
Business Development District Advisory Committee   3
Firefighters’ Pension Fund   4
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-1520, 9-5-2017)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-2-1: Board Created; Composition
2-2-2: Appointment And Terms
2-2-3: Qualifications
2-2-4: Oath Of Office
2-2-5: Removal From Office
2-2-6: Powers And Duties
2-2-7: Compensation
2-2-1: BOARD CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is created a board of fire and police commissioners consisting of three
(3) members, as provided by statute. (Ord. 462, 7-15-1957; amd. 2016 Code; Ord.
2023-1712, 10-17-2023)
2-2-2: APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall be appointed by the village
president, by and with the consent of the board of trustees. The terms of
office of the members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be
three (3) years and until their respective successors shall be appointed and
qualified; provided, that no such appointments shall be made by any president
within thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of office; and
provided further, that the president shall appoint the first members of such
board, one of whom is appointed to serve until the end of the current municipal
year in which such appointment is made, another shall serve until the end of
the municipal year next ensuing, and the third shall serve until the end of the
municipal year second next ensuing; provided, that each of the first members of
the board shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. (Ord.
462, 7-15-1957; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2023-1712, 10-17-2023)
2-2-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall have such
qualifications as are now, or may hereafter be, required of them by law. (Ord.
462, 7-15-1957; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2023-1712, 10-17-2023)
2-2-4: OATH OF OFFICE:
Each member of the board of fire and police commissioners shall take oath or
affirmation of office. (Ord. 462, 7-15-1957; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2023-1712,
10-17-2023)
2-2-5: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be subject to
removal from office in the same manner as other officers of the village. (Ord.
462, 7-15-1957; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2023-1712, 10-17-2023)
2-2-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall have such powers and duties as
are now or as may hereafter be given thereto by law. (Ord. 462, 7-15-1957; amd.
2016 Code; Ord. 2023-1712, 10-17-2023)
2-2-7: COMPENSATION:
The secretary of the board of fire and police commissioners shall serve without
compensation for his services, and the members of such board shall serve
without compensation. (Ord. 462, 7-15-1957; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2023-1712, 10-
17-2023)
CHAPTER 3
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-3-1: Committee Created; Composition
2-3-2: Appointment And Terms
2-3-3: Duties Of The Committee
2-3-4: Compensation
2-3-5: Compliance With Open Meetings Act
2-3-1: COMMITTEE CREATED; COMPOSITION:
   A.   There is hereby created a Business Development District Advisory
Committee consisting of seven (7) members. (Ord. 2018-1577, 12-4-2018)
2-3-2: APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
Members of the committee shall be appointed by the President of the Village
with the consent of the Board of Trustees. The terms of office of the members
of the committee shall be four (4) years and until their respective successors
shall be appointed and qualified; provided that members serving on the
committee as of December 4, 2018, shall serve for the term for which they were
initially appointed. Members of the committee shall elect a Chairperson from
the membership to preside during meetings. (Ord. 2018-1577, 12-4-2018)
2-3-3: DUTIES OF THE COMMITTEE:
The committee shall make recommendations to the Village Board regarding the
following matters:
   A.   Expansion or termination of any business development district existing
within the Village.
   B.   The creation of new business development districts.
   C.   The expenditure of funds generated by any business development district
within the Village.
   D.   Such other duties as the President or Board of Trustees may from time
to time assign to the committee.
The Village Board shall consider recommendations made by the committee, but
shall have no obligation to accept those recommendations. (Ord. 2018-1577, 12-
4-2018)
2-3-4: COMPENSATION:
The members of the committee shall serve without compensation for their
services. (Ord. 2018-1577, 12-4-2018)
2-3-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OPEN MEETINGS ACT:
The committee as a subsidiary body of the Village shall comply with the Open
Meetings Act. (Ord. 2018-1577, 12-4-2018)
CHAPTER 4
FIREFIGHTERS’ PENSION FUND
SECTION:
2-4-1: Creation; Officers
2-4-2: Duties
2-4-3: Treasurer
2-4-1: CREATION; OFFICERS:
   A.   There is hereby created a Board of Trustees of the Firefighter's
Pension Fund, which board shall consist of five (5) members, as follows: two
(2) members shall be appointed by the Village President, two (2) members shall
be active firefighters to be elected at the time and manner provided for by
statute, and one (1) member shall be a retired firefighter to be elected at the
time and manner provided for by statute. If there are no retired or disabled
members of the Pension Fund, or none are willing to serve, a third active
member may be elected to the Board in lieu of the retired or disabled member.
   B.   Each member of the Board shall hold office for a term of 3 years and
until his or her successor has been duly elected and qualified.
   C.   The Board shall elect a president and a secretary to be chosen annually
at the regular meeting of the Board.
   D.   Members of the Board of Trustees shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 2023-1711, 10-17-2023)
2-4-2: DUTIES:
The Board of Trustees and the members thereof shall have the rights, powers,
duties, and functions as set forth in Article 4 of the Illinois Pension Code,
and all applicable law. (Ord. 2023-1711, 10-17-2023)
2-4-3: TREASURER:
The Village treasurer shall be ex officio treasurer of the Board of Trustees
for the Firefighter's Pension Fund and shall be the custodian of the Pension
Fund, subject to the control and direction of the Board of Trustees. An annual
list of beneficiaries and report of funds shall be made as required by law.
(Ord. 2023-1711, 10-17-2023)
TITLE 3
FINANCES AND TAXATION
General Finance Provisions   1
Tax Rights And Responsibilities   2
Village Taxes   3
Home Rule Municipal Retailers' And
Service Occupation Taxes   3A
Motor Fuel Tax   3B
Simplified Telecommunications Tax   3C
Hotel And Motel Room Renting Tax   3D
Foreign Fire Insurance Companies Fee   4
Tax Increment Financing Interested Parties
Registration And Rules   5
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Fiscal And Municipal Year
3-1-2: Annual Operating Budget And Annual Tax Levy Ordinance
3-1-3: Purchases
3-1-3-1: Purchasing Policy
3-1-3-2: Intergovernmental Cooperative Purchasing Agreements
3-1-4: Responsible Bidder Requirements
3-1-1: FISCAL AND MUNICIPAL YEAR:
The fiscal and municipal year of the village shall begin on May 1 and shall end
on April 30 in each and every year. (1914 Code § 29-1)
3-1-2: ANNUAL OPERATING BUDGET AND ANNUAL TAX LEVY ORDINANCE:
   A.   Annual Operating Budget: The board shall annually pass an operating
budget in which it shall budget sums of money as may be deemed necessary to
defray all expenses and liabilities of the village for the current fiscal year.
(1914 Code §§ 21-1, 21-2; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Annual Tax Levy Ordinance: The board of trustees shall, on or before
the third Tuesday in September of each year, ascertain the total amount of
appropriations for all corporate purposes, legally made and to be collected
from the tax levy of that fiscal year and, if necessary, to levy a tax by an
ordinance specifying in detail the purposes for which such appropriations are
made, and the amount appropriated for each purpose, respectively, and levy the
amount so ascertained upon all the property subject to taxation within the
village, as the same is assessed and equalized for state and county purposes
for the current year. A certified copy of such ordinance shall be filed by the
village clerk with the county clerk within ten (10) days after its passage.
(1914 Code § 21-3)
3-1-3: PURCHASES:
3-1-3-1: PURCHASING POLICY:
   A.   Purposes: The purposes of this section are to standardize the
purchasing procedure of the village, thereby securing for the village the
advantages of a uniform purchasing policy in an effort to both save money and
increase public confidence in the procedures for municipal purchasing.
Additionally, it is to promote the fair and equitable treatment of all
suppliers of goods and services and to clearly set forth the duties and
responsibilities of the department heads and the purchasing agent.
   B.   Definitions: When used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   BID MOST ADVANTAGEOUS TO THE VILLAGE: A bid chosen on the basis of price,
quality of merchandise, suitability of merchandise, and service/reputation of
the vendor and, therefore, may not necessarily mean the lowest bid received.
   COMPETITIVE BIDDING: The process of obtaining the most advantageous bid for
any purchase, whether through formal or informal procedures.
   COOPERATIVE PURCHASE: A purchase made by the village in conjunction with, or
from, another governmental or quasi- governmental agency, such as the state of
Illinois, school, county, or another municipality.
   EMERGENCY: Any situation or circumstance that will inhibit a department from
providing delivery of services when said services are, or may be, needed.
   FIELD PURCHASE: An informal purchase of supplies needed in small quantities
from any vendor for day to day operation made directly by a department head or
his/her designee.
   FORMAL BID: A written quotation received in a sealed envelope from a vendor,
having been publicized, and opened at a specified day, place, and time.
   INFORMAL BID: A written quotation which is not required to be opened
publicly at a specified day, place, and time or an oral quotation (followed up
by an e-mail, e-mail attachment, fax or other written communication) which can
be accepted from a vendor.
   INVITATION TO BID: The complete assembly of specific related material
(whether attached or incorporated by reference) furnished to prospective
bidders.
   PURCHASE: Buying, renting, leasing, or otherwise acquiring supplies or
services for a price.
   PURCHASING AGENT: The village administrator or the village administrator's
designee.
   REQUEST FOR BIDS: The term "request for bids" shall also include "request
for proposals" or "request for qualifications".
   SERVICES: The lease or rental of equipment; the repair or maintenance of
equipment owned by the village or that is the responsibility of the village;
all labor furnished to the village by persons, firms, individuals, or
corporations not part of or connected with village government. The term shall
not include professional services provided to or for the village by attorneys,
architects, engineers, auditors, and other professional consultants or
utilities such as electricity, water, sewer, etc.
   SPECIFICATIONS: Standards, including quality, set by department heads as a
guide to the purchasing agent and as a measure of that which successful vendors
must achieve. Specifications shall be either technical specifications for bids,
which shall state formulations as broadly as is practicable, yet be specific
enough to meet the requirements of the department; or nontechnical
specifications for bids which shall state, in general terms, how the quality
requirements will be achieved. Department heads may rely on technical advice
from suppliers, salesmen and other agencies in developing specifications.
   SUPPLIES: All materials and equipment.
   C.   Application Of Provisions: This section shall apply to purchases made
by department heads and the village purchasing agent, except as otherwise
specified herein.
   D.   Purchasing Agent: The village administrator shall be the purchasing
agent for the village, and shall supervise and manage the purchase of all
supplies, materials, and equipment for use by the village in the operation/
maintenance of its departments. The purchasing agent shall also govern the sale
of surplus, obsolete, or unused supplies, materials, and equipment whenever the
same shall no longer be required for municipal purposes. The board of trustees
shall award bids for services or materials requiring bonding. Lease purchases
containing nonappropriation language shall be awarded by the purchasing agent
or his designee.
   E.   Appropriation Required: Neither the purchasing agent nor any department
head shall make any purchase or allow any purchase to be made until an
appropriation has been approved by the village board of trustees, if
applicable. However, the village administrator may permit an item to be bid
prior to the approval of an appropriation if it is in the best interest of the
village and will so note in the bid materials that the bid approval is subject
to the appropriation being approved by the board of trustees.
   F.   Purchase Limits: The following purchasing (dollar) limits shall pertain
to all purchases made by, or on behalf of, the village, except as otherwise
provided in this section:
      1.   A department head, or the department head's designee, may make a
field purchase when the total purchase price for the goods and service being
purchased is less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). For the
bulk purchase of routine operating supplies that are offered by limited vendors
and exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), such as chemicals for
water treatment purposes, approval shall be considered granted at the time of
the approval of the overall operating budget for the village, in which case,
additional board of trustees approval is not required.
      2.   Purchases made in emergency circumstances shall be considered to be
exempted from the aforementioned limit. Notification that an emergency exists
shall be made to the village administrator. A discussion between the department
head and the village administrator shall take place specifying the nature of
the emergency, the source of funding for the emergency purchase, and the most
advantageous manner in which to make the purchase.
      3.   All other purchases over two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00), unless exempted by this section, must be preapproved by the board
of trustees.
   G.   Bidding:
      1.   Competitive Bidding: The procedure for competitive bidding shall be
as follows:
         a.   Competitive bids shall be required for all purchases in excess of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) unless specifically exempted by this section
or by action of the board of trustees.
         b.   Informal bidding procedures shall be allowed when a purchase is
required to be competitively bid if the total purchase price is more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and less than twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00), unless the purchasing agent recommends use of formal bidding
procedures due to project complexity, funding source requirement, or to ensure
that the village is receiving the best price or value.
         c.   Formal bidding procedures are specified in subsection G2 of this
section and shall be followed by the purchasing agent or his/her designee.
         d.   The purchasing agent may make cooperative purchases without
competitive bidding if the purchasing agent determines the purchase being made
after competitive bidding by the cooperative entity is at a price more
advantageous than the village would be likely to obtain by competitive bidding
on its own.
         e.   The purchasing agent may waive the requirements for competitive
bidding in cases of emergency or when the purchase is inappropriate for
competitive bidding due to the nature of the item, time constraints, or other
factors; provided, that the purchasing agent shall file a statement of the
reason(s) for waiving competitive bidding.
      2.   Formal Bidding; Over Twenty Thousand Dollars: The procedure for
formal bidding (over $20,000.00) shall be as follows:
         a.   The department head or purchasing agent shall prepare the
invitation for bids, describing the village's requirements clearly, accurately,
and completely, but avoiding unnecessarily restrictive specifications that
unduly limit the number of bidders. The purchasing agent shall determine that
the requirements are clearly, accurately, and completely stated within the
invitation to bid. Every invitation to bid shall note that all purchases are
subject to the conditions set forth in subsection H of this section.
         b.   The department head or purchasing agent shall publicize the
invitation for bids through the following methods at least ten (10) calendar
days prior to the time set for public opening of sealed bids:
            (1)   Distribution to prospective bidders;
            (2)   Posting at approved posting locations in the village;
            (3)   Village website;
            (4)   Appropriate web based bid sites;
            (5)   Appropriate professional or trade publications; and/or
            (6)   All other means as the purchasing agent determines is
appropriate.
         c.   Bidders shall submit sealed bids to the village prior to the date
and time specified for the opening of bids. No e-mail, attachment, or faxed
bids will be accepted.
         d.   Late bids shall not be accepted.
         e.   Bids shall be publicly opened at the time and place specified in
the invitation to bid. A contract may then be awarded to the responsible bidder
whose bid meets all specifications required by the village and whose bid is
determined to be the most advantageous to the village. Award may be delayed
pending verification of the bidder's credentials, insurance (if required), and
references or review of the bids received.
         f.   Nothing in this subsection G2 shall preclude the village from
rejecting any and all bids, as provided in subsection H of this section.
      3.   Informal Bidding; Five Thousand Dollars To And Including Twenty
Thousand Dollars: The procedure for informal bidding ($5,000.00 to and
including $20,000.00) shall be as follows:
         a.   The department head or purchasing agent shall prepare the request
for bids, describing the village's requirements clearly, accurately, and
completely, but avoiding unnecessary restrictive specifications for
requirements that unduly limit the number of bidders. The purchasing agent
shall determine that the requirements are clearly, accurately, and completely
stated within the request for bids. Every request for bids shall note that all
purchases are subject to the conditions set forth in subsection H of this
section.
         b.   The purchasing agent or department head shall publicize the
request for bids through:
            (1)   Distribution to prospective bidders.
            (2)   Village website.
            (3)   Web based bid sites (if appropriate).
            (4)   Professional or trade publications (if appropriate).
         c.   Bidders shall submit bids to the village prior to the date and
time specified for the receipt of bids. If, in the opinion of the department
head or purchasing agent, no bids are acceptable, rebidding may be required.
         d.   Late bids shall not be accepted.
   H.   Administrative Procedures And Conditions: Competitive bids shall be
administered by the purchasing agent and shall be subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   The department head or purchasing agent shall establish a bid master
file which includes a checkoff sheet and all required documentation including,
but not limited to, the following:
         a.   Bid specifications.
         b.   Copy of advertising/web postings and where.
         c.   Mailing/contact list.
         d.   Bid responses.
         e.   Bid tabulation.
         f.   Award letter/rejection letters (required for formal bidding
only).
         g.   Post bid results on the village website.
         h.   Notes from any bid specification review meetings with participant
roster (required for formal bidding only).
      2.   Bid format:
         a.   Bid packages will be, whenever possible, standardized.
         b.   Bid specifications will be, whenever practical, in a standardized
format depending on the category of goods or services sought.
         c.   Establishing bid specifications shall be the responsibility of
the department head or purchasing agent.
      3.   Bid advertising shall follow the procedures specified in subsections
G1 and G2 of this section.
      4.   Request for bids shall be mailed or advertised at least ten (10)
calendar days prior to the deadline set for the receipt of bids.
      5.   The department head or purchasing agent may hold a bid specification
meeting when a particular project is complex or when it will clarify the
project or service required. The meeting shall be open to all interested
prospective bidders. Said meeting time and place shall be included in the bid
documents and all advertisements.
      6.   Bids shall be noted with the time and date received.
      7.   The department head or purchasing agent shall keep a record of all
bids submitted, and such records shall be open for inspection.
      8.   All bidders shall be notified in writing of bid results within ten
(10) days after the bids are opened for formal bidding only.
      9.   Tie bids shall be resolved by the village administrator.
      10.   All bids shall be awarded on the basis of the bid most advantageous
to the village, which may or may not be the lowest bid.
      11.   The village reserves the right to reject any and all bids or to
accept the bid that appears to be in the best interest of the village,
investigate the qualifications of any bidder, and waive or not waive any and
all formalities in the bids when making an award.
      12.   If an award is made to other than the low bidder, the purchasing
agent shall file a statement of the reasons for determining that the low bid
was not the bid most advantageous to the village, together with all papers
relating to the bidding process for the formal bidding process only, unless
required as part of a grant.
      13.   Subject to subsections H10, H11 and H12 of this section, the
village may give preference to local bidders if the difference between the
lowest responsible bids submitted by companies or individuals located in Peoria
Heights and those not located in Peoria Heights is two percent (2%) or less.
For purposes of this section "located in Peoria Heights" shall mean bidders
whose company headquarters are in Peoria Heights and/or who pay excise taxes on
their vehicles in Peoria Heights and/or who pay personal property taxes in
Peoria Heights. Individuals shall be classified as "located in Peoria Heights"
if they are residents of the village. Competing bids submitted by companies/
individuals located in Peoria Heights, as defined above, within two percent
(2%) of each other shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of
subsections H10, H11 and H12 of this section. This subsection H13 is required
for formal bidding only.
      14.   The village retains custody of all bids submitted, pursuant to this
section.
   I.   Duties Of Department Heads: The following are duties of the village
department heads:
      1.   Determine acceptable quality of commodities and supplies to be
purchased.
      2.   Reject any unacceptable supply of goods and/or materials provided to
the village by a vendor on the grounds of low quality. The department head
shall notify the purchasing agent of the rejection and supply a written report
supporting the rejection.
      3.   Prepare requisitions with an eye toward cooperative purchasing and
keep corresponding records to facilitate correct accounting charges. Department
heads shall be responsible for signing off on invoices for goods and services
purchased by their departments.
      4.   When appropriate, report to the purchasing agent the following:
         a.   Items beyond use.
         b.   Items being replaced or to be replaced.
         c.   Items no longer of use to the department operations.
      5.   Maintain adequate supplies on hand to minimize the need for direct
field purchases.
      6.   All other duties as outlined in this section. (2016 Code)
3-1-3-2: INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATIVE PURCHASING AGREEMENTS:
   A.   The village is authorized to enter into intergovernmental agreements
including, but not limited to, an intergovernmental agreement with national
joint powers alliance, also known as NJPA. The village is authorized to enter
into a participating membership agreement with NJPA. As a participating member,
the village is authorized to make purchases of goods, services and equipment on
behalf of the village for public purposes and the use of the citizens of the
village. Upon entering into a participating purchase agreement, the village
may, as a participant, purchase goods, services, materials and equipment
through the NJPA for public purposes and the benefit of the citizens of the
village.
   B.   The village is authorized to enter into cooperative intergovernmental
purchasing agreements with any appropriately authorized cooperative
intergovernmental purchasing unit which has been authorized by a state or other
legal means to assist public municipalities in cooperative purchases of goods,
materials and services, which could be better provided to the village by
cooperative purchasing. (Ord. 2011-1341, 6-21-2011)
3-1-4: RESPONSIBLE BIDDER REQUIREMENTS:
Any party submitting a bid on a Village public works project must comply with
the following requirements in order to have their bid considered and to be
awarded a contract:
   A.   The bidder must be a duly organized legal entity in good standing with
the Illinois Secretary of State and in compliance with all laws prerequisite to
doing business in Illinois.
   B.   The bidder must have a valid Federal Employer Tax Identification Number
or Social Security Number.
   C.   The bidder must be an equal opportunity employer and comply with
Section 2000(e) of Chapter 21, Title 42 of the United States Code and Executive
Order No. 11246.
   D.   The bidder shall provide certificates of insurance indicating the
following coverages if called for in the bid solicitation: general liability,
workers compensation, completed operations, automobile, hazardous occupation
and product liability.
   E.   The bidder must comply with all provisions of the Illinois Prevailing
Wage Act (820 ILCS 130), including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance
and retirement for those trades covered in the Act.
   F.   All contractors and sub-contractors performing services covered by the
Illinois Prevailing Wage Act must submit to the Village the certified payrolls
required by the Act, as amended by Illinois Public Act 94-0515.
   G.   For construction projects (construction of new facilities, renovation
or repair of existing facilities or structures, alteration, painting,
landscaping, road construction or road maintenance projects) over ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), or demolition contracts over ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) the awarded bidder and all subcontractors performing work on the
construction project must participate in an active joint labor-management
apprenticeship and training program approved and registered with the United
States Department of Labor's Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training for each
trade which performs work on the construction project.
   H.   For purposes of this Ordinance, "public works" shall have the meaning
stated in the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, 820 ILCS 130/2, and "bidder" shall
include any contractor or service provider who performs any public works for or
on behalf of the Village of Peoria Heights, Illinois. (Ord. 2023-1699, 2-21-
2023)
CHAPTER 2
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Title
3-2-2: Scope; Application Of Provisions
3-2-3: Definitions
3-2-4: Notice Requirements
3-2-5: Delinquent Notices, Payments, Remittances Or Other Filings
3-2-6: Application Of Tax Payments
3-2-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
3-2-8: Audit Procedure
3-2-9: Appeals
3-2-10: Payment Required; Interest And Penalties
3-2-11: Installment Contracts
3-2-12: Statute Of Limitations
3-2-13: Voluntary Disclosure
3-2-14: Publication Of Tax Ordinances; Copies
3-2-15: Review Of Liens
3-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000)
3-2-2: SCOPE; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village
procedures in connection with all of the village locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   B.   Application Of Provisions; Conflicting Provisions: This chapter shall
be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village tax
ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or
inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 1185,
12-19-2000)
3-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
   ACT: The local government taxpayers' bill of rights act.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village president and board of trustees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village administrator is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the village.
   NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and, with respect to consumer taxes, includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
   VILLAGE: The village of Peoria Heights, Illinois. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000;
amd. 2016 Code)
3-2-4: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   A.   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address; or
   B.   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000)
3-2-5: DELINQUENT NOTICES, PAYMENTS, REMITTANCES OR OTHER FILINGS:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date; or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate
postage prepaid. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000)
3-2-6: APPLICATION OF TAX PAYMENTS:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: first, to the tax due for the applicable period; second, to
the interest due for the applicable period; and third, to the penalty for the
applicable period. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000)
3-2-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   Written Protest Required: The village shall not refund or credit any
taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the
event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
   B.   Statute Of Limitations: The statute of limitations on a claim for
credit or refund shall be four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in
which payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund
of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person
who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.
   C.   Procedure: The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund, together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled
check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000)
3-2-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Information Required: Each notice of audit shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   B.   Time For Conducting Audit:
      1.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours, and if
the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to
the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within
thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
      2.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   C.   Taxpayer's Books And Records:
      1.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by
the village.
      2.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer
or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the
time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   D.   Overpayments: If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30)
days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   E.   Payment To Improper Entity: In the event a tax payment was submitted to
the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall
notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000)
3-2-9: APPEALS:
   A.   Contents Of Notice Regarding Taxes Due: The local tax administrator
shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's
issuance of a protectable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a
notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the
following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   Request For Hearing: A taxpayer who receives written notice from the
local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file
with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing,
setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator
within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.
   C.   Hearing Scheduled; Notice: If a timely written notice and petition for
hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for
hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be
scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written
protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date
convenient to all parties.
   D.   Time Limit For Filing Hearing Request: If a written protest and
petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the
tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing
without further notice.
   E.   Reopening, Extension Of Hearing Request: Upon the showing of reasonable
cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along
with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax
administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and
petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest
and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days
after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period.
   F.   Conduct Of Hearing; Decision:
      1.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under this section, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
      2.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
      3.   At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
      4.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000)
3-2-10: PAYMENT REQUIRED; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Time For Payment: In the event a determination has been made that a tax
is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be
paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
   B.   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax to be six
percent (6%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000)
   C.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of six percent (6%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on
a return shall be imposed, and a late payment penalty of six percent (6%) of
the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner
provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a
notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file
penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax
due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000; amd.
2016 Code)
   D.   Abatement Of Penalties: The local tax administrator shall have the
authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or
failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine
reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 1185, 12-
19-2000)
3-2-11: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000)
3-2-12: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The village, through the local lax administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice
of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   B.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   C.   If any tax return is not filed or if, during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed. (Ord.
1185, 12-19-2000)
   D.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000; amd. 2016 Code)
3-2-13: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due
under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period
before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which
case, the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. However any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000;
amd. 2016 Code)
3-2-14: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES; COPIES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 1185, 12-19-2000)
3-2-15: REVIEW OF LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
1185, 12-19-2000)
CHAPTER 3
VILLAGE TAXES
ARTICLE A. HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Taxes Imposed; Rates
3-3A-2: Exemptions From Taxes
3-3A-3: Compliance With State Law
3-3A-4: Collection And Enforcement By State
3-3A-1: TAXES IMPOSED; RATES:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in
the village at the rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this article
is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
village in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one and one-
half percent (1.5%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property
transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. (Ord. 2011-
1350, 10-18-2011)
3-3A-2: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAXES:
The home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax and the home rule municipal
service occupation tax shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human
consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics. (Ord. 2011-1350, 10-18-2011)
3-3A-3: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with the provisions of
sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the Illinois municipal code 1 .
(Ord. 2011-1350, 10-18-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, 5/8-11-5.
3-3A-4: COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT BY STATE:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the state department of
revenue. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2011-1350, 10-18-2011)
ARTICLE B. MOTOR FUEL TAX
SECTION:
3-3B-1: Definitions
3-3B-2: Tax Imposed; Rate; Tax Is Additional
3-3B-3: Scope Of Tax
3-3B-4: Collection Of Tax
3-3B-5: Tax Free Sales Authorized
3-3B-6: Remittance Of Tax; Delinquencies
3-3B-7: Recordkeeping
3-3B-8: Use Of Revenues
3-3B-9: Enforcement Of Payment
3-3B-10: Penalties
3-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein shall have the following
meanings:
   BULK USER: Any person who purchases motor fuel for storage in bulk storage
facilities located in the village which are owned, leased, operated or
controlled by the person for subsequent dispensing into the supply tanks of
internal combustion engines.
   GASOHOL: A fuel used chiefly in internal combustion engines which is a
combination of gasoline and ethyl alcohols in variable quantities.
   GASOLINE OR DIESEL FUEL: A volatile, highly flammable or combustible liquid
mixture of hydrocarbons produced by the fractional distillation of petroleum
and used as a fuel in internal combustion engines, but shall not include
mixtures commonly known as kerosene and aviation fuel, or mixtures used in the
heating of buildings.
   MOTOR FUEL: "Gasohol" and "gasoline or diesel fuel" as defined in this
section.
   PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative,
syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business
trust, institution, agency, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator,
user, or owner, or any officers, agents, employees, or other representative,
acting either individually or for any other person in any capacity, or any
other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The
masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any circumstance.
   RETAIL GASOLINE DEALER: Any person who engages in the business of selling
motor fuel in the village to a purchaser for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
   SALE, RESALE, AND SELLING: Any transfer of ownership or possession, or both,
exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for a valuable consideration. (Ord. 1094, 6-6-1995)
3-3B-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE; TAX IS ADDITIONAL:
There is hereby levied and imposed upon the purchase of each gallon of motor
fuel or fraction thereof sold at retail within the corporate limits of the
village, irrespective of the unit of measure in which it is actually sold, a
tax at the rate of two cents ($0.02) per gallon. The tax herein levied shall be
paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges, but such other taxes
and charges shall not be construed as part of the purchase price upon which the
tax herein is levied. (Ord. 1094, 6-6-1995)
3-3B-3: SCOPE OF TAX:
The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is to be borne
by the retail purchaser of motor fuel. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of persons engaged in the retail
sale of motor fuel. (Ord. 1094, 6-6-1995)
3-3B-4: COLLECTION OF TAX:
It shall be the duty of every retail gasoline dealer to secure the tax from the
purchaser at the time the dealer collects the purchase price for the motor fuel
and to pay the tax to the village as provided in this article, except in the
case of a sale to a bulk user, in which case, the bulk user shall pay the tax
to the village as provided in this article. (Ord. 1094, 6-6-1995)
3-3B-5: TAX FREE SALES AUTHORIZED:
A retail gasoline dealer may make tax free sales with respect to which the
dealer is otherwise required to collect the tax when the sale is made to the
federal government, the state of Illinois, any municipality, or unit of local
government as those terms are defined by section I of article VII of the
constitution of the state of Illinois of 1970, or any school district. (Ord.
1094, 6-6-1995)
3-3B-6: REMITTANCE OF TAX; DELINQUENCIES:
   A.   Tax Return And Remittance Required:
      1.   Retail Dealer: Every retail gasoline dealer shall transmit to the
village no later than the last day of each calendar month, a sum of money equal
to the amount of motor fuel tax collected for the preceding calendar month,
accompanied by a report upon forms supplied by the village, indicating the
gross gallons of motor fuel sold for the preceding calendar month, and such
other information as the village may require for enforcement of this article.
      2.   Bulk User: Every bulk user shall transmit to the village no later
than the last day of each calendar month, a sum of money equal to the amount of
motor fuel tax owing for the preceding calendar month, accompanied by a report
upon forms supplied by the village indicating the gross gallons of motor fuel
purchased for the preceding calendar month, and such other information as the
village may require for enforcement of this article.
   B.   Failure To File Return:
      1.   Individuals:
         a.   In case any person who is required under this article to file a
tax return to the village fails to file a return when and as required under
this section, such person shall pay to the village, in addition to the amount
of tax required to be transmitted, a penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax
that such person is required to transmit to the village; provided, however, a
twenty percent (20%) penalty shall be imposed for any fraudulent failure to
transmit such tax.
         b.   In case any person who is required under this article to file a
tax return with the village files a return at the time required but fails to
transmit the tax proceeds or any portion thereof to the village when due, a
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax not transmitted to the
village shall be added thereto; provided, however, the fraudulent failure to
pay such tax shall result in a twenty percent (20%) penalty.
         c.   In addition to any penalty for which provision is made in this
article, any amount of tax not transmitted when due shall bear interest at the
rate of two percent (2%) per month, or fraction thereof, until fully
transmitted.
      2.   Corporations: Any officer or employee of any corporation which is an
owner subject to the provisions of this article who has the control,
supervision or responsibility of collecting tax proceeds, filing returns and
transmitting collected tax proceeds of the tax imposed by this article and who
wilfully fails to file such return or to transmit any tax proceeds so collected
shall be personally liable for any such amounts collected, including interest
and penalties thereon. If, after proper proceedings for the collection of such
amount, such corporation is unable to pay such amounts, the personal liability
of such officer or employee, as provided in this article, shall survive
dissolution of the corporation. For purposes of this subsection, a person
wilfully fails to act if any conscious and voluntary action is taken with the
intention to perform any obligation hereunder including, but not limited to,
the utilizing of tax proceeds collected for the village to pay any other
corporate obligation. (Ord. 1094, 6-6-1995)
3-3B-7: RECORDKEEPING:
   A.   Records Required:
      1.   Retail Dealer: Every retail gasoline dealer shall keep complete and
accurate records, including a daily sheet showing the gross gallons of motor
fuel sold for each day, and the amount of motor fuel tax collected on each day.
      2.   Bulk User: Every bulk user shall keep complete and accurate records
of purchases of motor fuel, including the dates of the purchases, the gross
gallons purchased on each of the dates, and the names and addresses of the
retail gasoline dealers from whom each of the purchases were made.
   B.   Inspections: For the purpose of administering and enforcing this
article, the village shall have the right to inspect all books, records, and
reports of retail gasoline dealers and bulk users during their normal business
hours. (Ord. 1094, 6-6-1995)
3-3B-8: USE OF REVENUES:
The proceeds of the motor fuel tax imposed pursuant to this article shall be
accounted for separately and used solely for the installation, repair and
maintenance of the village transportation infrastructure. (Ord. 1094, 6-6-1995)
3-3B-9: ENFORCEMENT OF PAYMENT:
The village attorney is hereby empowered to bring or cause to be brought on
behalf of the village an action to enforce payment of any tax provided in this
article in any court of competent jurisdiction against any person failing to
pay said tax. (Ord. 1094, 6-6-1995)
3-3B-10: PENALTIES:
   A.   Fine: Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this article, except when otherwise specifically
provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Each Day A Separate Violation: A separate and distinct offense shall be
regarded as committed each day upon which such person shall continue any such
violation or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof.
(Ord. 1094, 6-6-1995; amd. 2016 Code)
ARTICLE C. SIMPLIFIED TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-3C-1: Rate Of Tax
3-3C-2: Effective Date Of Tax
3-3C-1: RATE OF TAX:
The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed under the
provisions of sections 5-25 and 5-30 of the simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act, P.A. 92-0526, is five percent (5%). (Ord. 2002-
1203, 9-17-2002)
3-3C-2: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX:
The tax imposed by this article shall take effect for all gross charges billed
by telecommunications retailers on and after January 1, 2003. (Ord. 2002-1203,
9-17-2002)
ARTICLE D. HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM RENTING TAX
SECTION:
3-3D-1: Definitions
3-3D-2: Hotel Use Tax Imposed
3-3D-3: Rules And Regulations
3-3D-4: Transmittal Of Tax Revenue
3-3D-5: Late Payment And Penalties
3-3D-6: Purpose Of Penalties
3-3D-7: Suspension Of Licenses
3-3D-8: Other Actions Authorized
3-3D-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, whenever any of the following words, terms, or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the following meanings:
                                 Any person or entity who provides a means
                                 through which a person may book a hotel room
                                 and/or transient occupancy rental unit to
                                 lessees, regardless of whether payment is
FACILITATOR:                     transferred through or processed by such
                                 facilitator. Facilitators are considered
                                 lessors, as used herein. Online travel
                                 companies are considered facilitators, as used
                                 herein.
                                 Means the total amount of consideration for
                                 occupancy, valued in money, whether received
                                 in money or otherwise, including all receipts,
                                 cash, credits, and property or services of any
                                 kind or nature, including but not limited to,
                                 amounts charged for the making, booking,
                                 facilitating or servicing of reservations.
                                 Gross rent means both (a) the "net rate" paid
                                 to the hotel or motel by a Facilitator for
                                 room occupancy by the consumer; and (b) the
GROSS RENT:                      amount retained by the facilitator for travel-
                                 related services provided to the consumer
                                 (sometimes referred to as a "facilitation
                                 fee"), and any additional amounts retained by
                                 the facilitator as compensation for its
                                 services to the consumer for the individual
                                 transaction, or, in the instance of a
                                 consumer's direct rental of a room with the
                                 hotel or motel, gross rent shall mean the
                                 amount charged by the hotel or motel directly
                                 to the consumer for the occupancy of the room.
                                 Means a structure kept, used or maintained as
                                 or advertised or held out to the public to be
                                 an inn, motel, hotel, apartment, home, lodging
                                 house, dormitory or place where sleeping,
HOTEL:                           rooming, office, conference or exhibition
                                 accommodations are furnished for lease or
                                 rent, whether with or without meals. For
                                 avoidance of doubt, transient occupancy rental
                                 units are hotels under this definition.
LESSEE:                          Any person who pays for the privilege of
                                 occupying all or part of a hotel.
                                 Any person having a sufficient proprietary
                                 interest in conducting the operation of a
                                 hotel, or receiving the consideration for the
LESSOR:                          rental of all or part of such hotel, so as to
                                 entitle such person to all or a portion of the
                                 net receipts thereof, including facilitators,
                                 as defined herein.
                                 An organization that books, reserves, or rents
                                 hotel or motel rooms and makes other travel
ONLINE TRAVEL COMPANY:           arrangements for consumers via the World Wide
                                 Web, internet or other digital means. Online
                                 travel companies are considered facilitators,
                                 as used herein.
                                 Means any person who has occupied or has the
PERMANENT RESIDENT:              right to occupy all or part of a hotel for
                                 more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
                                 Means any natural person, receiver,
                                 administrator, executor, conservator,
                                 assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate,
                                 firm, co-partnership, joint venture, club,
                                 company, business trust, domestic or foreign
                                 corporation, association, syndicate, society
                                 or any group of individuals acting as a unit,
PERSON:                          whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal,
                                 nonprofit, or otherwise, whenever the term
                                 "person" is used in any clause prescribing and
                                 imposing a penalty, the term as applied to
                                 associations shall mean the owners or part-
                                 owners thereof, and as applied to
                                 corporations, the offices thereof, or any
                                 other entity recognized by law as the subject
                                 of rights and duties.
                                 Means a dwelling unit or a habitable unit that
                                 is offered, in whole or in part, for rent,
                                 lease or hire that is rented, leased or hired
                                 for which a lessor receives consideration from
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY RENTAL UNIT: a person for a period of thirty (30) days or
                                 less and that person has the right to use,
                                 occupy or possess all or part of the dwelling
                                 unit or habitable unit for said period. (Ord.
                                 2020- 1632, 7-21-2020, eff. 10-1-2020)
 
3-3D-2: HOTEL USE TAX IMPOSED:
   A.    There is levied and imposed a tax of five percent (5%) of the gross
rent charged for the privilege and use of renting a hotel room within the
Village for each twenty-four (24) hour period or any portion thereof for which
a room charge is made.
   B.   Accommodations within said buildings or structures which are leased to
the same occupant for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days shall
be exempt from the tax provisions of this article.
   C.   Lessors renting or leasing hotel rooms within the Village are required
to collect the hotel use tax; however, the ultimate incidence of any liability
for payment of the tax is to be borne by the lessee.
   D.    The hotel use tax shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes
and charges.
   E.   It shall be the duty of every lessor of every hotel within the Village
to separately state such tax at the five percent (5%) rate upon the total
amount of compensation charged for the use of the hotel. The lessor shall
   also state separately the amount of tax on the invoice for the transaction
that will be tendered to the lessee.
   F.   It shall be the duty of every lessor of every hotel within the Village
to collect the tax from the lessee at the time the lessee pays for the
privilege of occupying all or part of a hotel transient occupancy rental unit,
and to remit to the Village the tax under procedures provided for in this
chapter or otherwise prescribed by the Village. If more than one (1) person is
the lessor as related to a particular transaction, the lessors are jointly and
severally responsible for collecting and remitting the tax.
   G.    It shall not be a defense to this article that the lessor is not
licensed by the Village to rent hotels and the lessor will still be required to
remit the proper tax to the Village. (Ord. 2020-1632, 7-21-2020, eff. 10-1-
2020)
3-3D-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Village may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter concerning enforcement and application of this
chapter. The phrase "rules and regulations" includes, but is not limited to,
case-by-case determination of whether or not the tax imposed by this chapter
applies. (Ord. 2020-1632, 7-21-2020, eff. 10-1-2020)
3-3D-4: TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUE:
   A.    The lessor of each hotel within the Village shall file returns and
remit collected taxes, to the Village Finance Department showing tax receipts
received with respect to each hotel during each monthly period commencing on
October 1, 2020, and continuing on the first day of every month thereafter on
forms prescribed by the Village. The return shall be due on or before the last
day of the calendar month succeeding the end of the monthly filing period.
   B.   The first taxing period for the purpose of this chapter shall commence
on October 1, 2020; and the tax return and payment for such period shall be due
on or before November 30, 2020. Thereafter, reporting periods and tax payments
shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. At the time of
filing such tax returns, the owner shall pay to the Village all taxes due for
the period to which the tax return applies. (Ord. 2020-1632, 7-21-2020, eff.
10-1-2020)
3-3D-5: LATE PAYMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to
the Village for the tax imposed by this article shall be considered late unless
it is (a) received by the Village on or before the due date imposed by this
article, or (b) received via a method consistent with the current established
standards of filing and payment determined by the Village.
   B.    In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and
owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid
within the time frame otherwise indicated.
   C.   Interest: The Village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment or non-payment of the tax, to be five
percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   D.   Late filing and payment penalties.
      1.    If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of five percent (5%) of
the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and
a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due shall be imposed.
      2.   If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the Village issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to five percent (5%) of the total tax due for the applicable
reporting period for which the return was required to be filed.
      3.   A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to
file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 2020-1632, 7-21-
2020, eff. 10-1-2020)
3-3D-6: PURPOSE OF PENALTIES:
The purpose of imposing the above penalties is to ensure the integrity of the
collection process established pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2020-1632, 7-21-
2020, eff. 10-1-2020)
3-3D-7: SUSPENSION OF LICENSES:
If the President of the Board of Trustees, after hearing held by the President,
shall find that any person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by
this chapter, he may suspend or revoke all Village licenses held by such tax
evader or may suspend any or all services provided by the Village. The owner,
manager, or operator of the hotel or motel shall have an opportunity to be
heard at such hearing to be held not less than five (5) days after notice of
the time and place of the hearing to be held, addressed to the last known place
of business. For purposes of this section, a person willfully avoids payment of
the tax if they take any conscious and voluntary action intending not to
perform any of the obligations hereunder, including, but not limited to, the
utilizing of tax proceeds collected for the Village to pay any other
obligations. (Ord. 2020-1632, 7-21-2020, eff. 10-1- 2020)
3-3D-8: OTHER ACTIONS AUTHORIZED:
The officers, employees and/or agents of the Village shall take all action
necessary or reasonably required to carry out, give effect to and consummate
the amendments contemplated by this ordinance and shall take all action
necessary in conformity therewith. The officers, employees and/or agents of the
Village are specifically authorized and directed to draft and disseminate any
and all necessary forms to be utilized in connection with these amendments. Any
and all actions previously performed by officials, employees and/or agents of
the Village in connection with carrying out and consummating the intent of this
article are hereby authorized, approved and ratified by this reference. (Ord.
2020-1632, 7-21- 2020, eff. 10-1-2020)
CHAPTER 4
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES FEE
SECTION:
3-4-1: Fee Established; Payment To Village
3-4-2: Report Required; Payment Due Date
3-4-1: FEE ESTABLISHED; PAYMENT TO VILLAGE:
From and after the effective date hereof, all corporations, companies and
associations not incorporated under the laws of the state which are engaged in
effecting fire insurance upon property within the corporate limits of the
village shall pay to the village treasurer, for the maintenance, use and
benefit of the village fire department, a sum equal to two percent (2%) of the
gross receipts received by their agencies from insurance on such property
within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 118, 7-17-1933)
3-4-2: REPORT REQUIRED; PAYMENT DUE DATE:
   A.   Every person or agent acting for or on behalf of any such corporation,
company or association shall, on or before July 15 of each year, render to the
village clerk a full, true and just account under oath of all the premiums
which shall have been received by him or other persons for him in behalf of any
such corporation, company or association during the year ending on July 1
preceding such report and shall, at the same time, pay to the village treasurer
the amounts due the village.
   B.   All monies to be paid by the said corporations, companies or
associations shall be due upon July 1 each year based upon the amount of
premiums collected by the corporations, companies or associations for the year
preceding July 1. (Ord. 118, 7-17-1933)
CHAPTER 5
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRATION AND RULES
SECTION:
3-5-1: Registries Created
3-5-2: Registration Rules Adopted; Amendments
3-5-1: REGISTRIES CREATED:
The village clerk is hereby authorized and directed to create an interested
parties registry in accordance with section 11-74.4-4.2 of the TIF act for each
redevelopment project area created under the TIF act, whether now existing or
created after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2015-1430, 1-20-2015)
3-5-2: REGISTRATION RULES ADOPTED; AMENDMENTS:
In accordance with section 11-74.4-4.2 of the act, the village hereby adopts
the registration rules attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein
as registration rules for each such interested parties registry. The village
clerk, with the consent of the village attorney, as to form and legality, shall
have the authority to amend such registration rules from time to time as may be
necessary or desirable to comply with and carry out the purposes intended by
the TIF act. (Ord. 2015-1430, 1-20-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
TITLE 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Alcoholic Beverages   1
Video Gaming   2
Food Dealers   3
Food And Alcohol Tax; Restaurants And Taverns   3A
Sale Of Food And Beverages From Public Property   3B
Junk Collectors   4
Tobacco Dealers   5
Secondhand Dealers   6
Peddlers   7
Pedal Buses And Pedicabs   8
Pedal Buses   8A
Pedicabs   8B
Municipal Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax   9
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definitions
4-1-2: Local Liquor Control Commissioner Powers And Duties
4-1-3: Licenses Required
4-1-4: Ineligibility For License; Manager Requirements
4-1-5: Application For License
4-1-6: Financial Disclosure
4-1-7: Insurance Requirements
4-1-8: License Fees
4-1-9: Suitability Of Location
4-1-10: Classification Of Licenses
4-1-11: Number Of Licenses
4-1-12: Term Of License; Proration Of Initial Fee
4-1-13: Nontransferability Of License; Change Of Location; Renewals
4-1-14: Posting License
4-1-15: Location Restrictions
4-1-16: Clear View Of Premises; Lighting
4-1-17: Sanitary Conditions
4-1-18: Closing Hours
4-1-19: Sales To Certain Persons Prohibited
4-1-20: Minors
4-1-21: Prohibited Acts And Conduct
4-1-22: Crimes Reported To Police
4-1-23: Public Possession Or Consumption
4-1-24: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
4-1-25: Penalty
4-1-26: Bring Your Own Bottle Regulations
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms, as used in this
chapter, shall be construed according to the following definitions:
   ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof and includes synthetic
ethyl alcohol. The term does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, wine, beer and/or spirits and every
liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, wine, beer and/or
spirits, and capable of and/or intended as a beverage for human consumption.
   APPLICANT: Any individual, corporation, partnership, limited corporation, or
any other entity organized as authorized under the laws of the state of
Illinois, or any officer, manager, stockholder, partner or employer of any such
entities who apply to have issued any type of a liquor license under the
provisions of this chapter.
   BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water and includes, among
other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like intended as a
beverage for human consumption.
   BREW PUB: Any establishment occupied and used as a place of business for the
purpose of primarily selling at retail beer, wine and ale with a focus on
selling beer brewed on-site at the licensed premises.
   CLUB: Any corporation, partnership or entity organized under the laws
authorized by the state of Illinois, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual
dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a building of such
extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and
comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests and provided
with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and
maintaining a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking,
preparing and serving food and meals for members and their guests; provided,
that such club filed with the village president at the time of its application
for a license under this chapter, two (2) copies of a list of the names and
residences of its members, and similarly files within ten (10) days of the
election of any additional member, his name and address; and provided further,
that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee or similar body chosen by the members in the annual meeting
and that no member or any officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or
directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation,
any profits from distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or to the
members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of
such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or
by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of
the club.
   HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised
or held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers
and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five
(25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and
having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests,
such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same
building or buildings in connection therewith, and such building or buildings,
structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity.
   ICE CREAM PARLOR: Any establishment occupied and used as a place of business
for the purpose of primarily selling at retail ice cream, ice milk, popsicles,
sherbets, frozen yogurt, or milk-based dessert products and confections.
   LICENSE YEAR: That period from the fourth Tuesday in October to the fourth
Tuesday in October the next year.
   MINOR: Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
   PREMISES: The area within a building for which a license to sell alcoholic
liquor is issued and which is actually used in connection with the storage,
preparation and sale of alcoholic liquors, but specifically excluding any
outside areas such as patios, open porches, rooftops, balconies, stoops,
sidewalks, yards, driveways, parking lots and similar outside areas, except as
otherwise provided in the case of a subclassification #1 license.
   RESIDENT: Any person having lived in the village of Peoria Heights for a
period of not less than one calendar year.
   RETAIL LIQUOR DEALER'S LICENSE: Official permission to undertake the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine as promulgated under the provisions
of this chapter.
   RETAIL SALES (AT RETAIL): The sale for use or consumption and not for resale
in any form.
   RETAILER: Any person, entity or corporation or any employee or agent of any
licensee to sell alcoholic liquor who sells or offers for sale alcoholic
liquors, beer or wine beverages for use or consumption and not for resale in
any form.
   SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including all sales made by any person, whether principal,
proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
   SELL: To keep or expose for sale and/or to keep with intent to sell.
   SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of "alcohol" or "spirits" as defined in this
section. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2021-1658, 7-20-2021;
Ord. 2023-1692, 1- -2023)
4-1-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER POWERS AND DUTIES:
The village president acting under the authority of state law as the local
liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and
duties pursuant to the terms of this chapter: (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
   A.   To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke
for cause all licenses issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter. (Ord.
2004-1225, 2-3-2004; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   To enter or authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time
upon any premises licensed, whenever any of the provisions of the liquor
control act of 1934, as amended, or any rules and regulations adopted by the
local liquor control commissioner or by the state of Illinois liquor control
commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine said
premises of the licensee in connection therewith.
   C.   To notify the secretary of state where a club incorporated under the
general not for profit corporation act, or a foreign corporation functioning as
a club in this state under a certificate of authority issued under that act has
violated the Illinois liquor control act of 1934, as amended, by selling or
offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors without a retailer's license.
   D.   To receive complaints from any citizen within the village that any of
the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the Illinois liquor control
act of 1934, as amended, or any rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the
Illinois liquor control act of 1934, as amended, have been or are being
violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner herein provided, or as
otherwise provided by the Illinois liquor control act of 1934, as amended.
   E.   To receive local liquor license fees and pay the same forthwith to the
village treasurer.
   F.   To levy fines in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
currently applicable state law.
   G.   To grant or deny a license applied for pursuant to the terms of this
chapter within not more than thirty (30) days of an applicant's filing date,
provided said application meets the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-
1225, 2-3-2004)
   H.   To issue citations for any violations of any provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2014-1416, 9-16-2014)
4-1-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   Business License: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at
retail in the village any alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine without having a
retail liquor dealer's license or in violation of any of the terms of such
license or any provisions of this chapter.
   B.   County Or State Food Or Drink License: No license shall be valid
without a food or drink license issued by the county health department or any
license required by the state of Illinois. The failure to obtain such a license
or the loss of such a license through revocation or otherwise shall require the
village president, if necessary, to revoke or suspend any license granted under
the authority of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-4: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE; MANAGER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The following restrictions shall apply to any individual who or any
entity which applies for a license, including the applicant and those persons
required to be named on the application. No such license shall be issued to:
      1.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he/she resides.
      2.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
      3.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under federal or state
law, unless the local liquor control commissioner determines that such person
has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after
considering matters set forth in such person's application and the
commissioner's investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation
shall be on the applicant.
      4.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
      5.   A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of prostitution
or keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, promoting prostitution that
involves keeping a place of prostitution, or promoting juvenile prostitution
that involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution.
      6.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime(s) or
misdemeanor(s) opposed to decency and morality.
      7.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked
for cause.
      8.   A person who, at the time of the application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
      9.   A copartnership or limited partnership, unless a partner shall own
twenty percent (20%) of such partnership and shall be qualified to obtain a
license.
      10.   A corporation or other entity, if any officer, manager or director
thereof or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than
ten percent (10%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to
receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship within the
village.
      11.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
      12.   A person, employee, agent, or any applicant, or parties required to
be disclosed on any application, who have been convicted of a violation of any
federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of
alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the effective date hereof, or shall have
forfeited their bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
      13.   A person or entity who or which does not own the premises for which
a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued.
      14.   Any law enforcing public official, the village president or member
of the board of trustees, and no such official shall have an interest in any
way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of
alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine.
      15.   Any person, partnership, association, corporation or entity not
eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license.
      16.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee.
      17.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed
by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of section 28-1 of, or as
proscribed by section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the criminal code of 1961 or the
criminal code of 2012, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the
aforesaid statutory provisions.
      18.   A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued
by the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued
a license under the raffles and poker runs act or the Illinois pull tabs and
jar games act.
      19.   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or
consumption on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor
liability insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least
equal to the maximum liability amounts set out in 235 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-21, subsection (a). (Ord. 2014-1416, 9-16-2014; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   No licensee shall employ any person, firm or corporation to manage said
licensed premises unless the same qualifications, except for residency and
citizenship, can be demonstrated. Should it be the intention of the licensee to
employ a manager, said licensee shall so indicate by written request such
intention at the time of application or if subsequent to the issuance of said
license, shall request same for approval prior to the employment of a manager.
(Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The license application shall be made in writing to the village president, on a
duly authorized application, signed by the applicant. The application for a
liquor license shall be signed by an individual, or a duly authorized officer
or owner of more than ten percent (10%) of the stock or capital of a
corporation, or twenty percent (20%) in interest partnership or a twenty
percent (20%) interest in any entity authorized to do business and who is
authorized to sign the application and authorized to hold a liquor license. The
application shall be verified by oath or affidavit and shall contain the
following information:
   A.   The name, age, address and social security number of the applicant, if
the applicant is an individual. If the applicant is a partner of a partnership,
all of the persons entitled to share in the profits of the corporation as
partners shall sign the application. The application for a limited partnership
shall be signed by the managing limited partner. The application for any type
of corporation for profit, not for profit, or club, or any other entity other
than an individual shall have the name, address and social security number of
the applicant and the tax identification number assigned to the entity applying
for the liquor license. For any entity applying for a liquor license other than
an individual, the applicant shall provide the date of incorporation, copies of
the articles of incorporation, partnership agreement, limited liability
corporation or partnership agreement and the names and addresses of the
officers and directors of the corporation and if a majority interest in any
entity is owned by one person, the name and address of such personnel.
   B.   Any person or entity that applies for an alcoholic liquor license who
owns more than ten percent (10%) of such entity shall sign an application in
order for that entity to obtain an alcoholic liquor license.
   C.   All parties required to sign an application must state their place of
birth and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of the issuance of the
naturalization certificate.
   D.   The character of the business of an individual applicant and, in case
of any other entity, the object for which the entity was formed.
   E.   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character or, in the case of an entity, the date on which its charter was
issued.
   F.   The amount of goods, wares, and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
   G.   The location, address, and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under any issued liquor license, and a copy of
any lease or deed indicating the authorization of the proposed licensee to have
the right to possession and use of the premises where the business will be
operated.
   H.   A statement by any applicant whether the applicant has made similar
application for a similar other license on premises other than described in
this application and the disposition of such application. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-
2004; amd. 2016 Code)
4-1-6: FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE:
   A.   Each individual applicant or each entity, upon filing an original
application, may be required to furnish certain financial information as
follows: (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004; amd. 2016 Code)
      1.   A detailed statement of assets and liabilities of the business
enterprise for which license is sought.
      2.   The names and addresses of all secured creditors and a description
of the security interest of each.
      3.   The names and addresses of all creditors who have any right to
control the use or disposition of the business or any asset thereof.
      4.   The name and address of each creditor who holds indebtedness of the
business totaling in the aggregate twenty percent (20%) or more of the net
worth of the business.
      5.   A detailed profit and loss statement for the last preceding business
year.
      6.   In the case of a corporation or entity, a copy of the latest annual
report required to be filed pursuant to state law as now or hereafter amended.
      7.   A detailed description of all agreements or obligations which
purport to bind any successor to the present applicant or licensee to continue
to purchase, rent or accept any goods, wares, or services from a specified
supplier thereof.
   B.   The financial statements required to be filed by this section shall be
held confidential except for official purposes, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to divulge said financial statements except for official purposes or
under order of a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-7: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All applicants applying for any classification of liquor license and all
licensees applying for liquor license renewal to be issued by the village,
including any subclassification license, before any liquor license is
authorized and issued pursuant to this chapter, shall provide to the village
administrator an endorsement on insurance policies insuring the village as an
insured for the period the license is in effect, as follows: dramshop insurance
for the maximum limits required by the Illinois liquor control act of 1934, as
amended, and on a general liability policy in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00). There shall be compliance with these requirements before the
issuance or renewal of any liquor license. (Ord. 2014-1416, 9-16-2014; amd.
2016 Code)
4-1-8: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Schedule Of Fees: The annual fees for the issuance of licenses pursuant
to this chapter shall be as enumerated on schedule L, a copy of which shall be
on file in the office of the village clerk. Said schedule L shall set forth all
license fees by classification and/or subclassification and shall be modified
or amended only by action of the president and board of trustees.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: All retail dealer's liquor license fees, including
renewals, shall be paid to the village at the time of application submission.
No application shall be considered, acted upon or granted until and unless all
related fees are paid. Said payment shall be made by cash or money order or
cashier's check made payable to the village of Peoria Heights.
   C.   Refunds: In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall
be returned to the applicant. No refunds shall be made for those licenses that
terminate due to a business cessation or as the result of license revocation
pursuant to the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-9: SUITABILITY OF LOCATION:
Before the issuance of any license provided pursuant to the terms of this
chapter, the village president shall consider the following issues in
determining the suitability of license issuance:
   A.   The zoning classification of the proposed premises.
   B.   The character of the surrounding area.
   C.   The impact of additional vehicular traffic and parking relative to the
creation of hazards and/or congestion.
   D.   Any statements of interested persons, either oral or written.
   E.   Any past operating history of the licensee and the proposed site.
   F.   In the case of the question of a subclassification #1 license renewal,
whether the music or other live entertainment is audible in the nearest
sleeping room of a residential dwelling unit in any R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning
district when the windows are closed. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-10: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
A.   Major Classifications: Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter are hereby divided into the following classes:
   1.   Class A-1: Class A-1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor on the premises of any tavern for consumption on the premises
as well as other retail sales of such liquor.
   2.   Class A-2: Class A-2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors on the premises in any restaurant which complies with the
requirement that thirty three percent (33%) or more of the gross revenue in any
month from the operation of the licensed premises must be derived from the
serving of meals, for consumption on the premises, as well as other retail
sales of such liquor.
   3.   Class B: Class B licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer, ale
and wine, but not alcoholic liquor, for consumption on the premises as well as
other retail sales of such beer, ale and wine.
      a.   There is hereby created a subclass B-1 license. A B-1 license is a
supplemental license to a Class B license and authorizes the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor in packages.
   4.   Class C: Class C licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor, beer, ale and wine in packages, but not for consumption on the premises
where sold.
   There is created a subclass C-1 license. A C-1 license is a supplemental
license to a class C license and authorizes the sale of alcoholic liquor, beer,
ale, and wine in packages, but not for consumption on the premises where sold,
for twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
   5.   Class D: Class D licenses are to clubs which shall authorize such
organization’s retail sale only to club members and guests accompanied by club
members on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale and wine for
consumption on the premises only.
   6.   Class E:
      a.   Class E licenses are issued to civic, religious, fraternal and
nonprofit organizations for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale and
wine for a temporary period not to exceed ten (10) days, and any such license
so issued under this classification shall be intended to be used only for a
bona fide special event or occasion.
      b.   Where such license issued under class E shall involve the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine in an outdoor location as part of
an approved public activity, the licensee shall comply with the following
additional conditions:
      (1)   The proposed licensee shall submit proof of adequate dramshop
insurance required by the Illinois liquor control act of 1934, as amended or in
the future revised, prior to being issued such license.
      (2)   To protect the public order, all licensees shall either provide
security guards or have a telephone at the bar or serving facility where any
alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine is dispensed. The village police department
will not provide security guards to licensees.
      (3)   To protect persons serving alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine, all
licensees under this subsection A6 shall provide a reasonably substantial
structure across which all alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine is served.
      (4)   Consumption of any and all alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine
shall be restricted to a confined area of the grounds on which the event is
conducted. The proposed licensee shall attach to the application a drawing
designating the area and the means of confinement.
      (5)   The licensee shall provide personnel at all exits to ensure that no
alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine is taken from the area and that effective
supervision is in place at all times to ensure against the transfer of
alcoholic liquor to minors.
      (6)   Prior to the actual sale of any alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or
wine, the licensee shall contact the village fire department to inspect the
premises and issue an occupancy permit and limit. The licensee shall cause the
conformance to said limit at all times.
   7.   Class F: Class F single event license is issued for a six (6) hour
period during a single day only, between the hours of four o’clock (4:00) P.M.
and ten o’clock (10:00) P.M., from Monday through Saturday, for the dispensing
of wine and beer during a single event held by a civic, religious, business,
not for profit, governmental body, or fraternal organization. Any food served
at the event must comply with all public health rules and regulations. A single
license issuing pursuant to this subsection A7 may only be issued once per year
to any organization.
   The proposed licensee shall submit proof of adequate dramshop insurance
required by the Illinois liquor control act of 1934, as amended or in the
future revised, prior to being issued such license.
   8.   Class G: Class G caterer retail license shall be a license permitting
the sale or service of alcoholic liquor by a caterer retailer, defined as “a
person who serves alcoholic liquor for consumption, either on site or off site,
whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as an incidental part of food
service when prepared meals and foods and alcoholic liquors are sold as a
package price agreed upon under contract”, which alcoholic liquor is served in
connection with the catering contract and for consumption only on the premises
where the food is served. Class G licenses shall be subject to the following:
      a.   In order to be eligible for a class G license, a caterer retailer
must have a valid license issued by the Illinois liquor control commission as
required by the Illinois liquor control act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
1-1 et seq.
      b.   A class G license shall only be issued after the applicant can
demonstrate, with proper documentation to the village liquor control
commissioner or the village administrator, that the applicant is operating a
bona fide catering business.
      c.   The licensee shall, for each catering event, have an agreed upon
catering contract. Any catering contract shall be furnished to the village
liquor control commissioner or his agent upon a written request.
      d.   The sale of alcoholic liquor shall be incidental to the food
service. The revenue which the licensee derives for the sale of food must
comprise at least fifty one percent (51%) of the gross revenue earned from the
sale of food and alcoholic liquor at each and every event or function.
      e.   No alcoholic liquor, pursuant to a catering contract, shall be sold
or served at a single location for more than eight (8) consecutive hours. The
sale and service of alcoholic liquor shall only be allowed on Monday through
Sunday from ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. until one o’clock (1:00) A.M. the
following day.
      f.   The event or function shall not be open to the general public but
only to invited guests of the party requesting catering service.
      g.   One or more employees of the class G license holder shall at all
times be present throughout the event or function and be capable of observing
any and all areas in or on the premises where alcoholic liquor is being sold or
served.
      h.   The licensee must implement measures to ensure that minors are not
served alcoholic liquors and do not consume alcoholic liquor on the premises of
any place alcoholic liquor is being sold or served as authorized by a class G
license.
      i.   Class G license holders shall be exempt from sections
4-1-15 and
4-1-16 of this chapter.
      j.   Any applicant for a class G license shall submit proof of adequate
dramshop insurance required by the Illinois liquor control act of 1934, as
amended, prior to being issued such license covering the sale and of alcoholic
beverages pursuant to a retail catering contract.
   9.   Class H: Class H licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquors for consumption on the premises for only two days per week subject to
the following provisions:
      a.   The days of the week shall be listed on the application and the
license. The days of the week may be changed by the applicant after receiving
written approval from the local liquor control commissioner of an amendment to
the license and a revised license is issued.
      b.   The annual fee for the class H license shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) which shall be in addition to any other fees required by license
holders pursuant to this chapter. Class H licenses shall not be prorated for
any length of time less than six (6) months or for less than the annual fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00).
   10.   Class I: Class I licenses shall authorize the retail sale of milk-
based and/or sherbet based dessert products containing alcoholic liquor from
the premises of any ice cream parlor for consumption on such premises, and the
retail sale of packaged milk-based and/or sherbet based dessert products
containing alcoholic liquor in fully sealed containers from the premises of any
ice cream parlor for consumption off of such premises.
      a.   The annual license fee for a Class I Liquor License shall be four
hundred dollars ($400.00).
   11.   Class J: Class J licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer,
wine and ale, including beer brewed on-site at the licensed premises, for
consumption on such premises, and the retail sale in fully sealed containers of
packaged beer brewed on-site at the licensed premises for consumption off of
such premises.
B.   Subclassifications:
   1.   Subclassification #1:
      a.   A category of liquor license is hereby created as subclassification
#1, separate from all other licenses issued pursuant to this chapter, which
shall be available to those licensees holding a currently valid A-1, A-2, B or
D license issued under this chapter.
      b.   Subclassification #1 shall govern the outdoor sale and consumption
of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine. In addition to all other requirements
pursuant to this chapter, the following requirements shall be met:
      (1)   The areas designated for outdoor sale and consumption of alcoholic
liquor shall be attached or directly adjacent to the existing building for
which a currently valid liquor license is in effect.
      (2)   A scale drawing shall be submitted to show the method of
confinement that will be utilized to restrict the removal by patrons of
alcoholic liquor from the designated outdoor area.
      (3)   A minimum of two (2) exits shall exist from the designated outdoor
area, only one of which is to be through the building attached or directly
adjacent thereto.
      (4)   All licensees shall provide a reasonably substantial structure
across which the alcoholic liquor shall be served.
      (5)   As part of the application process, the village clerk shall cause
notices to be sent to surrounding property owners within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of the proposed designated outdoor area announcing the licensee’s
intention and requesting written comments. The receipt of any written comments
from surrounding property owners received within ten (10) days from the date of
notice shall be considered by the village president in the granting or denial
of a subclassification #1 license. Any and all expenses incurred in the
processing of these notices shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
   2.   Subclassification 1A:
      a.   A category of liquor license is hereby created as Subclassification
1A, separate from all other licenses issued pursuant to this chapter, and shall
be available to those licensees holding a currently valid A-1, A-2, or B
license issued for the B-1 Central Business District.
      b.   Subclassification 1A shall govern the outdoor sale and consumption
of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine in the Village right-of-way and located
in the B-1 Central Business District. In addition to all other requirements
pursuant to this chapter, the following requirements shall be met:
      (1)   Meet all criteria included under Subclassification 1.
      (2)   The licensee shall be responsible to see that no customers,
employees, or other persons remove alcoholic liquor and beverages from the
designated outdoor sidewalk, except for the employee carrying alcoholic liquor
directly between the establishment and the sidewalk area.
      (3)   The licensee shall be responsible to see that no person is served
or consumes alcoholic liquor in the designated outdoor sidewalk unless seated
in the seating which has been provided in the designated outdoor sidewalk.
      (4)   Any Class A-1, A-2 or B license holders in the B-1 Central Business
District who have a Subclassification 1A license for sidewalk sales shall be
permitted the sale of alcoholic liquor from eleven o’clock (11:00) A.M. to the
closing hours authorized for A-1, A-2 and B license holders.
   3.   Subclassification 2:
      a.   A category of liquor license is hereby created as Subclassification
2 which shall be separate from all other licenses issued under this chapter and
which shall be available only to those licensees currently issued a valid A-1,
A-2, B or D license under this chapter.
      b.   Subclassification 2 is a supplemental license authorizing the sale
of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale, or wine to the public for consumption on the
premises from six o’clock (6:00) A.M. until one o’clock (1:00) A.M. the
following day on Sunday through Wednesday and from six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
until two o’clock (2:00) A.M. the following day on Thursday, Friday and
Saturday. (Ord. 2016-1486, 10-4-2016; amd. Ord. 2021-1658, 7-20-2021; Ord.
2023-1692, 1- -2023; Ord. 2023-1709, 10-17-2023; Ord. 2025-1751, 1-7-2025)
4-1-11: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare through the
promotion of temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale and
wine, the number of licenses available pursuant to this chapter shall be as
follows:
Class Of License Number Of Authorized Licenses
Class Of License Number Of Authorized Licenses
A-1              14
A-2              16
B                5
B-1              1
C                5
C-1              3
D                2
E                No more than 2 at any 1 time
F                No more than 1 in effect at 1 time and only 1 event license
                 per year per entity or organization
G                No limit
H                1
I                2
J                1
 
   B.   From and after the adoption of this ordinance, the Liquor Commissioner
or his/her designee, shall maintain a current list of all authorized licenses,
and shall report to the Village Board promptly at any time there is a change in
the number of licenses, irrespective of the reason for the change.
   C.   In the event any license(s) shall be revoked by final administrative
action of the Liquor Commissioner and any appeals to the Illinois Liquor
Commission or the courts of this state shall have been exhausted, such license
(s) shall be automatically void and the Liquor Commissioner or his/her designee
shall decrease the number of authorized licenses by the number of such revoked
license(s).
    D.   In the event any license(s) shall be allowed to lapse through non-
renewal, relinquishment or otherwise, such license(s) shall be automatically
void and the Liquor Commissioner or his/her designee shall decrease the number
of authorized licenses by the number of such revoked license(s). (Ord. 2017-
1522, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 2018-1553, 5-15-2018; Ord. 2019-1583, 2-19-2019; Ord.
2019-1599, 7-23-2019; Ord. 2021-1652, 6-22-2021; Ord. 2021-1658, 7-20-2021;
Ord. 2021-1668, 12-7-2021; Ord. 2022-1687, 9-20-2022; Ord. 2023-1692, 1- -2023;
Ord. 2023-1709, 10-17-2023; Ord. 2024-1730, 5-21-2024; Ord. 2025-1750, 1-7-
2025; Ord. 2025-1751, 1-7-2025)
4-1-12: TERM OF LICENSE; PRORATION OF INITIAL FEE:
Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate on the fourth
Tuesday of October next following its date of issuance. The fee to be paid for
new licenses shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which
have expired in the year prior to the issuance of the license. (Ord. 2004-1225,
2-3-2004)
4-1-13: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE; CHANGE OF LOCATION; RENEWALS:
   A.   Retail liquor licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be personal to the licensee or entity to whom issued and for the
premises specified therein and shall not be transferable, but must be
surrendered by the licensee for cancellation upon the transfer of said
licensee's business location and/or removal of the licensee's business from the
premises specified in the license application. However, the premises specified
on the license and application required by this chapter may be changed only
upon the filing of a written request to make such change, and any change must
be approved by the village president. A license shall be issued by the village
president only if the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state, provisions of this chapter,
and other ordinances of the village.
   B.   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall permit the sale of
alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license,
and only under the conditions and restrictions imposed under this chapter on
the particular classification of license described therein. Such license shall
not be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be
alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of
testate or intestate devolution, but shall cease upon the death of the
licensee; provided, that the executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of
the sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after
the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the
expiration of the license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
   C.   Any licensee shall have the right to renewal of such license; provided,
that said licensee is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for
which such renewal is sought is suitable for such purpose, but nothing herein
shall be deemed to restrict the right of the village president to suspend or
revoke any such license. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-14: POSTING LICENSE:
Every licensee shall immediately post and keep posted, while current, in a
conspicuous place on the premises the license so issued pursuant to the terms
of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-15: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor,
beer, ale or wine within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school,
hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons, nursing home or home for
veterans, their spouses or children, or any military installation or facility;
provided, that this prohibition does not apply to hotels offering restaurant
services or to restaurants where the sale of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or
wine is not the principal business carried on nor the renewal of a license for
the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine on the premises
within one hundred feet (100') of any above noted facilities where said
facilities are established after the issuance of the original license. For the
purposes herein described, the distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be
measured to the nearest part of any building used for any of the above noted
facilities and not to property boundaries. However, nothing herein shall
prohibit the village president from considering the proposed location's overall
proximity to the above noted facilities and the deleterious effects that the
sale of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine may have. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell
at retail alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine if any such sales are limited to
periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of
some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor,
beer, ale or wine. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-16: CLEAR VIEW OF PREMISES; LIGHTING:
Upon premises within which the sale of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine is
licensed, no screen, blind or curtain, partition, article, or thing shall be
permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside
such premises which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such
licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth,
screen, partition or other obstruction nor any arrangements of lights or
lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which
shall prevent a clear view of the entire interior from the street, road or
sidewalk. All rooms where alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine is sold for
consumption on the premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours
by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of
the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed
premises required by this section shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or
wilfully permitted to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such
license shall be subject to revocation in the manner herein provided. In order
to enforce the provision of this section, the president shall have the right to
require the filing with him of plans, drawings and photographs showing the
clearance of the view as required in this section. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-17: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
All premises used for the retail sale or storage of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale
or wine licensed under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and/or other ordinances regulating the condition of premises. (Ord.
2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-18: CLOSING HOURS:
   A.   Hours Established; Exceptions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine in the village between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except as authorized by
subsection
 4-1-10B2b of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
      2.   The closing hours provided herein shall not apply on New Year's Eve
to license classifications A-1, A-2, B or D; provided, that the licensed
establishment does not permit any additional patrons on the licensed premises
after normal closing hours as enumerated in subsection A1 of this section; and
further provided, that the licensed establishment not advertise or indicate in
any manner that it is open for business after the normal closing hours.
Further, that should a disturbance occur on the licensed premises during the
extended closing hours hereinabove designated which, in the opinion of the
police chief or his delegate, appears to endanger the lives, property or person
of the patrons of a licensed premises, said police chief or his delegate may
order the licensed establishment to close its business until the next business
day and may order all patrons to leave the licensed premises immediately. (Ord.
2014-1416, 9-16-2014)
   B.   Presence On Premises: It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or
to admit the public to any premises in or on which alcoholic liquor, beer, ale
or wine is sold at retail during the hours within which the sale of such
liquor, beer, ale or wine is prohibited; except, that in the case of
restaurants, clubs, and hotels, such establishments may be kept open during
such hours, but no alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine may be sold to or
consumed by the public during such hours. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-19: SALES TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No licensee, employee or agent shall sell, give away or deliver
alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine to any person under the age of twenty one
(21) or to any intoxicated person, except as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-16.1. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Should the village president find, following a hearing before the
president, as the village liquor control commissioner, that any licensee or his
officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee has knowingly
sold, given or delivered any alcoholic liquor to an intoxicated person, and the
person, while so intoxicated, has caused death or great bodily harm to himself
or any other person, the president shall revoke or suspend the license for the
establishment for not less than thirty (30) days for the first such violation,
and shall revoke such license for any subsequent violations. (Ord. 2004-1225,
2-3-2004)
4-1-20: MINORS:
   A.   Purchase, Accept, Possess Or Consume; Identification Requirements:
      1.   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age shall not attempt to or actually purchase
or accept a gift or delivery of such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic
liquor in his possession, or consume such alcoholic liquor, except in the
performance of a religious ceremony or service.
      2.   If a licensee or his agent or employee believes or has reason to
believe that a sale or delivery of an alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of
the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or
delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public official in the performance of his
official duties.
      3.   For the purpose of preventing the violation of this subsection A,
any licensee or his agent or employee may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic
beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate positive
identification of identity and of the fact that said person is over the age of
twenty one (21) years.
      4.   Proof that the licensee or his employee or agent demanded, was shown
and reasonably relied upon such positive identification in any transaction
forbidden by this subsection A is competent evidence and may be considered in
any criminal or ordinance prosecution therefor or in any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.
      5.   No person shall transfer, alter or deface such identification card,
use or attempt to use the identification card of another, carry or use or
attempt to use a false or forged identification card, or obtain or attempt to
obtain an identification card by means of false information.
      6.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall misrepresent
his or her age for the purpose of purchasing, receiving or consuming alcoholic
liquor, beer, ale or wine.
      7.   Every licensee shall display in a prominent place on the premises so
licensed, a printed notice that shall read as follows:
   WARNING TO MINORS
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF PEORIA HEIGHTS
IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, BEER, ALE OR WINE OR MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE
FOR THE PURPOSE OF PURCHASING, OBTAINING OR CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, BEER,
ALE OR WINE.
   B.   Presence On Premises:
      1.   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age shall not enter or remain upon any premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor except in the company of his parent
or legal guardian or when performing as a compensated entertainer pursuant to a
signed contract for such performance; provided, however, that this subsection B
shall not apply to restaurants, except as set forth in subsection B4 of this
section, ice cream parlors, dinner theaters, clubs, package liquor stores, or
privately owned clubs holding a valid temporary license, other than those
portions used exclusively or primarily for the sale and consumption of
alcoholic liquors.
      2.   Persons to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor
is prohibited because of age may enter and remain upon premises licensed:
         a.   For events where no alcoholic liquor is sold or served;
         b.   For events where no admission fee is charged other than the cost
to rent the hall, e.g., wedding receptions, private parties, etc.; or
         c.   When in the company of his parent or legal guardian.
      3.   The licensee and any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of such licensee shall monitor at all times the presence of
any person on the licensed premises to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any
alcoholic liquor is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any
officer, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to permit
or allow any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any liquor is
prohibited to remain on the premises, except in the company of his parent or
legal guardian.
      4.   In a restaurant which has a liquor license, any person to whom the
sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age
shall not enter or remain upon the premises after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
unless in the company of his parent or legal guardian or as a compensated
entertainer pursuant to a signed contract for such performance or the
restaurant's employee who is actually performing his/her duties. The licensee
shall post a sign in a prominent location within the premises stating as
follows:
No person under 21 shall be permitted on these premises after 8:00 p.m. unless
in the company of his/her parent or legal guardian after 8:00 p.m.
      5.   No licensee, employee or agent shall permit any minor to loiter in
or about any licensed premises.
   C.   Persons On Premises Where There Is Consumption By Minors: No person
shall knowingly enter or remain in any house, building, yard or other premises,
other than premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, under circumstances
where the person knows or reasonably should know that alcoholic liquor is being
illegally possessed or consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21)
years.
   D.   Purchasing To Sell Or Deliver To Minors: No person, after purchasing or
otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such
alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty one (21) years,
except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
   E.   Employment:
      1.   No licensee under this chapter shall employ or permit any person
under the age of twenty one (21) to handle, sell or serve alcoholic liquors for
sale; provided, however that any establishment holding a class A, class B,
class D, or class I license may employ persons nineteen (19) years of age or
older to serve alcoholic liquors to patrons in any fixed location used for
service of food where such person is under the direct and immediate supervision
of an employee twenty one (21) years of age or older who has supervisory
authority over the underage employee and who is actually present on the
premises at all times the underage employee is serving alcohol, but under no
circumstances shall such person be employed or act exclusively as a bartender
or cocktail server, nor shall such person sell alcoholic liquors.
      2.   No licensee under this chapter shall employ or permit any person
under the age of eighteen (18) to act as a compensated entertainer. (Ord. 2004-
1225, 2-3-2004; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2021-1658, 7-20-2021)
4-1-21: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDUCT:
   A.   Illegal Activities Generally: No licensee, agent and/or employee shall
engage in any activity or conduct or suffer or permit any other person to
engage in any activity or conduct in or about the licensed premises which is
prohibited by any ordinance of the village or law of the state of Illinois or
United States Of America.
   B.   Peddling Alcoholic Beverages: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to peddle alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine in the village.
   C.   Solicitation: No licensee, agent and/or employee of a licensed
establishment shall permit the solicitation of any patron thereof by anyone,
including the licensee, agent and/or employee, to purchase alcoholic liquor,
beer, ale or wine or nonalcoholic beverages or to give or donate money or any
other thing of value for any purpose including prostitution. However, nothing
contained herein shall prohibit any employee, regularly employed therein, from
accepting and serving an order of a patron in the normal course of employment.
   D.   Curb Service: No curb service for the sale of alcoholic liquor, beer,
ale or wine shall be permitted on or in connection with any premises licensed
under the terms of this chapter either upon a public street or public or
private property.
   E.   Removal Of Beverages From Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person
to carry any alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine in an unsealed or opened
container from the licensed premises where such alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or
wine was purchased. No licensee, agent and/or employee of the licensed
establishment shall permit any patron to violate this subsection nor continue
to sell or serve alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine to any such patron knowing
such patron intends to carry the alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine from the
premises in an unsealed or opened container. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-22: CRIMES REPORTED TO POLICE:
Each licensee, agent and/or employee shall immediately report to the village
police department any incident occurring on or about the licensed premises and
in their knowledge or view relating to the commission of any crime and shall
truthfully and fully respond to all questions and investigations of any
identified police officer who makes an inquiry concerning any persons in or
about the licensed premises and any events taking place in and about the
licensed premises. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004)
4-1-23: PUBLIC POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION:
   A.   No person shall transport, carry, possess or have on any public place
or any public way in the village any alcoholic liquor on or about his person,
except in the original package and with the seal(s) unbroken.
   B.   No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor upon any public place or
public way within the village, except on premises licensed for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises.
   C.   For purposes of this section, the term "public way" shall mean any and
all streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards and rights of way. The term "public
place" shall mean all publicly owned buildings, grounds, parks and privately
owned buildings and grounds which are actually or customarily opened to the
public. (Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004; amd. 2016 Code)
4-1-24: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The village president may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to the
terms of this chapter for any violation of any provision of this chapter or any
state or federal law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or
wine. In addition to the suspension, the village president may levy a fine on
the licensee for such violations as provided in subsection
1-4-1B of this code for each violation. Each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. No such license shall be suspended or
revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after a hearing held pursuant to
currently applicable law.
Any such hearing shall be conducted before a court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter. Review of the village president’s order on appeal shall be
limited to a review of the certified official record of the proceedings before
the village president.
(Ord. 2004-1225, 2-3-2004; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2023-1721, 12-19-2023)
4-1-25: PENALTY:
In addition to the penalty and enforcement provisions of section
 4-1-24 of this chapter, any licensee, manager of licensee, person, firm,
principal partners, principal stockholders of a corporation or partners or
limited partners who are licensees, or entity, manager or agent being found
guilty of a violation of any provision of this chapter, upon conviction and
finding and being adjudged guilty, shall be fined as provided in subsection
1-4-1B of this code. (Ord. 2009-1316, 11-17-2009; amd. 2016 Code)
4-1-26: BRING YOUR OWN BOTTLE REGULATIONS:
The regulations in this section apply to allow so-called BYOB (Bring Your Own
Bottle) at certain classes of businesses within the Village.
   A.   It shall be expressly permissible for tobacco businesses in the Village
to allow patrons to bring in their own alcoholic beverages, provided they have
a Village-issued BYOB permit for the same. For the purposes of this Section,
tobacco businesses shall mean cigar lounges.
   B.   The owner of a qualifying business may apply for a permit by providing
a sworn statement on a form provided by the Village Clerk and paying the annual
fee.
   C.   No tobacco business shall allow any person to consume alcohol on the
premises unless it holds a valid current BYOB permit.
   D.   No person under 21 may consume alcohol on the premises of any business.
   E.   No alcohol may be consumed in the premises at any time between 1:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning.
   F.   Public intoxication is not permitted by this section and business
owners and managers shall promptly eject persons who have become intoxicated,
and, if necessary call the police promptly for assistance.
   G.   No alcoholic beverages may be poured or consumed by any adult in a
booth or table where a minor is seated, unless the minor is accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian, and is properly supervised.
   H.   Illegal Activities Generally: No licensee, agent and/or employee shall
engage in any activity or conduct or suffer or permit any other person to
engage in any activity or conduct in or about the premises which is prohibited
by any ordinance of the Village or law of the State of Illinois or United
States of America.
   I.   Permits granted hereunder shall not be assignable or transferable to
any person, firm or corporation by the permittee, and if any such permit shall
be assigned or transferred, the same shall thereupon immediately become void.
   J.   Any permit issued shall only be effective and valid for one particular
location or place of business; and the address of such location or place of
business shall appear plainly on the face of any such permit, together with the
name of the permittee and the name, if any, of the business operated by the
permittee; otherwise, such license shall be void
   K.   The owner and employees of the business shall not be permitted to sell,
serve, or pour any alcoholic beverage.
   L.   The BYOB permit is not considered a pouring license, and a business
which qualifies for a BYOB permit is not considered a liquor licensee or
otherwise qualified as a licensed establishment or licensed terminal operator
as those terms are defined within the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/
1 et seq.
   M.   The annual fee of $100 applies to all businesses holding BYOB permits.
Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall terminate on the fourth
Tuesday of October next following its date of issuance. The fee to be paid for
new permits shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which
have expired in the year prior to the issuance of the permit This fee is in
addition to all other license fees applicable to the businesses.
   N.   Any proven violation of the provisions of this section shall be
considered grounds to revoke this grant of permission by the Village President
upon not less than three days’ written notice. In the event of such revocation
the affected business may appeal to the Village Board whose majority decision
shall stand as the final administrative act of the Village.
   P.   A violation of the provisions of this section shall also subject the
offender to penalties as provided in subsection
1-4-1B of this Code. (Ord. 2022-1686, 9-20-2022)
CHAPTER 2
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
4-2-1: Licensed Video Gaming Exemption
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Video Gaming Establishment License
4-2-4: Video Gaming Terminal Permit Sticker
4-2-5: Regulations Governing Licensed Establishments Operating Video Gaming
Terminals
4-2-6: Inspection Of Premises
4-2-7: Revocation/Suspension Of License And Permit Sticker
4-2-8: Seizure Of Unlawful Video Gaming Terminals
4-2-9: Monetary Penalty
4-2-1: LICENSED VIDEO GAMING EXEMPTION:
   A.   The prohibitions set forth in ordinance 299, an ordinance regulating
"automatic amusement machines" and "mechanical musical devices" shall not apply
to video gaming terminals operated by a licensed establishment under authority
of this chapter; and
   B.   Any activity that is lawfully conducted in accordance with the video
gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., is permitted and shall
not constitute unlawful gambling within the village of Peoria Heights; and
   C.   Any other ordinances of the village of Peoria Heights which prohibit
gambling or gaming shall not apply to any video gaming terminal that has a
valid video gaming terminal sticker and is being operated pursuant to this
chapter by a "licensed establishment" as hereinafter defined. (Ord. 2016-1471,
4-19-2016)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply within this chapter:
   LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment that is both licensed to sell
liquor at retail in the village pursuant to village ordinance 2004-1225, as
from time to time amended and also licensed by the Illinois gaming board to
operate a video gaming terminal on its premises.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, electronic cards, or vouchers or any combination thereof is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including, but not
limited to, video poker, line up, and blackjack, utilizing a video display and
microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that can
be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly
dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only. (Ord. 2016-
1471, 4-19-2016)
4-2-3: VIDEO GAMING ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE:
In order for an establishment to operate a video gaming terminal, the
establishment shall first obtain an annual video gaming establishment license
from the village by submitting a written application, on a form provided by the
village, to the mayor or the mayor’s designee. An applicant has the burden of
demonstrating its suitability for licensure. All video gaming establishment
licenses issued by the village shall expire April 30, next, after the date of
issue. An annual license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is payable in
full at the time the application is filed with the village or upon renewal as
the case may be. A licensed establishment in good standing shall be entitled to
renew its license upon timely payment of its annual fee without submission of
an application. Any change in ownership or other characteristic of a licensed
establishment shall require the submission of a new application. A license
shall be purely a personal privilege, good for a time period not to exceed one
year after issuance, unless sooner revoked as provided by law, and shall not
constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment, or
execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or
involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered. Not more than seventeen (17)
licensed video gaming establishments may operate at any one time within the
village. No additional license shall be issued by the village for the operation
of video gaming terminals whenever seventeen (17) such licenses have been
issued and are outstanding. (Ord. 2016-1471, 4-19-2016; amd. Ord. 2023-1705, 5-
16-2023; Ord. 2023-1706, 7-13-2023; Ord. 2024-1738, 10-15- 2024)
4-2-4: VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL PERMIT STICKER:
In order for a video gaming terminal to be operated at a licensed
establishment, the licensed establishment shall first obtain an annual video
gaming terminal permit sticker from the village for each video gaming terminal
located on its premises by submitting a written application, on a form provided
by the village, to the mayor or the mayor's designee. Each video gaming
terminal permit sticker issued by the village shall expire April 30, next,
after date of issue. An annual fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per video
gaming terminal payable in full at the time the application is filed with the
village, or upon renewal as the case may be. A licensed establishment in good
standing shall be entitled to renew gaming terminal permits upon timely payment
of the annual fee without submission of an application. (Ord. 2016-1471, 4-19-
2016)
4-2-5: REGULATIONS GOVERNING LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS OPERATING VIDEO GAMING
TERMINALS:
The following regulations apply to all licensed establishments operating video
gaming terminals:
   A.   A valid village video gaming establishment license must be clearly
displayed on the premises at all times.
   B.   A valid village video gaming terminal permit sticker shall be clearly
displayed at all times on each video gaming terminal.
   C.   No more than six (6) video gaming terminals may be located on the
premises of a licensed establishment.
   D.   Other than having up to six (6) video gaming terminals with valid video
gaming terminal permit stickers, a licensed establishment is prohibited from
having, anywhere on its premises, an electronic video gaming machine that may
be available to play or simulate the play of poker, line up, blackjack, faro,
roulette, craps, slots, or any other card or dice game or other game of chance,
or that is otherwise akin to a gambling or gaming device, even if solely for
amusement purposes.
   E.   All video gaming terminals must be located in an area restricted to
persons twenty one (21) years of age or older. The entrance to such area must,
at all times, be within the view of at least one employee who is at least
twenty one (21) years of age.
   F.   No licensed establishment may cause or permit any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years to use, play or operate a video gaming terminal.
   G.   No video gaming terminal may be played except during the legal hours of
operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the licensed
establishment pursuant to village ordinance 2004-1225, as from time to time
amended.
   H.   The licensed establishment must fully comply with the Illinois video
gaming act 1  and all rules, regulations and restrictions imposed by the
Illinois gaming board. (Ord. 2016-1471, 4-19-2016; amd. Ord. 2020-1620, 2-18-
2020)
 
Notes
1 1. 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
4-2-6: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Every licensed establishment where any video gaming terminal is kept shall be
subject to inspection by the chief of police or the chief's authorized agents,
at any time, to ensure compliance with village ordinances. This includes
licensed establishments applying for a video gaming establishment license and/
or video gaming terminal permit sticker. It shall be unlawful for any person to
hinder, resist, oppose or attempt to hinder, resist or oppose the chief of
police or the chief's authorized agents in the course of an inspection. (Ord.
2016-1471, 4-19-2016)
4-2-7: REVOCATION/SUSPENSION OF LICENSE AND PERMIT STICKER:
The village liquor commissioner may revoke or suspend any video gaming
establishment license and any video gaming terminal permit sticker issued by
the village if it determines that the licensed establishment has violated any
of the provisions of this chapter or any applicable provisions of state or
federal law. No license shall be so revoked or suspended, except after a public
hearing before the village liquor commissioner, with not less than three (3)
days' prior written notice to the licensed establishment affording the licensed
establishment an opportunity to appear and defend. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, any licensed establishment that has its liquor license revoked or
suspended by the village under village ordinance 2004-1225, as from time to
time amended or by the Illinois state liquor commission, or has its video
gaming license revoked or suspended by the Illinois gaming board, shall
automatically, without a hearing before the village liquor commissioner, have
its village video gaming establishment license and all village video gaming
terminal permit stickers revoked or suspended for the same time frame as its
liquor and/or Illinois gaming board gaming license is suspended whichever the
case may. (Ord. 2016-1471, 4-19-2016)
4-2-8: SEIZURE OF UNLAWFUL VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS:
Every video gaming terminal that does not have a valid video gaming terminal
permit sticker or is otherwise unlawful shall be considered a gambling device
subject to seizure by the police chief or his designee, and shall be turned
over to the Illinois gaming board, in accordance with board regulations and
applicable law, unless otherwise ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2016-1471, 4-19-2016)
4-2-9: MONETARY PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense and a fine of not less than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a second offense and each subsequent
offense. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense and a fine may be levied for not less than the minimum fine for each
day the offense continues. This penalty may be enforced by issuance of a
citation for the fine amount, or by issuance of a notice to appear. This
monetary penalty shall be in addition to any and all other remedies which may
be available to the village of Peoria Heights under village ordinance 2004-
1225, as from time to time amended or any other ordinance of the village of
Peoria Heights or federal or state law. (Ord. 2016-1471, 4-19-2016)
CHAPTER 3
FOOD DEALERS
ARTICLE A. FOOD AND ALCOHOL TAX; RESTAURANTS AND TAVERNS
SECTION:
4-3A-1: Definitions
4-3A-2: Food And Alcohol Tax
4-3A-3: Restaurant License Provisions
4-3A-4: Registration Of Restaurants And Taverns
4-3A-5: False Information On Applications Prohibited
4-3A-6: Rules And Regulations
4-3A-7: Penalty
4-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Is defined in the same manner as in section
4-1-1 of this title.
   FOOD ITEMS: Means and includes any and all materials, whether solid,
semisolid or liquid, used or intended to be used for human consumption and for
nourishment of the human body. The term includes any and all nonalcoholic
liquor beverages.
   OWNER: Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest in
conducting the operation of a restaurant or tavern so as to entitle such a
person or persons to all or a portion of the net receipts thereof.
   PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative,
syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business
trust, institution, agency, government corporation, municipal corporation,
district or other political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee,
operator, user or owner; or any officer, agent, employee or other
representative, acting either for himself or for any other person in any
capacity; or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties.
   RESTAURANT: Means and includes any place located within the corporate limits
of the village kept, used and maintained as a place at which food items are
served and/or prepared, and where food items are regularly served and/or
prepared, whether or not consumed on the premises; but shall not include coin
operated automatic food item dispensing machines. For the purposes of this
article, luncheon or dinner clubs, employee cafeterias, any location with
respect to any catered event and the like where food items are prepared or
served are deemed to be restaurants.
   TAVERN: Means and includes an establishment licensed by the village to serve
alcoholic liquor.
   TREASURER: The duly appointed and acting treasurer of the village and
includes the village administrator and bookkeeper hereby authorized as
delegates to assist in the performance of the duties assigned to the treasurer
under this article.
   VILLAGE: The village of Peoria Heights, a municipal corporation located in
Peoria County, Illinois. (Ord. 2016-1487, 10-18-2016)
4-3A-2: FOOD AND ALCOHOL TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed; Rate: There is hereby levied and imposed upon the
privilege of purchasing food items or alcoholic beverages served or prepared at
either a restaurant, tavern or licensed food vendor in the village a tax of two
percent (2%) of the purchase price, exclusive of any other tax, charged for
such food items and/or alcoholic beverages; provided, however, that such tax
shall not apply or be imposed upon persons purchasing food items or alcoholic
beverages served or prepared at restaurants owned by any grade, junior high or
high school within the village. (Ord. 2014-1406, 5-6-2014; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Exemptions From Tax: No such tax shall be levied and imposed upon the
purchase of an alcoholic beverage or food item which is both purchased and
taken from the premises of purchase in the hermetically sealed container of its
manufacturer or wholesaler.
   C.   Tax Is Additional: The tax levied in this section shall be paid in
addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
   D.   Liability For Payment Of Tax: The ultimate incidence of and liability
for payment of such tax shall be borne by the person who purchases food items
or alcoholic beverages so served or prepared at any such restaurant or tavern,
such person hereinafter referred to as "consumer".
   E.   Collection Of Tax:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or operator of every
restaurant or tavern to act as trustee for and on account of the village, and
to secure such tax for the consumer of a restaurant or tavern and pay to the
village treasurer such tax under procedures prescribed by the treasurer or as
otherwise provided in this section.
      2.   Every person required to collect the tax levied by this section
shall secure such tax from the consumer at the time he collects payment for the
service of food or alcoholic beverage. Upon the invoice, receipt or other
statement or memorandum given to the consumer at the time of payment, the
amount due under the tax provided in this section shall be stated separately on
such documents.
   F.   Remittance Of Tax; Delinquencies:
      1.   Tax Return And Remittance Required; Due Date:
         a.   The owner of each restaurant or tavern within the village shall
file tax returns showing tax receipts received during each month by period on
forms prescribed by the treasurer. The returns shall be due on or before the
thirtieth day of the calendar month succeeding the end of the monthly filing
period. Such owner shall file an application for registration in the manner
hereinafter set forth prior to filing the first tax return.
         b.   The first taxing period, for the purpose of this section, shall
commence on July 1, 2014, and the tax return and payment for such period shall
be due on or before August 30, 2014. Thereafter, reporting periods and tax
payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. At the
time of filing such tax returns, the owner shall pay to the treasurer all taxes
due for the period to which the tax return applies.
      2.   Failure To File Return:
         a.   Individuals:
            (1)   In case any person who is required under this section to file
a tax return to the village fails to file a return when and as required under
this section, such person shall pay to the village, in addition to the amount
of tax required to be transmitted, a penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax
that such person is required to transmit to the village; provided, however, a
twenty percent (20%) penalty shall be imposed for any fraudulent failure to
transmit such tax.
            (2)   In case any person who is required under this section to file
a tax return with the village files a return at the time required or fails to
transmit the tax proceeds, or any portion thereof, to the village when due, a
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax not transmitted to the
village shall be added thereto; provided, however, the fraudulent failure to
pay such tax shall result in a twenty percent (20%) penalty.
            (3)   In addition to any penalty for which provision is made in
this section, any amount of tax not transmitted when due shall bear interest at
the rate of two percent (2%) per month, or fraction thereof, until fully
transmitted.
         b.   Corporations: Any officer or employee of any corporation which is
an owner subject to the provisions of this section, who has control,
supervision or responsibility of collecting tax proceeds, filing returns and
transmitting collected tax proceeds of the tax imposed by this section and who
wilfully fails to file such return or to transmit any tax proceeds so collected
to the village shall be personally liable for any such amounts collected,
including interest and penalties thereon. The personal liability of such
officer or employee, as provided in this section, shall survive dissolution of
the corporation. For purposes of this subsection F2b, a person wilfully fails
to act if he takes any conscious and voluntary action intending not to perform
any of his obligations hereunder, including, but not limited to, the utilizing
of tax proceeds collected for the village to pay any other corporate
obligations.
      3.   Copies Of Sales And Use Tax Returns Required: The person filing such
return shall attach thereto a copy of the Illinois sales and use tax returns of
the submitting tavern or restaurant for the month for which a return is made
under this section.
   G.   Enforcement Of Payment: Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax
as provided in this section, the village attorney shall, upon the request of
the village administrator, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce
the payment of such tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent
jurisdiction. Attorney fees incurred by the village for the purpose of
enforcing the collection or payment of such tax shall be assessed against the
defendants in any such action.
   H.   Books And Records:
      1.   The treasurer or any person certified as his delegate may enter the
premises of the restaurant and tavern for inspection and examination of books
and records in order to effectuate the proper administration of this section
and to assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere
with the treasurer or his duly authorized delegate in the discharge of his
duties or to fail to comply with the terms and conditions of this section. It
shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete books and
records to which the treasurer or his delegate shall at all times have full
access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing:
         a.   The amount of taxable receipts within the twenty four (24) hour
period; and
         b.   The actual restaurant/tavern tax receipts collected for the date
in question.
   I.   Disposition Of Revenues: All proceeds resulting from the imposition of
the tax under this section, including interest, penalties or other assessments,
shall be paid into the treasury of the village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the corporate fund of the village. (Ord. 2014-1406, 5-6-2014)
4-3A-3: RESTAURANT LICENSE PROVISIONS:
   A.   License And Compliance Required; Interpretation: It shall be unlawful
for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established,
operated or maintained, upon any property owned or controlled thereby a
restaurant within the village without having first obtained a license therefor
from the village treasurer or without complying with all provisions of this
article. For purposes of this article, a restaurant or its operator which has
been issued a liquor license by the village shall be deemed to be licensed to
operate the restaurant and need not file a separate restaurant license
application. A restaurant that does not sell liquor is required to have a valid
restaurant license. (Ord. 2014-1406, 5-6-2014; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   No Fee: There shall be no fee for such license for a restaurant as
required in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Term Of License: The license shall be valid until the next expiration
date. All restaurant licenses shall expire on May 1 of each calendar year, but
shall be deemed reissued upon expiration without further application to all
restaurants in good standing under the terms of this article.
   D.   Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Appeals:
      1.   If the village president, after a hearing held by or for him, shall
find that any person has wilfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this
article, he may suspend or revoke all licenses issued by the village and held
by such tax evader.
      2.   The owner, manager or operator of the restaurant or tavern shall
have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than five
(5) days after notice of the time and place of the hearing to be held,
addressed by him at his last known place of business. (Ord. 2014-1406, 5-6-
2014)
4-3A-4: REGISTRATION OF RESTAURANTS AND TAVERNS:
   A.   Registration Required: The owner of every restaurant or tavern shall
register with the village for the purpose of providing information deemed
necessary to facilitate collection of the tax imposed by this article.
   B.   Application For Registration:
      1.   All persons registering as required by this section shall submit to
the treasurer an application in writing stating:
         a.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual;
         b.   In the case of a corporation or club, the date of incorporation
and the names, ages and addresses of its officers and directors;
         c.   In the case of a for profit corporation, the names, addresses and
ages of any stockholders owning or controlling the voting rights to more than
five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation;
         d.   In the case of a partnership, the names, addresses and ages of
all partners or managers of the partnership;
         e.   The location of all taverns or restaurants operated by the
applicant within the village;
         f.   The Illinois business tax number of the establishment and the
federal employer identification number of the establishment.
      2.   If such application is made in behalf of a partnership, association,
club or corporation, then the same shall be signed by an authorized member of
such partnership or the president of such corporation, association or club.
      3.   The application for registration required by this subsection B shall
also serve as an application for a license to operate a restaurant if required
by section
4-3A-3 of this article. (Ord. 2014-1406, 5-6-2014)
4-3A-5: FALSE INFORMATION ON APPLICATIONS PROHIBITED:
No person shall knowingly furnish false or misleading information or withhold
any relevant information on any application for any registration or license
required by this article nor knowingly cause or suffer another to furnish or
withhold such information on his behalf. No person shall knowingly furnish any
false or misleading information to the village president, the chief of police,
the village administrator, the treasurer or any person authorized to act in
their behalf in the investigation of any application required by this chapter;
nor shall any person wilfully withhold any information that is relevant to any
such investigation when called upon the chief of police, the village
administrator, the treasurer or a person acting in their behalf to furnish such
information. (Ord. 2014-1406, 5-6-2014)
4-3A-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The treasurer may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article concerning the enforcement and application of this
article. The term "rules and regulations" includes, but is not limited to, a
case by case determination whether or not the tax imposed by this article
applies. (Ord. 2014-1406, 5-6-2014)
4-3A-7: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this article, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first
offense and not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one
hundred eighty (180) day period. A separate and distinct offense shall be
regarded as committed each day upon which such person shall continue any such
violation or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof. The
purpose of imposing penalties for the violation of this article is to ensure
the integrity of the collection process established pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 2014-1406, 5-6-2014)
ARTICLE B. SALE OF FOOD AND BEVERAGES FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY
SECTION:
4-3B-1: Purpose
4-3B-2: Definitions
4-3B-3: License Required
4-3B-4: Application For License; Competing Applications
4-3B-5: License Fee
4-3B-6: Background Check
4-3B-7: Issuance Of License
4-3B-8: Term And Nontransferability Of License
4-3B-9: Location Limitations
4-3B-10: Regulations
4-3B-11: Property Interest In Sites Prohibited; Village Authority Regarding
Vendors
4-3B-12: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
4-3B-13: Exemptions
4-3B-14: Penalty
4-3B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to regulate the placement and operation of food
vendors from within and adjacent to Tower Park and from certain public rights
of way. (Ord. 2015-1451, 7-21-2015)
4-3B-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this article unless the use or context
clearly indicates that another meaning is intended:
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Collectively "Tower Park" and "rights of way", as said
terms are defined herein.
   RIGHTS OF WAY: Sidewalks and street rights of way within areas of the
village zoned to allow retail sales as a permitted use.
   SITE: The total area occupied by a "vendor", as defined herein, including a
"stand", as defined herein, and auxiliary tables, the place where employees
stand and the place where goods and equipment are stored or displayed.
   STAND: Any table, showcase, bench, rack, pushcart, wagon or any other
vehicle or device used by a vendor for the display or dispensing of food or
beverages from a "site", as defined herein.
   TOWER PARK: The public park owned by the village of Peoria Heights located
in the southwest quadrant of the intersection of Prospect Road and Kingman
Avenue, together with any adjoining public rights of way and adjacent public
parking areas.
   VENDOR: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the selling or offering
for sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages on public property from a stand or
from his person by locating the same in a fixed location for a period of time
rather than by going from place to place within the village. (Ord. 2015-1451,
7-21-2015)
4-3B-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no vendor shall operate from
public property without having first received a license from the village
administrator. (Ord. 2015-1451, 7-21-2015)
4-3B-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; COMPETING APPLICATIONS:
   A.   An application for a license required by this article shall be
submitted in writing to the village administrator on a form prescribed by the
village administrator setting forth the following information:
      1.   The name of the individual or entity applying for the license. A
corporate applicant shall provide the names of its officers and directors;
      2.   The residence address, business address, telephone number and
driver's license number of the applicant or, in the case of a corporation, such
information regarding its officers and directors;
      3.   The type of food and beverages to be sold or offered for sale;
      4.   The site where the applicant proposes to sell food and beverages;
      5.   Whether the applicant has, within the last five (5) years, been
convicted of a criminal offense or ordinance violation (other than traffic or
parking offenses) in any jurisdiction and, if so, a list of such convictions
with the date and prosecuting jurisdiction;
      6.   The State of Illinois Sales Tax number demonstrating that the
applicant is registered for the collection and payment of Sales Tax to the
Illinois Department of Revenue; and
      7.   Evidence of compliance with article A of this chapter imposing a tax
on the privilege of purchasing food items or beverages.
   B.   Competing approvable applications for the same site shall be reviewed
and considered on a first come, first served basis. (Ord. 2015-1451, 7-21-2015)
4-3B-5: LICENSE FEE:
The applicant shall pay to the Village Treasurer, with the application, a
filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Should the Village Administrator
decline to issue a license in response to an application, the fee shall be
refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 2015-1451, 7-21-2015)
4-3B-6: BACKGROUND CHECK:
Upon receipt of a completed application, the Village Administrator shall cause
a copy thereof to be sent to the Chief of Police who shall conduct a conviction
information/criminal history background check through the Illinois State
Police. (Ord. 2015-1451, 7-21-2015)
4-3B-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon receipt of the completed background check from the Chief of Police, the
Village Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, issue a license to the
applicant unless he shall find:
   A.   That the applicant is under sixteen (16) years of age;
   B.   That the applicant was convicted within the last five (5) years of any
offense relating to theft, burglary or fraud;
   C.   That the site requested by the applicant is not proper for a vendor
under the terms of this article;
   D.   That the applicant has made a misrepresentation in its application; or
   E.   That the applicant cannot meet or has not met the requirements of this
article. (Ord. 2015-1451, 7-21-2015)
4-3B-8: TERM AND NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued during a calendar year shall expire on December 31 of such
calendar year regardless of the date issued. Licenses are not transferable.
(Ord. 2015-1451, 7-21-2015)
4-3B-9: LOCATION LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Not more than five (5) licenses shall be approved for a site within
Tower Park.
   B.   No site may be approved for a location within one hundred feet (100')
of the front entrance of any business licensed to sell food or beverages under
authority of article A of this chapter.
   C.   No license shall be issued for any site which, in the sole and
exclusive discretion of the Village Administrator, would unreasonably interfere
with the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or unreasonably interfere with
the operation of any existing business located within one hundred feet (100')
of the site. (Ord. 2018-1541, 2-6-2018)
4-3B-10: REGULATIONS:
All vendors issued a license under authority of this article shall operate in
accordance with the following regulations:
   A.   Vendors shall not sell or offer for sale food and beverages other than
at the site approved by the Village Administrator.
   B.   1. Vendors may engage in business from a site only from Monday through
Friday of each week between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and two
thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M.
      2.   Vendors shall not place stands on a site or elsewhere on public
property before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. from Monday through Friday and shall
promptly remove all stands and related material, merchandise and trash or
refuse from public property at the conclusion of business each day, but in no
event later than two thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M.
   C.   Vendors shall not at any time leave a stand unattended.
   D.   Vendors shall at all times maintain the site in a clean and sanitary
condition. All trash or refuse resulting from sales or activities of the vendor
shall be immediately picked up by the vendor and deposited in receptacles
maintained by the vendor. Vendors shall not dispose of trash or refuse in
public receptacles.
   E.   Vendors shall at all times operate in accordance with applicable local,
state or federal regulations including those governing food safety.
   F.   Vendors shall not sell or deliver alcoholic beverages from a site.
   G.   Vendors shall not deface, mar, mark, damage or destroy public property.
   H.   Vendors shall promptly remove all stains from cooking, wheels, spillage
or other causes.
   I.   Vendors shall place a protective pad under their stands to protect the
surface of public property.
   J.   Vendors shall timely pay all sales taxes due the Illinois department of
revenue and all food and beverage taxes due the village. (Ord. 2015-1451, 7-21-
2015)
4-3B-11: PROPERTY INTEREST IN SITES PROHIBITED; VILLAGE AUTHORITY REGARDING
VENDORS:
   A.   Vendors shall have no property rights in any site.
   B.   The village may any time, in its discretion, determine that it is no
longer appropriate for a vendor to operate from any particular site or
determine that vendors will no longer be allowed to operate from public
property. Based on any such determination, the village may any time, at its
option, revoke any license which has been issued under this article or decline
to issue a license for a subsequent calendar year. In the event that the
village exercises its option to revoke a license during a calendar year, the
fee paid by the licensee with respect to that calendar year shall be refunded
to the licensee. In any event, however, a licensee operating from a particular
site during a calendar year shall have first priority to reserve a license for
that same site during the following calendar year; provided, that the licensee
submits an approvable application between November 1 and December 1 of the year
for which the current license for that site is effective. (Ord. 2015-1451, 7-
21-2015)
4-3B-12: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
If the village president, after a hearing held by him or his designee, shall
find that any licensee has violated the provisions of this article, he may
suspend the license of the offender for a period of not more than thirty (30)
days or permanently revoke the license issued under the provisions of this
article. A licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be
held not less than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the
hearing has been mailed or personally delivered to the last known address of
the licensee. (Ord. 2015-1451, 7-21-2015)
4-3B-13: EXEMPTIONS:
Vendors registered with the sponsor of a public charitable or community event
approved by the village board of trustees shall be exempt from the application,
licensing and fee provisions of this article. (Ord. 2015-1451, 7-21-2015)
4-3B-14: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day that a violation continues. (Ord. 2015-1451, 7-21-2015;
amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 4
JUNK COLLECTORS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Registration Requirements
4-4-3: Hours For Junk Collection
4-4-4: Violation; Penalty
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   JUNK: Includes, but is not limited to, garbage, rubbish, refuse, which
includes any item, piece or part reduced in value or parts in order to
facilitate its discard and removal and disposal; which includes, but is not
limited to, combustible and noncombustible waste, cardboard, paper, plastics,
tin cans, glass, wood, bedding, crockery, iron, brass, automobile parts,
machinery parts, rubber tires, appliance parts and any other type of similar
material.
   JUNK COLLECTION: The removal of junk from any public place, street or alley
or at the curbside or on the property of any individual who has placed said
items on their private property for garbage collection in the village of Peoria
Heights.
   JUNK COLLECTOR: Any person engaged in junk collecting.
   PERSON: Any person or individual, or any employee of any entity,
corporation, partnership, LLC, or individual doing business under another name.
   PUBLIC PLACE: All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public
ways and all public square spaces, grounds and buildings in the village of
Peoria Heights. (Ord. 2011-1356, 12-6-2011)
4-4-2: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
All junk collectors shall be required to register with the village police
department in order to collect junk within the village. The following
information shall be furnished: proof of identification of the junk collector,
name and address, a current driver's license and driver's license number, and
current valid vehicle registration certificate, all of which must be presented
to the village police department at the time of registration in order to be
registered as a junk collector. All junk collectors must reregister every six
(6) months from the date of issuance of their initial registration. There is no
cost for junk registration. (Ord. 2011-1356, 12-6-2011; amd. 2016 Code)
4-4-3: HOURS FOR JUNK COLLECTION:
Hours of junk collection shall be only as follows:
   A.   From May 1 to October 31: Between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. every day; and
   B.   From November 1 to April 30: Between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. every day. (Ord. 2012-1363, 2-21-2012)
4-4-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in junk collection in violation of this
chapter. Any person engaged in junk collection without first having registered
as required in this chapter shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 2011-1356, 12-6-2011; amd. 2016
Code)
CHAPTER 5
TOBACCO DEALERS
SECTION:
4-5-1: License Required
4-5-2: Application For License
4-5-3: License Fee
4-5-4: Nontransferability Of License
4-5-5: License Applicable For One Location Only; Contents Of License
4-5-6: Display Of License
4-5-7: Violation; Penalty
4-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall hereafter keep for sale or give away or shall sell or give away
or offer to sell or give away any cigarettes, cigarette papers or wrappers and
tobacco products of any kind at any place within the village without first
having procured the license as herein provided. (Ord. 1172, 6-6-2000)
4-5-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for such license shall be made in writing to the village clerk,
signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent if a
club or corporation. (Ord. 1172, 6-6-2000)
4-5-3: LICENSE FEE:
   A.   Fee Established:
      1.   The fee for a license to sell cigarettes, cigarette papers or
wrappers and tobacco products in the village shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00) per annum for each location or place of business where such selling is
carried on.
      2.   Any person, firm or corporation who has not sold cigarettes,
cigarette papers or wrappers and tobacco products within the village prior to
making an application for a license between May 1 and November 1 shall be
required to pay the full annual license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. 1172, 6-6-2000; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Payment And Disposition Of Fee; Refunds:
      1.   All of the license fee shall be paid to the village clerk at the
time application is made, and shall be forthwith turned over to the village
treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be
returned to the applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee shall be
deposited in the general fund or in such other fund as has been designated by
the board of trustees by proper action.
      2.   No rebate or refund shall be given to any licensee who ceases to
engage in the sale of cigarettes, cigarette papers or wrappers and tobacco
products prior to the expiration of the year for which his/her license is
issued on account of the unexpired term of such license. (Ord. 1172, 6-6-2000)
4-5-4: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
No license to sell cigarettes, cigarette papers or wrappers and tobacco
products of any kind shall be assignable or transferable to any person, firm or
corporation by the licensee, and if any such license shall be assigned or
transferred, the same shall thereupon immediately become void. (Ord. 1172, 6-6-
2000; amd. 2016 Code)
4-5-5: LICENSE APPLICABLE FOR ONE LOCATION ONLY; CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Any license issued shall only be effective and valid for one particular
location or place of business; and the address of such location or place of
business shall appear plainly on the face of any such license, together with
the name of the licensee and the name, if any, of the business operated by the
licensee; otherwise, such license shall be void. (Ord. 1172, 6-6-2000)
4-5-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his license to be framed and kept in plain view in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 1172, 6-6-2000)
4-5-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during which or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1172, 6-6-
2000; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 6
SECONDHAND DEALERS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definition
4-6-2: License Required
4-6-3: Application For License
4-6-4: Bond Required
4-6-5: License Fee
4-6-6: Investigation Of Applicant
4-6-7: Conditions On Issuance Of License
4-6-8: Nontransferability Of License Or Stock
4-6-9: Posting License
4-6-10: Location Regulations
4-6-11: Closing Hours
4-6-12: Prohibited Purchases
4-6-13: Weapons Purchases Or Sales Prohibited
4-6-14: Records And Reports
4-6-15: Waiting Periods After Sales
4-6-16: Inspections; Property Seizures
4-6-17: Revocation Or Suspension Of License; Hearing
4-6-18: Exemptions
4-6-19: Penalties
4-6-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, a "secondhand dealer" is any person who operates a
business for profit and who buys, sells, possesses on consignment for sale or
trades jewelry, stamps, coins/currency, precious metals or stones which may
have been previously owned by a consumer; or who derives more than thirty five
percent (35%) of his gross receipts from the sale, consignment for sale, pledge
or trade of any goods, wares or merchandise which have previously been owned by
a consumer including, but not limited to, furniture, appliances, automobile
parts and accessories, metals, whether in bulk or manufactured state,
computers, computer parts or equipment, video/camera/stereo parts or equipment,
electronic video consoles and games, videos, music, musical instruments,
collectibles and memorabilia, sporting goods, bicycles, motorized tools/
vehicles, tools, collectible artwork, and firearms including their accessories
and ammunition. The term "secondhand dealer" shall include businesses commonly
known as pawnbrokers, swap shop operators, stamp dealers, coin dealers and
jewelers who purchase and resell items from persons other than dealers and
suppliers. The fact that any business does any of the following acts shall be
prima facie proof that such business is a secondhand dealership:
   A.   Advertises in any fashion that it buys or sells secondhand or used
items. Such advertisements shall include, but not be limited to, media
advertisements, telephone listings, and signs, whether on the exterior or
interior of the business.
   B.   Devotes a significant segment or section of the business premises to
the purchase or sale of secondhand or used items. (Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, either as owner, manager, lessee, officer or agent, or in any other
capacity, shall operate or permit to be operated a secondhand dealership
without first having obtained a license from the village to do so. (Ord. 2014-
1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license required by this chapter shall be made in writing
to the village president and shall set forth the following:
   A.   The name of the individual, partnership, corporation or association
applying for a license.
   B.   The residence, phone number, date of birth and driver's license number
of the applicant or partners; or if a corporation or association, the
residence, phone number and driver's license number of the officers and all
shareholders owning more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of
stock.
   C.   The location for which the license is requested.
   D.   Whether the applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders,
have been convicted of any criminal offense or ordinance violation (other than
traffic or parking offenses) in any jurisdiction and, if so, a list of such
convictions with date and prosecuting jurisdiction.
   E.   Whether the applicant, his partners, officers or listed shareholders,
have held a license or had an interest in a license issued by the village or
any other jurisdiction regulating the purchase or sale of secondhand property
revoked for cause and, if so, list the date of revocation and jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-4: BOND REQUIRED:
Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall file with the village a
license bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), approved by
the village administrator, with the village as obligee, conditioned upon the
faithful and due performance of the provisions of this chapter and the laws of
the state concerning the operation of the licensed business and the payment of
all fines and penalties by reason of the violation thereof. (Ord. 2014-1418,
11-4-2014; amd. 2016 Code)
4-6-5: LICENSE FEE:
   A.   The applicant for a license required by this chapter shall pay the
village treasurer, prior to filing an application, a nonrefundable license fee.
The fee for secondhand dealers established after the effective date hereof
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   B.   All secondhand dealer businesses established prior to the effective
date hereof shall be exempt from any and all fees but shall still be required
to register and obtain a license from the village.
   C.   All fees are per calendar year or part thereof, and license fees shall
not be prorated. (Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this chapter, the village
president shall cause a copy thereof to be sent to the police department and
the building inspector, each of which shall report back to the president within
twenty one (21) days whether the applicant and the proposed location of the
secondhand dealership is in accordance with applicable village codes. (Ord.
2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-7: CONDITIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon receipt of the report from the departments referred to in section
4-6-6 of this chapter, the village president shall issue the license requested
unless he shall find that:
   A.   The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18).
   B.   The location requested is not in a permanent structure.
   C.   The applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders have been
convicted of or have pled guilty to any offense related to theft, burglary, or
purchasing or receiving stolen items under the laws of the state, village or
any other jurisdiction within the past ten (10) years, or have forfeited a bond
to appear in court to answer for charges for such offenses during such time.
   D.   The location requested and structure to be used would not comply with
all applicable laws including the zoning ordinance of the village.
   E.   The applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders have held
a license or had an interest in a license issued by the village or any other
jurisdiction regulating the purchase or sale of secondhand property which was
revoked for cause.
   F.   The applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders have
knowingly furnished false or misleading information or withheld relevant
information on any application for a license required by this chapter or any
investigation into any application. (Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-8: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE OR STOCK:
   A.   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred to any other
person.
   B.   No corporate licensee shall permit any transfer of its stock which
would vest in aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock outstanding in
such corporation in any shareholder unless such shareholder has been certified
by the village administrator as meeting the requirements of section
4-6-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-9: POSTING LICENSE:
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall, at all times
during the period for which it is effective, be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the principal entrance to the premises for which the license is
issued. (Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-10: LOCATION REGULATIONS:
No licensee shall carry on any business required to be licensed under this
chapter except at the location designated on the license. Should the licensee
wish to change the location, application shall be made to the village president
for such change in writing. The president shall approve the change of location
unless the new location would be contrary to the provisions of this chapter or
any other ordinances of the village. (Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-11: CLOSING HOURS:
No licensee shall purchase any goods, wares, articles or things whatsoever from
any person between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. the next day. (Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-12: PROHIBITED PURCHASES:
No licensee under this chapter shall purchase or accept any goods, wares,
articles or things under any of the following circumstances:
   A.   Where the seller is less than the age of eighteen (18).
   B.   Where the seller is intoxicated.
   C.   Where the seller fails to present a valid and current identification
government issued ID containing the seller's full legal name, date of birth,
address, photograph, and an identification number.
   D.   Where the article to be purchased had an original manufacturer's serial
number at the time it was new but no longer legibly exhibits such number.
   E.   Where the licensee or its employee or agent knows or reasonably should
have known that the items are stolen or otherwise illegal to possess. (Ord.
2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-13: WEAPONS PURCHASES OR SALES PROHIBITED:
No licensee shall deal in, or buy or sell or display in his shop, any pistol,
revolver, derringer, bowie knife, dirk or other deadly weapon of like
character, capable of being secreted upon the person, unless such licensee
shall also possess a valid and current license as provided under some other
legal authority. (Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-14: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
   A.   Record Of Purchases:
      1.   Every licensee shall keep at the licensed location a register on
multicopy forms provided by the chief of police in which shall be accurately
entered all of the following information:
         a.   A succinct and accurate description of all property taken
(excluding junk/scrap), purchased or received in the course of the business
licensed under this article including:
            (1)   Type of article.
            (2)   Brand name/make/manufacturer.
            (3)   Model number.
            (4)   Serial number.
            (5)   Color/finish.
            (6)   Any other identifying marks, writings, engravings, etc.
         b.   Clear photograph of any property using LeadsOnline cameras.
         c.   Seller's full legal name, date of birth, and address. Also
required is a color copy or photograph of a valid and current government issued
photo ID containing the aforementioned information.
         d.   The amount given or loaned to such person and the terms thereof.
         e.   The signature of the employee who received the property.
         f.   A signed statement of the person from whom the property was
obtained affirming that he is over eighteen (18) years of age and lawful owner
of the property which is clear of all attachments.
      2.   Entries made in the register shall be printed or typed and shall be
legible. All entries shall be made immediately upon receipt or purchase of any
property. The register shall be open to inspection by any law enforcement
officer during the performance of their duties during normal hours of
operation.
      3.   a. Effective January 1, 2015, all licensees are required to use the
LeadsOnline system for keeping records under this chapter. The chief of police
shall provide information on obtaining the software and hardware necessary for
this purpose.
         b.   All licensees shall subscribe to and participate in
"leadsonline.com", the current software based tracking system approved by the
chief of police. Any article deposited, pawned or pledged shall be entered into
leadsonline.com and downloaded into the database within twelve (12) hours of
receipt of the article. LeadsOnline may be substituted in the future at the
discretion of the chief, however substitution shall be made with ample notice
to licensees to allow for compliance.
   B.   Reports To Chief Of Police; Exemptions:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every licensee under this article to (upon
request) have available for delivery to the chief of police or designee a
legible, correct, and complete copy of the register for the period of time as
specified.
      2.   No person shall be required to furnish such description of any new
property purchased from manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an
established place of business, or of any goods purchased at open sale, or from
a bankrupt stock. Such goods must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other
evidence of open and legitimate purchase and must be shown to the chief of
police and members of the police department, when demanded. (Ord. 2014-1418,
11-4-2014)
4-6-15: WAITING PERIODS AFTER SALES:
The licensee under this chapter shall keep all property purchased or received
from an individual available for inspection for the period of time as
prescribed below before it can be sold, traded, or discarded. Licensees may
advertise, display, and sell items during their respective waiting periods but
they must remain on the licensed premises until the waiting period expires.
Gold and silver commodities identified in subsection B2 of this section may be
sold or disposed of after seven (7) days. However, in the event the items are
determined to be stolen and the owner is identified within fourteen (14) days
of the date of receipt by the dealer, the dealer shall make the owner whole for
the total fair market value of the items.
   A.   Fourteen (14) day waiting period:
      1.   All items with serial numbers or other identifying markings/
engravings (excluding appliances).
      2.   Memorabilia/collectibles (i.e., autographed items, sports cards,
collectible stamps, figurines, etc.).
      3.   Collectible artwork (numbered prints, sculptures, etc.).
      4.   Jewelry (precious metals, gemstones, etc., excluding costume
jewelry).
      5.   Collectible currency/collectible coins.
      6.   Musical instruments.
      7.   Automobile wheels/rims.
   B.   Seven (7) day waiting period:
      1.   Appliances.
      2.   Gold/silver and other precious metal coins, bars, etc., valued only
as commodities, not otherwise uniquely identifiable or collectible.
      3.   All other items not specified in this section.
   C.   No waiting period required (only below items lacking serial numbers or
other identifying markings/engravings):
      1.   Video games.
      2.   Music (CDs, cassettes, records, etc.).
      3.   Movies (DVDs, tapes, etc.).
      4.   Furniture.
      5.   Sporting goods.
      6.   Tools. (Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-16: INSPECTIONS; PROPERTY SEIZURES:
Every licensee under this article and every person employed by the licensee in
the conduct of business shall admit to any and every part of the premises
designated in the license, during normal business hours, any law enforcement
officer of the village, county or state to examine any goods, articles, things,
pledges, pawns, or books or other records on the premises dealing with purchase
or sale of used property and to search for and to take into possession any
article known or for which he has reasonable grounds to believe to have been
stolen. Such law enforcement officer may make any such search or seizure as is
provided for in this section, and property so seized shall be receipted for by
such officer who shall adequately describe the seized property and sign the
receipt. Should the officer determine the property not to be stolen, he shall
promptly return same to the licensee. (Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-17: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; HEARING:
   A.   Any license issued for a secondhand dealer under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days by the
president if he shall find, after hearing:
      1.   That the licensee, its officers, agents or employees have violated
any of the provisions of this chapter, the laws of the state, or other
ordinances of the village in the operation of the business;
      2.   That the licensee, its partners, officers or shareholders have been
convicted of any offense set forth in subsection
4-6-7C of this chapter; or
      3.   That the licensee, its partners, officers or shareholders have
knowingly furnished false or misleading information or withheld relevant
information on any application for a license required by this chapter or any
investigation into any application.
   B.   The licensee shall be responsible for the acts of its agents, servants
and employees in the operation of the business. Prior to holding a hearing
concerning the questions of whether a license shall be revoked or suspended,
the village president shall give at least ten (10) days' written notice to the
licensee specifically describing the alleged violation. The licensee may
present evidence and cross examine witnesses at such hearing. (Ord. 2014-1418,
11-4-2014)
4-6-18: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
   A.   Garage sales.
   B.   Sales conducted by governmental, civic, patriotic, fraternal,
educational, religious or benevolent organizations which have been in active
and continuous existence for at least one year prior to the holding of the
sale, or which are incorporated as not for profit corporations by the state.
   C.   Sales or purchases which are regulated by the licensing laws of the
state, including automobile dealers, used parts dealers and automotive parts
recyclers.
   D.   Consumer shows, or exhibitions of collectibles holding a license
pursuant to any other license issued by the village.
   E.   Sales or trades of used books between a customer and owner of a used
bookstore. (Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014)
4-6-19: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. In addition to the penalty set forth
herein, the village retains the right to suspend or revoke the license for a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or state or federal laws.
(Ord. 2014-1418, 11-4-2014; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 7
PEDDLERS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Definitions
4-7-2: License Required; Expiration
4-7-3: Application For License
4-7-4: License Fee
4-7-5: Background Check; Ineligibility For License
4-7-6: Nontransferability Of License
4-7-7: Possession Of License Required
4-7-8: Restrictions On Peddlers
4-7-9: Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Hearing
4-7-10: Exemptions
4-7-11: Penalty
4-7-12: Sales Of Food Items From Non-Motorized Carts
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning is intended:
   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: Any bona fide charitable, educational, fraternal,
labor, religious, or veterans' organization that operates without profit to its
members and which has been in existence continuously for a period of five (5)
years or more immediately before making application for a license and which has
had, during the entire five (5) year period, a bona fide membership engaged in
carrying out its objectives. If the organization has an exemption under section
501(c) of the internal revenue code, the five (5) year requirement is waived.
   PEDDLER: Every person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter or exchange,
at retail, any goods, wares or merchandise by traveling from place to place in,
along and upon the streets, avenues, alleys or public thoroughfares of the
village; or who shall sell and deliver from any vehicle goods, wares or
merchandise, by going from place to place in the village, whether to regular
customers or not; or who shall sell and deliver goods, wares or merchandise
from any vehicle parked on public property. The term shall also mean every
person who moves from house to house or from place to place in the village
selling or taking orders for goods, wares, subscriptions or merchandise for
future delivery. (Ord. 2015-1449, 7-15-2015)
4-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXPIRATION:
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to transact any business within the
village without first having obtained a license therefor. All peddler's
licenses shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which the license
was issued. (Ord. 2015-1449, 7-15-2015)
4-7-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a peddler's license shall be made in writing to the village
administrator and shall set forth the following:
   A.   The name of the individual applying for the license.
   B.   The residence, telephone number and driver's license number of the
applicant.
   C.   The address of the principal place of business of the applicant and the
applicant's telephone number.
   D.   If the applicant is employed by another person or entity, the name of
the employer, its address and telephone number.
   E.   A state of Illinois sales tax number or other evidence that the
business is registered with the state department of revenue.
   F.   An applicant engaged in the sale of food or beverages shall demonstrate
compliance with chapter 3, article A of this title imposing a tax on the
privilege of purchasing food items or alcoholic beverages. Any such applicant
issued a peddler's license shall comply with all applicable provisions of
chapter 3, article A of this title. (Ord. 2015-1449, 7-15-2015)
4-7-4: LICENSE FEE:
Each applicant for a peddler's license under this chapter shall pay to the
village treasurer, with the application, a fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) per calendar year or part thereof. Should the application be denied,
the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 2015-1449, 7-15-2015)
4-7-5: BACKGROUND CHECK; INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
Upon receipt of an application, the village administrator shall submit the
application to the chief of police. Upon receipt of the application from the
village administrator, the chief of police shall conduct a conviction
information/criminal history background check through the Illinois state
police. The chief of police shall issue a license to an eligible applicant
within seven (7) days after receipt of the results of the background check from
the Illinois state police; provided, however, no such license shall be issued
to an applicant whose conviction information/criminal history background check
results indicate, or if the chief of police otherwise obtains information
indicating, the applicant has been convicted of:
   A.   A felony or any offense which, if committed in the state of Illinois,
would have been a felony;
   B.   A sex offense for which the applicant is required to register as a sex
offender; or
   C.   An offense involving fraud or deceit. (Ord. 2015-1449, 7-15-2015)
4-7-6: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
No license issued under the authority of this chapter shall be transferable.
(Ord. 2015-1449, 7-15-2015)
4-7-7: POSSESSION OF LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person licensed pursuant to this chapter shall, at all times while engaged
in the activities regulated by this chapter, keep said license in his or her
possession and shall display the same upon the demand of any police officer or
upon the request of any person whose premises he seeks to enter. (Ord. 2015-
1449, 7-15-2015)
4-7-8: RESTRICTIONS ON PEDDLERS:
   A.   Departure Required Upon Request: It is unlawful for any peddler to
enter or remain upon private premises in disregard of the expressed wish of the
owner or occupant of such premises or to enter into a private residence or
other privately owned or occupied building without the express consent of the
owner or occupant of such residence or building.
   B.   Compliance With Sign Prohibiting Peddling: It shall be unlawful for any
peddler to enter upon any premises or to in any way disturb or attempt to gain
the attention of the owner or occupant of any premises if a sign having
dimensions of not less than three inches by five inches (3" x 5") which states
"No Peddlers Allowed" or other words of similar substance has been posted at a
conspicuous location near the front entrance to the premises.
   C.   Prohibited Hours: It shall be unlawful for any peddler to transact the
business of a "peddler", as defined by this chapter, between the hours of six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. on one day and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on the following
day.
   D.   Transactions From Parked Vehicles: Whenever a peddler engages in the
activities of a peddler from a vehicle parked on a public street, the vehicle
shall be stopped at the right hand curb of the street or at the extreme right
and edge of a pavement. No business shall be transacted from any vehicle except
from the curbside thereof. Nothing in this subsection shall allow any peddler
to park a vehicle in violation of any applicable local or state law or
regulation. (Ord. 2015-1449, 7-15-2015)
4-7-9: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING:
If the village president, after a hearing held by him, shall find that any
person has wilfully violated the provisions of this chapter, he may suspend or
revoke the license issued hereunder. The licensee shall have an opportunity to
be heard at such hearing to be held not less than five (5) days after notice of
the time and place of the hearing, addressed by the president or his designee
and mailed or personally delivered to the last known address of the licensee.
(Ord. 2015-1449, 7-15-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
4-7-10: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The following shall be exempt from the application and license
requirements imposed by this chapter:
      1.   Persons engaged in the sale of or solicitation to purchase
newspapers, magazines, books and other printed materials;
      2.   Persons seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing
or other valuable things for the support or benefit of any charitable,
religious, political or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or
project;
      3.   Any person seeking to proselytize beliefs by any charitable,
religious, political or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or
project; or
      4.   Nonprofit organizations; provided, however, that the organization
provides documentation to the chief of police sufficient to demonstrate that it
qualifies as a "nonprofit organization" as defined in this chapter.
   B.   Persons exempt from the application and license requirements under the
provisions of this section shall nevertheless be subject to the remaining
provisions of this chapter including, without limitation, those sections
requiring departure from private property upon the request of the owner or
occupant, disturbing or attempting to gain the attention of the owner or
occupant of any premises with a sign indicating that no peddlers are allowed
and the limitation on the hours during which business may be transacted. (Ord.
2015-1449, 7-15-2015)
4-7-11: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day that a violation continues. (Ord. 2015-1449, 7-15-2015;
amd. 2016 Code)
4-7-12: SALES OF FOOD ITEMS FROM NON-MOTORIZED CARTS:
For purposes of this section
4-7-12, a “Pushcart” is any non-motorized vehicle from which food sales are
made. It shall be unlawful to engage in sales from a Pushcart without a valid
peddler's license pursuant to Section
4-7-2 of this code. No peddler engaging in sales from a pushcart may stand in a
stationary position on public property except when actually engaged in the
transaction of a sale of food items from the pushcart. Peddler's wishing to
engage in stationary sales at a public event on public property may do so only
with written permission granted by the Village Administrator. (Ord. 2021-1659,
7-20-2021)
CHAPTER 8
PEDAL BUSES AND PEDICABS
ARTICLE A. PEDAL BUSES
SECTION:
4-8A-1: Purpose
4-8A-2: Definitions
4-8A-3: License Required
4-8A-4: Condition Of Pedal Bus; Inspections
4-8A-5: Pedal Bus Driver Requirements
4-8A-6: Rates
4-8A-7: Rules And Regulations
4-8A-8: Pedal Bus Operation
4-8A-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to regulate the operation of pedal buses as a means of
group transportation within the village in order to promote safety for pedal
bus passengers as well as to promote safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 2019-1604, 9-17-2019)
4-8A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms when used in this chapter shall have the indicated meanings
unless the use or context clearly indicates another meaning is intended:
 
                            Any single-unit device upon which any person may
                            ride, propelled by human power through a belt,
                            chain, or gears, having four (4) or more wheels,
PEDAL BUS:                  and designed and constructed in such a manner as to
                            engage in the business of carrying groups of
                            passengers for hire as agreed by pre-arranged
                            contract.
                            The business of operating a pedal bus for the
PEDAL BUS BUSINESS:         recreational or physical transportation of groups
                            of the general public as agreed by pre-arranged
                            contract.
PEDAL BUS DRIVER:           The person in actual physical control of the pedal
                            bus.
PEDAL BUS BUSINESS LICENSE: A license granted in accordance with this chapter.
OPERATOR:                   The owner of a business that provides pedal bus
                            services. (Ord. 2019-1604, 9-17-2019)
 
4-8A-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all pedal buses
and to the drivers and operators of such pedal buses within the corporate
limits of the village. Every pedal bus business shall register with the village
and obtain a license before conducting any such business within the village.
   B.   Each license issued under this chapter shall expire April 30 of the
fiscal year for which such license was issued. The fee for licenses shall be
five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. Licenses issued during the fiscal year
shall be subject to prorated license fees.
   C.   Application: A verified application for a pedal bus business license
shall be made in writing by the owner or manager of the pedal bus to the
village administrator or her/his designee upon forms furnished by the village.
The application shall include the following information as applicable:
      1.   The full name of the applicant (if a firm or corporation, provide
names, telephone numbers and addresses of the president, secretary and
treasurer);
      2.   The applicant's residence (local and permanent) address;
      3.   The full name and intended place of business, the telephone number
of the business, and the owner and/or manager;
      4.   The number of pedal buses to be operated, a complete description of
each pedal bus to be used, pictures clearly depicting all four (4) sides of
each unit to be operated, the seating capacity thereof according to its trade
rating, the company assigned number for each unit (if any), the body style, and
the color;
      5.   Insurance certificates; and
       6.   Signature of applicant.
   D.   Issuance:
      1.   The village administrator or her/his designee is authorized to issue
a license to any qualified applicant for the operation of a pedal bus business.
The license shall contain a distinguishing number, full name of the person
owning such pedal bus business, and his/her business address.
      2.   The pedal bus business license shall be non-assignable and
nontransferable.
      3.   The pedal bus business shall carry a copy of said license aboard
each pedal bus unit at all times and shall present it for inspection upon the
request of any passenger or law enforcement officer.
      4.   Whenever an owner/manager of a pedal bus business has lost or
destroyed his/her license, he/she shall submit an affidavit in writing to the
village administrator or her/his designee, stating that the license has been
lost or destroyed. The village administrator or her/his designee shall issue a
duplicate copy or substitute thereof upon payment of a fee in the amount of
twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      5.   The village shall issue no more than one (1) license to a pedal bus
business before April 30, 2023; provided, however that the village shall offer
licenses to additional pedal bus business operators in the event the sole
licensee operates a pedal bus business outside of the village but within twenty
five (25) miles of the Peoria Heights Village Hall.
   E.   Licensees shall report any change in information furnished in the
application for a pedal bus business license pursuant to this division to the
village administrator or her/his designee in writing within ten (10) days of
the change. Failure to so report shall be cause for suspension or revocation of
the license.
   F.   Renewal: If a pedal bus business license holder wants to renew their
license so that the renewal takes effect immediately upon the expiration of the
prior annual license, such license holder must submit the renewal application
prior to April 15. Applications for renewal submitted after April 15 shall
incur a late fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), plus a per diem late fee in
the amount of five dollars ($5.00) per day for each day after April 15 that the
application is submitted. If the late fee is not paid prior to issuance of the
renewed license, the existing license shall lapse as of midnight April 30.
   G.   Suspension Or Revocation:
      1.   The village administrator may initiate suspension and/or revocation
proceedings for a license issued under this chapter for any of the following:
         a.   Violation of any ordinance provisions regulating a license of a
pedal bus business or any other provisions of the village code;
         b.   Knowingly allowing any individual to operate or drive a pedal bus
with a driver's license that is suspended or revoked under the Illinois Vehicle
Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.).
      2.   Any person whose business license has been revoked shall immediately
return every such license to the village administrator. (Ord. 2019-1604, 9-17-
2019)
4-8A-4: CONDITION OF PEDAL BUS; INSPECTIONS:
   A.   No license to engage in the business of driving a pedal bus shall be
issued unless:
      1.   The pedal bus is equipped with seats for the driver and all
passengers;
      2.   The pedal bus provides a hood or cover to protect passengers from
the elements;
      3.   The pedal bus is equipped with hydraulic or mechanical disc brakes,
a battery-operated or generator-operated headlight and taillight, both front
and rear turn signals, tires, and bell or horn;
      4.   The pedal bus has been inspected and found by the village
administrator or her/his designee to be in clean, sanitary, safe and good
mechanical condition for the transportation of passengers; and
      5.   A written certificate of the inspection required by this section is
filed with the village administrator or her/his designee.
   B.   Every pedal bus in operation shall be inspected at the beginning of the
license year to determine if such pedal bus meets the requirements of this
chapter. The inspection required may be conducted by the village or by such
duly qualified persons as the village administrator may direct.
   C.   Additional inspections may be required as often as the apparent
condition of the pedal bus warrants.
   D.   All pedal buses shall have the name of the pedal bus business as
provided to the village administrator or her/his designee in visible lettering
at least three (3) inches in height painted conspicuously upon the pedal bus
unit.
   E.   It shall be unlawful to operate a pedal bus that is wider than eighty-
four (84) inches at its widest point.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, or cause to be driven, a
pedal bus that is not in good working order. (Ord. 2019-1604, 9-17-2019)
4-8A-5: PEDAL BUS DRIVER REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall drive a pedal bus or be permitted to do so if they are not:
   A.   A duly licensed driver in the State of Illinois;
   B.   Familiar with local traffic laws and ordinances; and
   C.   The age of nineteen (19) years or older. (Ord. 2019-1604, 9-17-2019)
4-8A-6: RATES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a pedal bus to charge a
passenger a fare that was not agreed upon with the passenger in advance through
a pre-arranged contract.
   B.   A copy of said contract must be present with the pedal bus driver for
the duration of each group's reservation. (Ord. 2019-1604, 9-17-2019)
4-8A-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Proof Of Insurance Or Bond: No pedal bus business shall provide pedal
bus service unless such pedal bus is covered by a bond or an insurance policy
or other proof of general liability insurance in the minimum amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person, two million dollars ($2,000,000.00)
per incident, and one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) for property damage.
Evidence of such coverage shall be filed with the village administrator prior
to the issuance of any pedal bus business license.
   B.   No driver or other employee of a pedal bus business shall imitate the
name, colors, or emblems, previously adopted and in use by any other pedal bus
business or represent him/herself as an employee of any other pedal bus
business.
   C.   No person shall knowingly permit any pedal bus to be used in the
perpetration of a crime.
   D.   Every driver of a pedal bus shall obey all traffic rules established by
statute or ordinance.
   E.   No pedal bus driver shall exceed the rated seating capacity of the
pedal bus.
   F.   No passenger shall be allowed to ride the pedal bus except in the
designated seating area.
   G.   Pedal buses licensed under this chapter shall not operate or permit the
operation of any sound amplification system that creates noise that is audible
more than twenty (20) feet from the pedal bus.
   H.   Alcohol Possession And Consumption:
      1.   No pedal bus operator or driver shall provide an alcoholic beverage
to a passenger for a fee or as part of the passenger transport service.
      2.   No pedal bus operator or driver shall provide or stock any alcoholic
beverage in the pedal bus.
      3.   Alcoholic beverages may be consumed by a pedal bus passenger under
the following conditions:
         a.   No glassware of any kind shall be allowed for consumption of
alcoholic liquor on a pedal bus. This prohibition includes, but is not limited
to, bottles, receptacles, or drinking glasses. Glass bottles or containers may
be used solely by the pedal bus operator or its employees for the exclusive
purpose of uncorking, pouring, serving, or otherwise controlling the
consumption of alcoholic liquor.
         b.   Alcoholic beverages as described in this section may be consumed
only from plastic or foam cups.
         c.   Alcoholic beverages as described in this section may be consumed
only when the passenger is in or on a pedal bus and only when otherwise
permitted by all applicable state laws and regulations.
         d.   The pedal bus operator and driver may not allow consumption of
alcoholic beverages by persons under the age of twenty-one (21). (Ord. 2019-
1604, 9-17-2019)
4-8A-8: PEDAL BUS OPERATION:
   A.   No pedal bus driver shall transport passengers while using a wireless
device unless said pedal bus is not in motion.
   B.   No pedal bus shall be driven in weather conditions that pose an
unreasonable safety risk to the driver or passengers of the pedal bus, or to
motorists or pedestrians.
   C.   For the purposes of immediately loading and unloading passengers, a
pedal bus may remain standing upon a street if the pedal bus is in any legal
parking stall, designated loading zone, or any other location that does not
impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   D.   No pedal bus shall be left unattended by the pedal bus driver unless
legally parked in a legal parking stall.
   E.   No pedal bus driver shall operate a pedal bus on a street with a posted
speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or greater, except for the
purpose of crossing that street.
   F.   No pedal bus driver, while driving a pedal bus, shall stop on a street
with a posted speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or greater in
order to pick up or drop off passengers.
   G.   No pedal bus driver shall drive a pedal bus on a sidewalk.
   H.   No pedal bus driver shall drive a pedal bus in a way that obstructs the
flow of pedestrian traffic, except for the time period necessary to pick up or
drop off passengers.
   I.   Route Restrictions: Pedal bus operation shall be limited to the
following streets:
      1.   North Prospect Road;
      2.   East Paris Avenue;
      3.   North Boulevard Avenue;
      4.   East Lake Avenue; and
      5.   Grandview Drive; provided that the Peoria Park District provides
written consent to the pedal bus business to operate thereon. (Ord. 2019-1604,
9-17-2019)
ARTICLE B. PEDICABS
SECTION:
4-8B-1: Purpose
4-8B-2: Definitions
4-8B-3: License Required
4-8B-4: Condition Of Pedicab; Inspections
4-8B-5: Pedicab Driver Requirements
4-8B-6: Rates
4-8B-7: Rules And Regulations
4-8B-8: Pedicab Operation
4-8B-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to regulate the operation of pedicabs as a means of
transportation within the Village in order to promote safety for pedicab
passengers as well as to promote safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic. (Ord.
2020-1635, 10-6-2020)
4-8B-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms when used in this chapter shall have the indicated meanings
unless the use or context clearly indicates another meaning is intended:
 
                          A bicycle that has three (3) or more wheels that
                          transports, or is capable of transporting, passengers
                          on seats attached to the bicycle that is operated by
                          an individual, and that is used for transporting
                          passengers for receipt of any form of consideration;
PEDICAB:                  or a bicycle with a singular unarticulated frame,
                          that pulls a device that transports, or is capable of
                          transporting, passengers on seats attached to a
                          passenger cab or similar device, that is operated by
                          an individual, and that is used for transporting
                          passengers for receipt of any form of consideration.
                          The business of operating a pedicab for the
PEDICAB BUSINESS:         recreational or physical transportation of the
                          general public as agreed by pre-arranged contract.
PEDICAB BUSINESS LICENSE: A license granted in accordance with this chapter.
PEDICAB DRIVER:           The person in actual physical control of the pedicab.
OPERATOR:                 The owner of a business that provides pedicab
                          services. (Ord. 2020-1635, 10-6-2020)
 
4-8B-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all pedicabs and
to the drivers and operators of such pedicabs within the corporate limits of
the Village of Peoria Heights. Every pedicab business shall register with the
Village and obtain a license before conducting any such business within the
Village.
   B.   Each license issued under this chapter shall expire April 30 of the
fiscal year for which such license was issued. The fee for licenses shall be
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. Licenses issued during the fiscal
year shall be subject to prorated license fees.
   C.   Application: A verified application for a pedicab business license
shall be made in writing by the owner or manager of the pedicab to the Village
Administrator or her/his designee upon forms furnished by the Village. The
application shall include the following information as applicable:
      1.   The full name of the applicant (if a firm or corporation, provide
names, telephone numbers and addresses of the president, secretary and
treasurer);
      2.   The applicant's residence (local and permanent) address;
      3.   The full name and intended place of business, the telephone number
of the business, and the owner and/or manager;
      4.   The number of pedicabs to be operated, a complete description of
each pedicab to be used, pictures clearly depicting all four (4) sides of each
unit to be operated, the seating capacity thereof according to its trade
rating, the company assigned number for each unit (if any), the body style, and
the color;
      5.   Insurance certificates; and
      6.   Signature of applicant.
   D.   Issuance.
      1.   The Village Administrator or her/his designee is authorized to issue
a license to any qualified applicant for the operation of a pedicab business.
The license shall contain a distinguishing number, full name of the person
owning such pedicab business, and his/her business address.
      2.   The pedicab business license shall be non-assignable and
nontransferable.
      3.   The pedicab business shall carry a copy of said license aboard each
pedicab unit at all times and shall present it for inspection upon the request
of any passenger or law enforcement officer.
      4.   Whenever an owner/manager of a pedicab business has lost or
destroyed his/her license, he/she shall submit an affidavit in writing to the
Village Administrator or her/his designee, stating that the license has been
lost or destroyed. The Village Administrator or her/his designee shall issue a
duplicate copy or substitute thereof upon payment of a fee in the amount of
twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   E.   Licensees shall report any change in information furnished in the
application for a pedicab business license pursuant to this division to the
Village Administrator or her/his designee in writing within ten (10) days of
the change. Failure to so report shall be cause for suspension or revocation of
the license.
   F.   Renewal: If a pedicab business license holder wants to renew their
license so that the renewal takes effect immediately upon the expiration of the
prior annual license, such license holder must submit the renewal application
prior to April 15. Applications for renewal submitted after April 15 shall
incur a late fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00), plus a per diem late fee in
the amount of five dollars ($5.00) per day for each day after April 15 that the
application is submitted. If the late fee is not paid prior to issuance of the
renewed license, the existing license shall lapse as of midnight April 30.
   G.   Suspension or revocation.
      1.   The Village Administrator may initiate suspension and/or revocation
proceedings for a license issued under this chapter for any of the following:
         a.   Violation of any ordinance provisions regulating a license of a
pedicab business or any other provisions of the Peoria Heights Village Code;
         b.   Knowingly allowing any individual to operate or drive a pedicab
with a driver's license that is suspended or revoked under the Illinois Vehicle
Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.).
      2.   Any person whose business license has been revoked shall immediately
return every such license to the Village Administrator. (Ord. 2020- 1635, 10-6-
2020)
4-8B-4: CONDITION OF PEDICAB; INSPECTIONS:
   A.   No license to engage in the business of driving a pedicab shall be
issued unless:
      1.   The pedicab is equipped with seats for the driver and all
passengers;
      2.   The pedicab is equipped with hydraulic or mechanical disc brakes, a
battery-operated or generator-operated headlight and taillight, both front and
rear turn signals, tires, and bell or horn;
      3.   The pedicab has been inspected and found by the Village
Administrator or her/his designee to be in clean, sanitary, safe and good
mechanical condition for the transportation of passengers; and
      4.   A written certificate of the inspection required by this section is
filed with the Village Administrator or her/his designee.
   B.   Every pedicab in operation shall be inspected at the beginning of the
license year to determine if such pedicab meets the requirements of this
chapter. The inspection required may be conducted by the Village or by such
duly qualified persons as the Village Administrator may direct.
   C.   Additional inspections may be required as often as the apparent
condition of the pedicab warrants.
   D.   All pedicabs shall have the name of the pedicab business as provided to
the Village Administrator or her/his designee in visible lettering painted
conspicuously upon the pedicab unit.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, or cause to be driven, a
pedicab that is not in good working order. (Ord. 2020-1635, 10-6-2020)
4-8B-5: PEDICAB DRIVER REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall drive a pedicab or be permitted to do so if they are not:
   A.   A duly licensed driver in the State of Illinois;
   B.   Familiar with local traffic laws and ordinances;
   C.   The age of nineteen (19) years or older. (Ord. 2020-1635, 10-6-2020)
4-8B-6: RATES:
Each pedicab shall clearly post rates within the pedicab. (Ord. 2020-1635, 10-
6-2020)
4-8B-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Proof of insurance or bond. No pedicab business shall provide pedicab
service unless such pedicab is covered by a bond or an insurance policy or
other proof of general liability insurance in the minimum amount of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person, two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per
incident, and one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) for property damage. Evidence
of such coverage shall be filed with the Village Administrator prior to the
issuance of any pedicab business license.
   B.   No driver or other employee of a pedicab business shall imitate the
name, colors, or emblems, previously adopted and in use by any another pedicab
business or represent him/herself as an employee of any other pedicab business.
   C.   No person shall knowingly permit any pedicab to be used in the
perpetration of a crime.
   D.   Every driver of a pedicab shall obey all traffic rules established by
statute or ordinance.
   E.   No pedicab driver shall exceed the rated seating capacity of the
pedicab.
   F.   No passenger shall be allowed to ride the pedicab except in the
designated seating area.
   G.   Pedicabs licensed under this chapter shall not operate or permit the
operation of any sound amplification system that creates noise that is audible
more than twenty (20) feet from the pedicab.
   H.   Alcoholic beverages may not be consumed on a pedicab. (Ord. 2020-1635,
10-6-2020)
4-8B-8: PEDICAB OPERATION:
   A.   No pedicab driver shall transport passengers while using a wireless
device unless said Pedicab is not in motion.
   B.   No pedicab shall be driven in weather conditions that pose an
unreasonable safety risk to the driver or passengers of the pedicab, or to
motorists or pedestrians.
   C.   For the purposes of immediately loading and unloading passengers, a
pedicab may remain standing upon a street if the pedicab is in any legal
parking stall, designated loading zone, or any other location that does not
impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   D.   No pedicab shall be left unattended by the pedicab driver unless
legally parked in a legal parking stall.
   E.   No pedicab driver shall operate a pedicab on a street with a posted
speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or greater, except for the
purpose of crossing that street.
   F.   No Pedicab driver, while driving a Pedicab, shall stop on a street with
a posted speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or greater in order to
pick up or drop off passengers.
   G.   No pedicab driver shall drive a pedicab on a sidewalk.
   H.   No pedicab driver shall drive a pedicab in a way that obstructs the
flow of pedestrian traffic, except for the time period necessary to pick up or
drop off passengers.
   I.   Route restrictions: Pedicab operation shall be limited to the following
streets:
      1.   North Prospect Road;
      2.   East Paris Avenue;
      3.   North Boulevard Avenue;
      4.   East Lake Avenue; and
      5.   Grandview Drive; provided that the Peoria Park District provides
written consent to the pedicab business to operate thereon. (Ord. 2020-1635,
10-6-2020)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
4-9-1: Definitions
4-9-2: Tax Imposed; Rate
4-9-3: Collection Of Tax By Recreational Cannabis Retailers
4-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/
1-1 et seq.), as may be amended from time to time, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. (Ord. 2019-1606, 9-17-2019)
4-9-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling adult-use, recreational cannabis at retail in the village at the rate
of 3.0% of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that
business. Such tax shall not apply to sales of cannabis that are made pursuant
to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et
seq.) as may be amended from time to time.
   B.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Illinois Municipal Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax Law, as set forth in
Section 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22), as amended
from time to time. (Ord. 2019-1606, 9-17-2019)
4-9-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RECREATIONAL CANNABIS RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be remitted by such retailer to
the Illinois Department of Revenue. Any tax required to be collected pursuant
to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such retailer
and required to be remitted to the Illinois Department of Revenue shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State of Illinois. Retailers may
reimburse themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately
stating that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in
combination, in a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required
to collect.
   B.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois
Department of Revenue. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-1606, 9-
17-2019)
CHAPTER 10
BODYWORK ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
4-10-1: Definitions
4-10-2: License Required
4-10-3: Application Requirements
4-10-4: Issuance Of License
4-10-5: Facilities
4-10-6: Operating Requirements
4-10-7: Solicitation Prohibited
4-10-8: Advertising
4-10-9: Inspections
4-10-10: Transfer Of License
4-10-11: Display Of License
4-10-12: Employment Of Massage Therapists
4-10-13: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
4-10-14: Renewal Of License
4-10-15: Public Nuisance
4-10-16: Penalty
4-10-17: Appeals
4-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
4-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, offer, engage in, conduct or
carry on, or to permit to be advertised, offered, engaged in, conducted, or
carried on, in or upon any premises in the village, the operation of a bodywork
establishment as herein defined, without first having obtained a license from
the village pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, with the exception of
the following:
   A.   Hospitals, nursing homes, medical facilities, or offices at which
physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, podiatrists, naprapaths,
occupational therapists, physical therapists, or other health care workers duly
licensed by the State of Illinois to provide, on an ongoing basis, professional
health services to individuals including, but not limited to, services
permitted by the Illinois Occupational Therapy Practices Act (225 ILCS 75/1 et
seq.); the Illinois Physical Therapy Act (225 ILCS 90/1 et seq.); or the
Illinois Naprapathic Practices Act (225 ILCS 63/1 et seq.);
   B.   Athletic trainers for any athletic program of a private or public
school, college, or any athletic team regularly organized or engaging in
competition;
   C.   Barbers, estheticians, and cosmetologists who are duly licensed by the
State of Illinois, and who perform massage in a manner consistent with their
training and the code of ethics of their respective professions;
   D.   Practitioners who only provide bodywork services of the neck, back,
face, scalp, hair, hands, and/or feet of a patron who is fully clothed; and
   E.   Bodywork provided by massage therapy students enrolled in a massage
therapy program approved by the Illinois Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation during the course of clinical externships, practicums
or community services, provided that such bodywork services are part of the
curricular requirements of the recognized school and for which no compensation
is received by the students. (Ord. 2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a
bodywork establishment shall file an application with the village clerk as
provided herein. The application shall be in the form provided by the village
clerk or his/her designee.
   B.   All license fees and other required fees, including costs of
fingerprinting and background investigations, shall be paid at the time the
application is submitted:
   C.   The application for a license to operate a bodywork establishment shall
set forth the exact nature of the services to be administered and the proposed
place of business and facilities therefor.
   D.   The application for a license shall contain the following information:
      1.   The applicant’s name, current address, telephone number, and date of
birth.
      2.   The name, address, and date of birth of all bodywork providers,
managers, and persons with supervisory authority employed or contracted by the
establishment.
      3.   Whether the applicant has had any business or liquor license denied,
revoked or suspended by the village, the State of Illinois, or any other state
or municipality and the reasons therefor.
      4.   Whether the applicant or any employee, massage therapist, bodywork
provider, manager, or person with supervisory authority has had any criminal
convictions, forfeiture of bond, or pleadings of nolo contendere, except minor
traffic violations, within the last five years.
      5.   Authorization for the chief of police or his designee to conduct a
background check and take fingerprints of the applicant and any manager or
person with supervisory authority.
      6.   A copy of the State of Illinois issued massage license for each
massage therapist that has been or is intended to be employed by the applicant
to provide massage services, or a copy of the certification or other written
documentation or proof of exemption for licensing as required by the Act.
      7.   A drawing or floor plan of the premises designating each room by its
purpose or the activity that will take place in each room.
      8.   If the premises is leased:
         a.   A copy of the lease. and any subleases, assignments or
acceptances in effect at the time of application;
         b.   The name, address, and telephone number of the legal owner of the
premises;
         c.   If the legal owner is not an individual, the name, address, and
telephone number of a representative or agent authorized to act on behalf of
the legal owner; and
         d.   If the premises is managed or supervised by someone other than
the legal owner thereof, the name, address, and telephone number of the person,
business, or entity who manages or supervises the premises.
      9.   If the applicant is a business:
         a.   The type of business or entity (i.e., sole proprietorship,
corporation, limited liability company, partnership. etc.);
         b.   The name of the business or entity, and all assumed names under
which the business or entity is conducted; and
         c.   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and dates of birth of
all persons with management and supervisory authority of the business or
entity.
      10.   The information requested in subsections C.1, 3, 4, and 5 of this
section shall also be provided for the following individuals:
         a.   If the applicant is a sole proprietorship, for the individual
proprietor.
         b.   If the applicant is a partnership, for each general and limited
partner, for each individual who is a general partner of such general or
limited partnership, and for each individual who owns more than five percent
(5%) of such limited partnership.
         c.   If the applicant is a joint venture, for each joint venturer and
each individual who owns more than 5% of such joint venture.
         d.   If the applicant is a corporation, for each officer and director,
and if the corporation’s stock is publicly traded, for each shareholder owning
more than 5% of the outstanding stock in said corporation.
         e.   If the applicant is a limited liability company, for each manager
and member owning or holding more than a 5% membership interest.
   E.   If a change in any information required under this section occurs at
any time during a license period, the licensee shall file a written statement
with the village clerk indicating the nature and effective date of the change.
The change in information statement shall be filed no later than ten days after
the change(s) take effect. (Ord. 2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   The village clerk shall, within five days of the receipt of an
application for a bodywork establishment license, forward copies of such
application to the police department, the fire department, the department of
public works, and the building inspector. These departments shall, within 30
days of the receipt of a copy of the application, inspect the premises proposed
to be operated as a bodywork establishment and make written recommendations to
the village administrator, with a copy to the village clerk, concerning
compliance with the codes, laws, regulations, and ordinances that each
respective department administers.
   B.   Within 30 days of receipt of the recommendations of the aforesaid
departments, the village administrator shall determine whether to grant, deny,
or hold an application for further investigation, and shall notify the
applicant of his or her determination. The period of such additional
investigation shall not exceed an additional 30 days unless additional time is
agreed to by the applicant. Upon conclusion of any period of additional
investigation, the village administrator shall advise the applicant in writing
whether the application is granted or denied.
   C.   The village administrator shall grant the application unless he or she
finds:
      1.   That the operation of a bodyworks establishment, as proposed by the
applicant, would not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited
to, the building, health, planning, housing, zoning, and fire codes of the
village; or
      2.   That the applicant and any other person who will be directly or
indirectly engaged in the ownership, management, or operation of the proposed
bodywork establishment has been convicted of or pled guilty to:
         a.   A felony;
         b.   A misdemeanor, an essential element of which involves (i)
dishonesty or fraud; (ii) sexual offenses as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-.01 et
seq.; (iii) the use of violence or force; or (iv) misconduct otherwise directly
related to the provision of bodywork or massage services or the operation of a
bodywork establishment;
         c.   An offense involving sexual misconduct with children; or
         d.   Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, keeping a place of
prostitution, pimping, or other similar offense opposed to decency and
morality; or
      3.   That the applicant has failed or refused to give information
relevant to the investigation of the application; submitted false, misleading,
or incomplete information; or has refused to submit to or cooperate with any
inspection required by this chapter; or
      4.   That the operation of the bodywork establishment as proposed by the
applicant would violate the provisions of this chapter; or
      5.   That the granting of the license would not be in the best interests
of the village, in which case the determination shall state the reason(s) for
such determination.
   D.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village administrator may, at his/
her discretion, issue a license to any person convicted of or who has pled
guilty to a felony if the village administrator finds:
      1.   That such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date
of application;
      2.   The offenses did not involve (i) dishonesty; (ii) sexual offenses as
defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-.01 et seq.; (iii) the use of violence or force; or
(iv) misconduct otherwise directly related to the provision of bodywork or
massage services or the operation of a bodywork establishment;
      3.   The applicant has had no subsequent convictions, and
      4.   The applicant has shown evidence of rehabilitation sufficient to
warrant the public trust.
   E.   Upon a determination by the village administrator granting the
application, the village clerk shall issue a license to maintain, operate, or
conduct a bodywork establishment pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2025-1763, 6-
3-2025)
4-10-5: FACILITIES:
No bodyworks establishment shall be issued a license or be operated,
established, or maintained within the village unless said establishment
complies with each of the following minimum requirements:
   A.   Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers
shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials and shall be
installed in accordance with the building code of the Village of Peoria
Heights.
   B.   All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas,
lavatories, and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
   C.   Adequate bathing, dressing, locker, and toilet facilities shall be
provided for patrons to be served at any given time. In the event male and
female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing,
locker, toilet, and massage room facilities shall be provided for each sex.
Doors to dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
   D.   Separate toilet and lavatory facilities shall be maintained for
employees and staff.
   E.   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected
after use on each patron.
   F.   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations within the
premises and in accordance with applicable occupancy requirements.
   G.   Lavatories or washbasins shall provide both hot and cold running water
and shall be installed in the toilet room. Lavatories or washbasins shall be
provided with a soap dispenser and clean towels or paper towels.
   H.   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and
all other physical facilities shall be maintained in good repair and in a clean
and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, steam or
vapor cabinets, shower compartments, bathtubs, and toilet rooms shall be
thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. When carpeting is
used on the floors, it shall be kept clean and dry.
   I.   The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
service. (Ord. 2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-6: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The premises of the licensed establishment shall be supervised at all
times when open for business by at least one person who is an owner or manager
of the business or who has supervisory authority with regard to the business.
The supervisor shall not violate, or permit others to violate, any applicable
provisions of this chapter. The violation of any provision of this chapter by
any agent or employee of the licensee shall constitute a violation by the
licensee.
   B.   Every portion of the licensed establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept and operated in a clean and sanitary condition.
   C.   Reserved.
   D.   Sheets, towels, and other linens shall be available in sufficient
quantities to service each patron and shall be laundered after each use. Closed
cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels, and
other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled
linens, towels, and other materials shall be kept in properly covered
containers or cabinets, which shall be kept separate from the clean storage
areas.
   E.   Oils, creams, lotions, or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
   F.   All employees, managers, persons with supervisory authority, bodywork
providers, agents, and independent contractors shall wear clean, non-
transparent outer garments, which cover the sexual and genital areas while on
the licensed premises. Employees, bodywork providers, agents, and independent
contractors shall not disrobe, or offer or agree to disrobe, either wholly or
partially while in the presence of any patron receiving massage services.
   G.   The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels,
cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, manager, person
with supervisory authority, bodywork provider, agent, or independent contractor
of the licensed establishment.
   H.   No bodywork provider shall administer bodywork services to a patron
impaired by intoxicating liquor or drugs, nor shall any bodywork provider
administer bodywork services to a patron while impaired by intoxicating liquor
or drugs.
   I.   No bodywork provider shall administer bodywork services to a patron
exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation, or skin
eruption, unless a physician or nurse practitioner duly licensed by the State
of Illinois certifies in writing that such services maybe safely performed and
prescribing the conditions thereof.
   J.   Each bodywork provider shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering bodywork
services to any patron.
   K.   All licensees shall maintain, as a business record of the licensed
establishment:
      1.   A record of:
         a.   The date and time of all bodywork services performed at the
licensed premises;
         b.   The name of the bodywork provider administering the bodywork
services; and
         c.   The amounts received for bodywork services.
      2.   The record of the date, time, and service provided must be made
before services are initiated, and the record of the amount received for
services must be made at the time payment is rendered. All records shall be
kept for a period of at least one year and shall be made available in a format
that can be inspected at any reasonable time upon request by the village
administrator or the chief of police or their designees.
   L.   The main entrance to the licensed establishment where patrons and
potential customers are greeted shall be clearly visible from the outside and
shall have and maintain clear glass that is not painted over, darkened, or
otherwise blocked by cloth or any other obstruction.
   M.   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location near the main entrance
of the licensed establishment identifying the establishment as a bodywork
establishment and state the trade or business name as it appears on the
establishment’s license.
   N.   The hours of operation for bodywork establishments shall be limited to
the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
   O.   No person shall reside or be allowed to remain overnight in the
licensed premises; provided, however, that if the licensed premises contains
living quarters that are properly zoned and authorized for such residential
use, the entrance to such living quarters shall be separate from the entrance
to the licensed establishment and shall not be accessible in any manner from
the interior of the licensed establishment. (Ord. 2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-7: SOLICITATIONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any employee, manager, person with supervisory
authority, bodywork provider, agent, or independent contractor of the licensed
establishment to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or
her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area of
any person while on the licensed premises.
   B.   No employee, manager, person with supervisory authority, bodywork
provider, agent, or independent contractor of the licensed establishment shall
perform or offer or agree to perform any act which would require the touching
of the patrons’ genital area.
   C.   There shall not be placed, published, or distributed any advertisement,
picture, or statement in any manner or medium which is false, deceptive, or
misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any bodywork
services, or which reasonably appears to suggest or imply any sexual activity
in connection with bodywork services.
   D.   Prospective customers and patrons shall be provided with written notice
which states the following:
      “State law prohibits soliciting another for the purpose of a sexual act.
Solicitation can be punishable as a Class 4 felony, subject an offender to
fines and imprisonment. And impoundment of any vehicle used by the offender to
commit the offense. Offers or requests to buy or purchase sexual services or
acts shall be immediately reported to law enforcement.”
   E.   Written notice shall be posted in a conspicuous location accessible to
all employees and massage therapists which states the following:
      “State law prohibits soliciting another for the purpose of a sexual act.
Solicitation can be punishable as a Class 4 felony, subject an offender to
fines and imprisonment. And impoundment of any vehicle used by the offender to
commit the offense. Offers or requests to buy or purchase sexual services or
acts should be immediately reported to the Peoria Heights Police Department by
calling 911.”
   F.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit clinical massage
therapy for post-mastectomy scar tissue, including myofascial release therapy,
or of therapeutic treatment of breast tissue and muscles for pre-and post-
surgical mastectomy, lumpectomy, or breast reconstruction, clinical perineal
massage therapy for pregnant women to ease the pain of childbirth; or clinical
lower abdominal massage therapy to relieve menstruation related pain. (Ord.
2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-8: ADVERTISING:
No bodywork establishment granted a license under provisions of this chapter
shall place, publish, or distribute or cause to be placed, published, or
distributed any advertising material that depicts any portion of the human body
that would reasonably suggest or imply to prospective customers that any sexual
activity is available or will be performed in connection with bodywork
services, or that employees, managers, persons with supervisory authority,
massage therapists, or bodywork providers are dressed in any manner other than
prescribed in this chapter, nor shall any licensed establishment suggest or
imply in the text of such advertising that any sexual activity is available or
will be performed in connection with bodywork services. (Ord. 2025-1763, 6-3-
2025)
4-10-9: INSPECTIONS:
The building inspection department, the department of public works, the police
department, and the fire department may make an inspection of each bodywork
establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter for the
purposes of determining whether the licensed establishment is in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. Such inspections shall be made at
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. As a condition of the issuance of
a license under this chapter, the licensee consents to walk-through inspections
by authorized village employees, without notice, at any time during business
hours. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow such inspection
officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner. (Ord.
2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-10: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license for the operation of a bodywork establishment issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be transferable; provided, however, that upon
the death or incapacity of a licensee, the licensed establishment may continue
in business for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 90 days, to allow
for the approval of a new license. (Ord. 2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-11: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every licensee shall display a valid license in a conspicuous place within the
licensed establishment so that the same may be readily seen by patrons or
prospective customers entering the premises. (Ord. 2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-12: EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPISTS:
   A.   Bodywork establishments shall not employ or contract with any person as
a massage therapist unless he or she holds a current, valid license issued by
the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation pursuant to
the Act, or written proof of exemption from said license requirements. Upon
receiving notice or constructive notice that a massage therapist has been
disciplined or subject to investigation by the Illinois Department of Financial
and Professional Regulation, the licensee shall be responsible for obtaining
information as to the status of said massage therapist’s license.
   B.   Each bodywork establishment shall maintain a current list of all
licensed massage therapists who perform massage services and proof of their
current. valid license or written proof of exemption from said license as
required by the Act. The licensee shall allow inspection of such records at any
reasonable time upon request by the village.
   C.   No student or non-licensed person, other than a person with written
proof of exemption from licensure as required by the Act, shall be allowed in a
massage therapy room with a patron unless accompanied by a licensed massage
therapist at all times. (Ord. 2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-13: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Any license issued for a bodywork establishment under this chapter may
be revoked or suspended by the village administrator for good cause or where
any provision of this chapter, the Village Code, or any law is violated by the
licensee or any massage therapist, bodywork provider, employee, manager, person
with supervisory authority, agent, or independent contractor of the licensee.
For purposes of license revocation or suspension, the licensee shall be
strictly liable for any such violations, regardless of actual or constructive
knowledge of such violations. It shall also be cause for revocation or
suspension that the licensee has made a false statement on an application for a
license or renewal thereof under this chapter, or in any case where the
licensee refused to permit any duly authorized building inspector, public works
employee, police officer, or fire department officer to inspect the licensed
premises or the operations therein. A license may also be suspended or revoked
by the village administrator upon the recommendation of the building inspector,
director of public works, chief of police, or fire chief on the grounds that
the establishment is being managed, operated, or maintained without regard for
the public health, the health of patrons customers, or proper sanitation or
hygiene.
   B.   Any violation of this chapter shall be cause for suspension of the
license for not more than 30 days in the first instance. Any subsequent
violation of this chapter shall be cause for suspension for more than 30 days
or for revocation of the license. In addition, the revocation or suspension of
a bodywork establishment license for a violation at the licensed premises shall
result in the suspension or revocation of any bodywork establishment license
for any other premises in the village owned or operated by the licensee whose
license was revoked for cause.
   C.   The village administrator, before revoking or suspending any license,
shall give the licensee at least ten days’ written notice of the charges
against the licensee and the opportunity for a hearing before the village
administrator, at which time the licensee may present evidence bearing upon the
question.
   D.   When any license shall have been revoked pursuant to this section, no
license under this chapter shall be granted to such licensee for the period of
two (2) years thereafter for the conduct of a bodywork establishment. Such
prohibition shall apply also to a business partner of the licensee, or any
other person who holds more than a five (5) percent ownership interest in the
licensee. (Ord. 2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-14: LICENSE TERM, FEES, AND RENEWAL:
   A.   Each license issued under this chapter shall expire April 30th of the
fiscal year for which such license was issued.
   B.   Any licensee may renew his or her license prior to the expiration
thereof for an additional one-year term, provided that he or she is qualified
to receive a license and the bodywork establishment complies with all of the
provisions of this chapter. Applications for renewal of license must be made in
writing to the village clerk not more than two months and not less than one
month prior to expiration of an existing license and accompanied by the
applicable license renewal fee.
   C.   The fee for an initial license application for a bodywork establishment
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). The fee for a license renewal
application shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). Licenses issued during the
fiscal year shall be subject to prorated license fees.
   D.   Licenses shall apply only to the premises described in the application
and the license issued thereon, and only one location shall be so described in
each license. (Ord. 2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-15: MAINTAINING PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any building used, operated, or maintained as a bodywork establishment in
violation of this chapter with the intentional, knowing, reckless, or negligent
permission of the owner, licensee, or person managing or supervising the
licensed establishment, together with all fixtures and other property used in
violation of this chapter, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 2025-
1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-16: PENALTY:
Any person in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $250 nor more than $750 per offense. Each day the violation continues
shall be a separate offense. The village shall have the right to prohibit
occupancy of any building being utilized in violation of this chapter. (Ord.
2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
4-10-17: APPEALS:
Any person may appeal a determination of the village administrator denying an
application for license or suspending or revoking a license to the village
board. The notice of appeal must be filed with the village clerk within fifteen
(15) days after the date of the village administrator’s determination. Hearing
on the appeal before the village board or a hearing officer appointed by the
village board shall take place within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt
of the notice of appeal. The decision of the village board shall be final.
(Ord. 2025-1763, 6-3-2025)
TITLE 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
Nuisances   1
Noise Control   2
Litter, Garbage And Refuse   3
Open Burning   4
Vegetation Control   5
Disabled Vehicles   6
Stormwater System Discharges And
Connections   7
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-1-1: Definitions
5-1-2: Common Law And Statutory Nuisances
5-1-3: Certain Nuisances Enumerated
5-1-4: Abandonment And Storage Of Containers
5-1-5: Inspection And Investigation Of Possible Nuisance Conditions
5-1-6: Abatement Provisions
5-1-7: Enforcement
5-1-8: Penalty
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   GARBAGE: Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation,
cooking, and consumption of food or food products.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE: Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage and refuse.
The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery, yard trimmings, and railroad tie walls that have
deteriorated.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public squares, space, grounds and buildings.
   REFUSE: Any discarded matter, or any matter which is to be reduced in volume
or otherwise changed in chemical or physical properties in order to facilitate
its discard, removal or disposal.
   RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes including, but not limited to, paper, wrappings,
cigarettes or other tobacco products, cardboard, plastics, tin cans, glass,
wood, bedding, crockery, iron, brass, tin, other metals, appliances, appliance
parts, vehicle parts, rubber (including tires), plasterboard, ceramics, masonry
(including bricks, cement blocks and concrete), indoor furniture placed in an
outdoor environment exposed to the elements and other similar materials. (Ord.
2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
5-1-2: COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES:
In addition to what is hereby declared to be a nuisance, those offenses known
to the common law or of the Statutes of the State as nuisances may, in case the
same exist within the Village, be treated as such and proceeded against as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2007-1290, 10-2-2007)
5-1-3: CERTAIN NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
   A.   1. Interference With Peace And Comfort: Sound, animals, or things which
interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of any person in the
Village constitute a public nuisance. These may also include rodents,
cockroaches, termites, loud music, and woodworking.
      2.   Offensive, Nauseous Or Dangerous Items: Anything which is made,
permitted, used, kept, maintained or operated, or any building or any animal
that is kept in the Village in a manner that is offensive, nauseous, dangerous
to life, limb or property or detrimental to the health or welfare of any person
or persons residing in the area or having the rights to use the area shall be a
public nuisance.
      3.   Discharge Of Offensive Matter: Whoever shall, within the Village,
place or throw, or permit to be discharged or to flow from or out of any house
or premises, any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into
any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground, or shall
allow or permit the same to be done by any person connected with the premises
of the Village, under his control, shall be deemed to have created a nuisance.
      4.   Garbage, Refuse, Landscape Waste And Rubbish: Any person or persons,
entity, or corporation who allows any garbage, refuse, landscape waste or
rubbish to accumulate on any premises, private property or public place within
the Village, as provided in this chapter, shall be deemed to have created a
nuisance.
      5.   Threats To Health, Safety And Welfare: Conditions which interfere
with or constitute a threat to or impairment of the health, safety or welfare
of the Village citizens, are deemed to be nuisances.
   B.   The various nuisances described and enumerated in subsection A of this
section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all
other nuisances described and prohibited by this Code. (Ord. 2017-1519, 9-5-
2017)
5-1-4: ABANDONMENT AND STORAGE OF CONTAINERS:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: No person may leave or permit to remain outside of
any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or
abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his control, any
abandoned, unattended or discarded refrigerator or other similar appliance or
container of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more, and
which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device, which may
not be released from the inside, without first removing the door or lid or snap
lock or other locking device from the refrigerator, container or appliance.
   B.   Abatement Provisions: Any authorized Village personnel charged with
enforcement of this section may order, in writing or orally, any person in
violation of this section to comply with the requirements of this section
within twenty four (24) hours. In the event the person fails to comply with
this section within twenty four (24) hours of the order, or in the event the
identity or whereabouts of such person cannot be ascertained, then the door or
lid, snap lock or other locking device shall be removed from the refrigerator
or container or be otherwise secured by the Chief of Police, and the cost
thereof shall be charged to that person.
   C.   Enforcement Officials: This section may be enforced by members of the
Village Police Department or the Village Code Enforcement Officer, the Village
of Peoria Health Department, the Village of Peoria Public Services Department,
the Village of Peoria Fire Department and the Village of Peoria Police
Department.
   D.   Penalties: In addition to the charge for the cost of securing the
refrigerator or other similar appliance or container, or the cost of removal of
the door or lid, snap lock or other locking device, any violation of this
section shall be punishable by fines as allowed. Each day that a violation of
this section is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
5-1-5: INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION OF POSSIBLE NUISANCE CONDITIONS:
When an existence of a public nuisance is brought to the attention of the
Village Police Department or Village Code Enforcement Officer, the Village
Chief of Police (or his official designee) or the Village Code Enforcement
Officer shall cause an inspection and investigation to be made and to determine
whether removal is necessary. (Ord. 2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
5-1-6: ABATEMENT PROVISIONS:
   A.   Notice To Abate:
      1.   The Village Chief of Police or his official designee and/or Village
Code Enforcement Officer may, after inspection and investigating under the
provisions of section
5-1-5 of this chapter, cause a notice in writing to be served upon the person,
corporation or entity found to be responsible for the existence of the
nuisance. The notice shall require the person, entity, or corporation
responsible to abate the nuisance within five (5) days from the time the notice
is served. The notice shall be given by personal service; by registered or
certified mail addressed to the residence or usual place of business of the
person, corporation, or entity responsible for the existence of the nuisance;
or by posting a sign regarding the violation on the premises of the property in
violation of this chapter.
      2.   The Village may give notice to abate a violation of this chapter by
posting a sign in a conspicuous place near the main entrance of a structure on
the premises where the violation is in existence. The posted sign shall be at
least fourteen inches (14") in height and eight inches (8") in width and at the
top thereof, in large letters, shall state the words "Notice to Abate". The
text of the notice shall contain a reference to the provision(s) of this
chapter violated and may contain such other information respecting the nature
of the violation as advisable. It shall be unlawful for anyone to deface,
tamper with, or remove the "Notice to Abate" sign from the property where it is
posted unless authorized by an employee or agent of the Village.
   B.   Failure To Abate; Abatement By Village; Costs: After the expiration of
five (5) days from the time the notice is served, if the nuisance is not abated
or other remedy made as required, the Village, under the direction of the
Village Chief of Police or the Village Code Enforcement Officer, may issue a
citation for a violation of this chapter, or abate or cause the abatement of
the nuisance without further notice and all costs to remedy the abatement shall
be collected from the person, corporation or entity who is responsible for the
nuisance with a penalty of ten percent (10%) of such costs.
   C.   Emergency Abatement: If a nuisance constitutes an emergency, the time
for abatement may be reduced by the Chief of Police and/or the Code Enforcement
Officer in the notices which specify that the emergency exists.
   D.   Responsibility Of Owner, Agent Or Occupant: When any nuisance, or
anything likely to become a nuisance, may be found upon any premises, and the
person, corporation or entity causing such nuisance is unknown or cannot be
found, the owner, agent or occupant of the premises shall be notified by the
Chief of Police and/or the Code Enforcement Officer to abate the same. If such
owner, agent or occupant whose duty it is hereby made to abate such nuisance
shall not promptly comply with such notice, he shall be subject to the penalty
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
5-1-7: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   This chapter may be enforced through the County Circuit Court. The
Village may also obtain an injunction or other appropriate equitable relief to
prevent or remedy any nuisance conditions.
   B.   Any and all fines imposed by this chapter shall bear interest at a rate
of one percent (1%) per month on the unpaid balance from the date of the fine
imposition.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Village Chief of Police or
his official designee and/or Village Code Enforcement Officer from issuing a
citation for any violation of this chapter without providing any prior
notification. (Ord. 2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
5-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person, entity, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day such refusal to comply with this chapter by any
person, entity, firm or corporation shall constitute a separate offense. The
penalty as specified in this section, which may be imposed, may include, in
addition to the fine, all costs, attorney fees and penalties provided for late
payment and/or abatement of the nuisances as provided in this chapter. (Ord.
2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
CHAPTER 2
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
5-2-1: Noise Control Regulations
5-2-2: Penalty
5-2-1: NOISE CONTROL REGULATIONS:
That no person shall allow or cause to be used or operated any radio, musical
instrument, sound amplifier or other device or machine for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than
is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle
or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary
listener thereto. The operation of any such machine or device between the hours
of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in such a manner as
to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the building,
structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section. (Ord. 1084, 8-2-1994; amd. Ord. 2024-1732, 7-16-
2024)
5-2-2: PENALTY:
Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be fined, upon conviction,
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day an offense is committed shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 1084, 8-2-1994; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 3
LITTER, GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Littering Restrictions And Prohibitions
5-3-3: Containers Required
5-3-4: Storage Of Containers For Single-Family Dwellings
5-3-5: Placement Of Containers For Pick Up
5-3-6: Additional Curbside Pick Up Regulations
5-3-7: Enforcement
5-3-8: Penalty; Failure To Pay Fine
5-3-9: Lien Provisions; Personal Judgment
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
   GARBAGE: Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation,
cooking, and consumption of food or food products.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE: Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage and refuse.
The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery, yard trimmings, and railroad tie walls that have
deteriorated.
   LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse", "landscape waste" and "rubbish" as herein
defined which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited by this chapter, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and/or welfare.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public squares, space, grounds and buildings.
   RATPROOF CONTAINER: A garbage can or other container, regardless of size,
mobile or stationary, which shall be incapable of being penetrated by and is
impervious to rats.
   REFUSE: Any discarded matter, or any matter which is to be reduced in volume
or otherwise changed in chemical or physical properties in order to facilitate
its discard, removal or disposal.
   RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes including, but not limited to, paper, wrappings,
cigarettes or other tobacco products, cardboard, plastics, tin cans, glass,
wood, bedding, crockery, iron, brass, tin, other metals, appliances, appliance
parts, vehicle parts, rubber (including tires), plasterboard, ceramics, masonry
(including bricks, cement blocks and concrete), indoor furniture placed in an
outdoor environment exposed to the elements and other similar materials. (Ord.
2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
5-3-2: LITTERING RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Use Of Receptacles:
      1.   No person, firm or corporation shall throw or deposit litter in or
upon any public place within the Village, except in public receptacles or in
private ratproof containers for collection. (Ord. 2006-1271, 11-7-2006)
      2.   Any person, firm or corporation placing litter in public receptacles
or in private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place. (Ord. 2006-1271, 11-7-2006; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Depositing Litter Into Public Ways:
      1.   No person, firm or corporation shall sweep or deposit in any gutter,
street, or other public place within the Village the accumulation of litter
from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their
premises free of litter.
      2.   No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying a place of
business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the village the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
places of business within the village shall keep the sidewalk in front of their
business premises free of litter.
   C.   Depositing From Vehicles: No person, while a driver or passenger in a
vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street other public place or
private property within the village.
   D.   Vacant Or Private Property:
      1.   No person, firm or corporation shall throw or deposit litter on any
open or vacant private property within the village, whether owned by such
person or not.
      2.   No person, firm or corporation shall throw or deposit litter on any
occupied private premises within the village, whether owned by such person or
not, except in private ratproof containers for collection.
      3.   The owner or person in control of any private premises or vacant
property shall at all times maintain the private premises or vacant property
free of litter; provided, however, that this subsection shall not prohibit the
storage of litter in ratproof containers for collection, as hereinafter
provided.
   E.   Vehicles With Loads:
      1.   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
village unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load
or contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the village, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances or foreign
matter of any kind.
      2.   All persons, firms or corporations hauling or causing to be hauled
any dirt, sand, gravel, cinders, or other materials or any waste matter on
streets or alleys shall so construct and maintain their vehicles at all times
to prevent the spilling of such material or matter from the same.
   F.   Depositing Oil Products And Other Liquids: No person, firm or
corporation shall cause the spilling of any turpentine, kerosene, gasoline,
benzene, naphtha, coal, oil or any product thereof or any oil used for
lubricating, illuminating or fuel purposes or allow any of such fluids to
escape to or upon any asphalt pavement of the village or operate or permit to
be operated any tank wagon or other vehicle from which any of such fluids are
permitted to escape. (Ord. 2006-1271, 11-7-2006)
   G.   Creating Unhealthy And Unsafe Conditions: No person, firm or
corporation shall allow or maintain conditions on property owned or controlled
thereby which interfere with or constitute a threat to or impairment of the
health, safety or welfare of the village citizens. (2016 Code)
5-3-3: CONTAINERS REQUIRED:
   A.   The occupants of any single-family dwelling or townhouse shall provide,
maintain and keep tightly covered or sealed, a ratproof and watertight
container for all garbage/litter.
   B.   The owner, tenant or occupant of a two-family or multiple- family
dwelling of less than five (5) units shall provide, maintain and keep tightly
covered or sealed, a ratproof and watertight container for all garbage/litter.
   C.   The owner of a multiple-family dwelling consisting of five (5) or more
dwelling units or a commercial building shall provide and maintain a ratproof,
watertight and tightly covered or sealed dumpster for all garbage/litter.
However, if this requirement cannot be met because the nature or size of the
property does not permit the placement or removal of a dumpster, the owner may
petition the village administrator or his designee for an exception; provided,
that such exception can be granted without substantial detriment to the public
good and without impairing the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-1271, 11-7-2006)
5-3-4: STORAGE OF CONTAINERS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
It is the responsibility of all persons occupying or controlling any single-
family dwelling to place ratproof containers for the storage of garbage/litter
at least three feet (3') from the property line or public right of way, so long
as this space is available to the resident. Containers shall not be stored in
the front yard or on a front porch. If containers are stored outside, they
shall be secured and maintained in a stationary manner. (Ord. 2007-1283, 6-19-
2007)
5-3-5: PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS FOR PICK UP:
   A.   Containers for single-family dwellings shall not be set out for garbage
pick up earlier than three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the day preceding garbage
pick up. Containers shall be retrieved and returned to the premises within
twenty four (24) hours after garbage pick up.
   B.   In two-family dwellings or multiple-family dwellings of less than five
(5) units, it is the responsibility of the owner, tenant and occupant to place
and retrieve containers within the same guidelines provided for single-family
dwellings in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2007-1283, 6-19-2007; amd.
2016 Code)
5-3-6: ADDITIONAL CURBSIDE PICK UP REGULATIONS:
   A.   1. Items which would contain foodstuffs or other attractions for
animals and vermin may be placed at curbside for pick up on the day of waste
pick up, so long as they are placed no earlier than four o'clock (4:00) A.M.,
and do not need to be placed in the ratproof containers, so long as they fall
within the accepted requirements by the Village waste collector.
      2.   Items which would contain foodstuffs and other attractions for
animals and vermin may not be stored outside prior to four o'clock (4:00) A.M.
of the day of the waste pick up, unless they are stored within a ratproof
container, and a lid is in place, held securely so as to not be easily removed
by animals or vermin. It will be acceptable to set cans out on garbage pick up
day without a lid being in place.
   B.   Items which do not contain foodstuffs or other attractions for animals
and vermin may be placed at curbside for pick up on the day prior to waste pick
up, so long as they are not placed earlier than twenty four (24) hours before
pick up, and do not have to be placed in a ratproof container, so long as they
fall within the accepted requirements by the Village waste collector.
   C.   Lawn refuse may be set out in containers, bundles or paper containers
which are deemed acceptable by the Village waste collector. Lawn refuse should
not be set out any earlier than twenty four (24) hours before pick up. (Ord.
2007-1283, 6-19-2007)
5-3-7: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The Village Chief of Police or his official designee and/or the Village
Code Enforcement Officer may serve a written notification upon the owner,
occupant or tenant who owns or resides in or upon any private property or
building on private property within the Village, or any such agents of such
owner, ordering the violation of this chapter to be corrected and abated within
five (5) days from the time the notice is served. Said notice shall be given by
personal service; by registered or certified mail addressed to the owner,
tenant, occupant or person in control or residing in any single-family dwelling
or townhouse, or the owner, tenant or occupant of a two-family or multiple-
family dwelling of less than five (5) units, or the owner or manager of a
multiple-family dwelling consisting of five (5) or more dwelling units or a
commercial building agent or owner; or by posting a sign regarding the
violation on the premises of the property in violation of this chapter. If the
notice is served by posting, the sign shall conform to the requirements of
section
5-1-6 of this title.
   B.   After the expiration of five (5) days from the service of the written
notice, if the person, owner, tenant, occupant, firm, corporation or other
entity who has been served with a notice to correct and abate the violation has
failed, neglected or refused to comply with the directions of the notice, the
Village, under the direction of the Village Chief of Police or his official
designee and/or Village Code Enforcement Officer may issue a citation for the
violation of this chapter, or abate or cause the abatement of the violation
without further notice.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Village Chief of Police or
his official designee and/or Village Code Enforcement Officer from issuing a
citation for any violation of this chapter without providing any prior
notification. The Village may also obtain an injunction or other appropriate
equitable relief through the County Circuit Court to prevent or remedy any
violations of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
5-3-8: PENALTY; FAILURE TO PAY FINE:
   A.   Any person, firm, owner, occupant, tenant or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, and each day any such violation shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Any defendant who has been found guilty of a violation of this chapter
by a judgment of guilty in the County Circuit Court and assessed a fine and
costs who defaults in the payment of any fine, court cost or interest, a
petition for a rule to show cause shall be filed with the said Circuit Court,
and said defendant shall be served by personal service or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to show cause why the violator should not be held in
contempt of court and attorney fees and costs assigned. (Ord. 2006-1271, 11-7-
2006; amd. 2016 Code)
5-3-9: LIEN PROVISIONS; PERSONAL JUDGMENT:
   A.   The cost of abating any violation of this chapter from private property
shall be recoverable from the owner or person in control of or residing in the
real estate and shall be a lien thereon. The lien shall be superior to all
prior existing liens and encumbrances, except taxes; provided, however, that
within ninety (90) days after abatement of the violation, the Village Attorney
shall file a notice of lien for the cost incurred by the Village in the Office
of the County Recorder of Deeds. Upon payment of the total costs, the lien
shall be released by the Village Attorney.
   B.   The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of
mortgages or mechanics' liens. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced
by the Village Attorney within three (3) years after the date of filing of
notice of lien.
   C.   If the Village's costs for abating any violation of this chapter are
not paid, the Village Attorney may commence proceedings in the Circuit Court
seeking a personal judgment from the owner, person in control, or residing in
the property. Attorney fees and costs to prosecution are an expense of
enforcing this chapter, and said expenses are in addition to the collection of
the amount of the judgment entered by the court.
   D.   Attorney fees and costs are an expense in enforcing any proceedings to
foreclose a lien and/or to obtain a personal judgment against an owner, party
in control or residing in property for whom a lien is enforced or a personal
judgment is obtained for the violation under this chapter.
   E.   Any action as authorized by this chapter shall be in addition to, and
without waiver of, any other remedies. (Ord. 2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
CHAPTER 4
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
5-4-1: Definitions
5-4-2: Prohibited Burning
5-4-3: Permitted Burning; Restrictions
5-4-4: Authority To Declare Moratorium On Burning
5-4-5: Penalties And Enforcement
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
   GARBAGE: Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food or food products.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE: Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage and refuse.
The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings. The term does not include
construction lumber of any kind.
   OPEN BURNING: The combustion of any matter in such a way that the products
of the combustion are emitted to the open air without originating in or passing
through equipment so designed for that purpose.
   REFUSE: Any discarded matter, or any matter which is to be reduced in volume
or otherwise changed in chemical or physical properties in order to facilitate
its discard, removal or disposal. (Ord. 1053, 1-3-1991)
5-4-2: PROHIBITED BURNING:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to burn in
any manner any garbage or refuse. (Ord. 1053, 1-3-1991)
5-4-3: PERMITTED BURNING; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The burning of landscape waste shall be permitted, but only:
      1.   Between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) a.m. and sunset.
      2.   On the premises from which such landscape waste is generated.
      3.   When atmospheric conditions will readily dissipate contaminants.
      4.   If such burning does not create a visibility hazard on roadways.
      5.   If such burning is contained wholly on private property and not on
any public grounds or street and/or alley right of way.
      6.   If such burning activity is continually monitored and attended by a
responsible person in charge, equipped with a means to readily extinguish said
burning activity.
      7.   Burning of wet leaves will not be permitted at any time.
   B.   The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter, provided they are in compliance with other applicable state and local
laws or restrictions:
      1.   The setting of fires to combat or limit existing fires, when
reasonably necessary in the judgment of a responsible government official.
      2.   The burning of fuels for legitimate campfire, recreational and
cooking purposes, or in domestic fireplaces, where consistent with other laws;
provided, that no garbage or refuse shall be burned in such cases; and provided
further, that such burning of fuels by persons, firms or corporations for
legitimate campfire and recreational purposes after the hour of six o'clock (6:
00) P.M. shall be allowed, but only:
         a.   If said burning activity is totally extinguished by twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight.
         b.   If said burning is continuously monitored at the site by a
responsible person in charge.
         c.   If adequate means are in place at all times to extinguish the
blaze.
         d.   If said burning activity is wholly contained on the private
property of the person, firm or corporation.
      3.   Small open flames for heating tar, for welding, acetylene torches,
highway safety flares and the like. (Ord. 1053, 1-3-1991; amd. Ord. 2020-1639,
10-20-2020)
5-4-4: AUTHORITY TO DECLARE MORATORIUM ON BURNING:
The village fire chief may request the president and board of trustees to
declare a moratorium on the burning of landscape waste, and upon a showing by
said fire chief of justification for the request, such permission shall not be
unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 1053, 1-3-1991)
5-4-5: PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   In addition to any citation issued pursuant to violations of the
provisions of this chapter, the village chief of police or official designee
shall order the immediate cessation of any burning activity being conducted in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1053, 1-3-1991)
   B.   Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable, upon conviction
thereof, by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2006-1262, 5-2-2006; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Any and all fines imposed by this chapter shall bear interest at a rate
of one percent (1%) per month on the unpaid balance from the date of fine
imposition.
   D.   Upon default in payment of any fine, interest, court costs or
installment thereof for more than thirty (30) days, the defendant shall be
summoned to appear before the county circuit court by personal service or
registered mail, return receipt requested, to show cause, if any there be, why
the person should not be held in contempt of court. (Ord. 1053, 1-3-1991)
CHAPTER 5
VEGETATION CONTROL
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Weeds
5-5-3: Height Restrictions; Waivers
5-5-4: Encroachment Onto Public Ways Prohibited
5-5-5: Notices To Abate; Abatement By Village
5-5-6: Lien Provisions; Personal Judgment
5-5-7: Penalties
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
   NEWSPAPER: Any paper of general circulation in the Village which is
regularly published and sold or distributed to the public.
   PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC WAY: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards,
alleys, or other public ways, and any and all public squares, space, grounds
and buildings.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: Public property dedicated for a public purpose such as
vehicular traffic.
   ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic.
   VEGETATION: Any plant life.
   VILLAGE: The Village of Peoria Heights.
   WEEDS: All noxious vegetation including, but not limited to, weeds such as
jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of like kind, and
all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs, which
exceed a height or length of ten inches (10"); provided, however, this term
shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. (Ord. 2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
5-5-2: WEEDS:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: All weeds are declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   Prohibited Between Property Line And Right-Of-Way: It shall be unlawful
for an owner or person in control of or residing in any real property to permit
the growth of weeds on any right-of-way located between the property line of
the property and the roadway portion of an adjoining highway, inclusive of all
parkways, sidewalks and waterways found therein. (Ord. 2002-1201, 6-18-2002)
5-5-3: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS; WAIVERS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or entity to
permit any weeds, vegetation, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes,
flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow to a height exceeding ten inches
(10") on any lot or tract of land in the Village.
   B.   When a parcel or right-of-way, because of dangerously steep gradient,
or for other similar reasons, has growth in a natural state and has not been
previously graded, improved or otherwise maintained, enforcement of the height
requirement shall be waived, unless noxious growths adversely affecting health
or obstructions to traffic safety are present. (Ord. 2002-1201, 6-18-2002)
5-5-4: ENCROACHMENT ONTO PUBLIC WAYS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for an owner or person in control of or residing in any
real property to permit the encroachment of vegetation including all weeds,
flowers, bushes, hedges, trees or any other plant growth to encumber any public
place or public way. (Ord. 2002-1201, 6-18-2002)
5-5-5: NOTICES TO ABATE; ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   Notice to abate any violation of this chapter may be given by
personal service, by certified mail which is addressed to the residence or
usual place of business of the owner or person in control or possession of the
property, or by posting a sign regarding the violation on the premises of the
property in violation.
      2.   The Village may give notice to abate a violation by posting a sign
in a conspicuous place near the main entrance of a structure. The posted sign
shall be at least fourteen inches (14") in height and eight inches (8") in
width and at the top thereof, in large letters, shall state the words "Notice
To Abate". The text of the notice shall contain a reference to the provision of
this chapter violated and may contain such other information respecting the
nature of the violation as advisable. It shall be unlawful for anyone to
deface, tamper with, or remove the "Notice To Abate" sign from the property
where it is posted unless authorized by an employee or agent of the Village.
      3.   If the notice to abate sent by certified mail is returned to the
Village by the United States Post Office because of its inability to make
delivery thereof, the Village is authorized to cut the vegetation, grass or
weeds and remove the cuttings from the property without further notice, and the
owner or person in control shall be liable to the Village for its costs.
      4.   Upon failure of the owner or persons in control or residing in the
premises to comply with a notice to abate and cut vegetation, grass or weeds
within five (5) days from the date the notice is served, the Village may cut or
cause the cutting of any vegetation, grass or weeds and remove same from the
premises without further notice, and the owner or person in control shall be
liable to the Village for its costs.
   B.   Weeds On Vacant Premises: The Village shall cause to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Village limits once a week for two
(2) consecutive weeks, only between March 21 and August 31 of each year, a
notice informing all owners and persons in control of any vacant lot, or any
lot or any home with an unoccupied structure that the growth of vegetation,
grass or weeds on any such lot or parcel of land is contrary to this chapter.
The notice shall further inform the public that should the vegetation, grass or
weeds ever grow to more than ten inches (10") in height, the Village may cut
the vegetation, grass or weeds without further notice, and the owner or person
in control shall be liable to the Village for its costs. This notice shall be a
display advertisement.
   C.   Citations: Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Village Chief of
Police or his official designee and/or Village Code Enforcement Officer from
issuing a citation for any violation of this chapter without providing any
prior notification. The Village may also obtain an injunction or other
appropriate equitable relief through the County Circuit Court to prevent or
remedy any violations of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
5-5-6: LIEN PROVISIONS; PERSONAL JUDGMENT:
   A.   The cost of cutting the vegetation, grass or weeds and the removal of
the cut vegetation, grass or weeds from private property shall be recoverable
from the owner or person in control of or residing in the real estate and shall
be a lien thereon. The lien shall be superior to all prior existing liens and
encumbrances, except taxes; provided, however, that within ninety (90) days
after completion of the cutting of the vegetation, grass or weeds and the
removal, the Village Attorney shall file a notice of lien for the cost incurred
by the Village in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds. Upon payment of
the total costs, the lien shall be released by the Village Attorney. (Ord.
2002-1201, 6-18-2002; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of
mortgages or mechanics' liens. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced
by the Village Attorney within three (3) years after the date of filing of
notice of lien.
   C.   If the Village cost for cutting the vegetation, weeds and grass are not
paid, the Village Attorney may commence proceedings in the Circuit Court
seeking a personal judgment from the owner, person in control, or residing in
the property. Attorney fees and costs to prosecution are an expense of
enforcing this chapter, and said expenses are in addition to the collection of
the amount of the judgment entered by the court.
   D.   Attorney fees and costs are an expense in enforcing any proceedings to
foreclose a lien and/or to obtain a personal judgment against an owner, party
in control or residing in property for whom a lien is enforced or a personal
judgment is obtained for the violation under this chapter.
   E.   Any action as authorized by this chapter shall be in addition to, and
without waiver of, any other remedies. (Ord. 2002-1201, 6-18-2002)
5-5-7: PENALTIES:
Any person, entity, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day such refusal to comply with this chapter by any
person, entity, firm or corporation shall constitute a separate offense. The
penalty as specified in this section, which may be imposed, may include, in
addition to the fine, all costs, attorney fees and penalties provided for late
payment and/or abatement of the nuisances as provided in this chapter. (Ord.
2002-1201, 6-18-2002; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 6
DISABLED VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definition
5-6-2: Prohibitions
5-6-3: Nuisance Declared
5-6-4: Notices To Abate
5-6-5: Abatement By Village; Costs
5-6-6: Penalty; Failure To Pay
5-6-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, "a disabled motor vehicle" shall mean any vehicle or
vehicle parts and/or equipment, including a trailer, which is without currently
valid license plates or in either wrecked, discarded, dismantled, inoperative
or abandoned condition. (Ord. 1055A, 1-3-1991)
5-6-2: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   A disabled motor vehicle shall not be parked, stored, nor left in the
open on private property unless it is necessary for the operation of a business
enterprise lawfully conducted on said private property.
   B.   A disabled motor vehicle shall not be parked nor stored on any public
right-of-way. (Ord. 1055A, 1-3-1991)
5-6-3: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The parking or storing of a disabled motor vehicle in violation of the
provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. 1055A, 1-3-1991)
5-6-4: NOTICES TO ABATE:
   A.   The Village Chief of Police or his official designee and/or Village
Code Enforcement Officer shall serve a written notice upon the person, firm or
corporation in control of a disabled motor vehicle parked or stored on any
public right-of-way or any private property upon which a disabled motor vehicle
is parked or stored. The written notice shall give the person, firm or
corporation five (5) days from the time the notice is served to either submit a
written request for a hearing on the question of whether or not the motor
vehicle is disabled with the Village Clerk, or abate the nuisance by relocating
the disabled motor vehicle to a completely enclosed location or otherwise to
remove same from the public right-of-way or private property. The written
notice shall be served by personal service, or by registered or certified mail
to the last known address of the person, firm or corporation in control of the
disabled motor vehicle.
   B.   If the person, firm or corporation served with the written notice to
abate requests a hearing within the five-day period, the hearing shall be
scheduled to occur within thirty (30) days after the request for a hearing is
received by the Village Clerk. Reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given
to the person, firm or corporation requesting the hearing. Hearings shall be
held by the Circuit Court of Peoria County. During any such hearing, any person
interested in the described disabled motor vehicle, and any representative of
the Village, may call witnesses and present evidence concerning the motor
vehicle. Any party to the hearing may be represented by legal counsel at the
expense of such party. After receiving all relevant evidence, the court shall
make a written decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence as to
whether or not the motor vehicle constitutes a disabled motor vehicle within
the meaning of this chapter. The person, firm or corporation who requested the
hearing shall be provided a copy of the court's written decision within seven
(7) days of the decision in the same manner as prescribed in this section for
service of a notice to abate. If court determines that the vehicle is a
disabled motor vehicle, then the notice to abate shall become effective from
and after the date such determination is served on the person who requested the
hearing.
   C.   If the person, firm or corporation served with the written notice to
abate fails to submit a written request for a hearing with the Village Clerk
within five (5) days from the time the written notice is served, any hearing
rights under this section shall be deemed waived, and the Village Chief of
Police or his official designee and/or the Village Code Enforcement Officer,
may abate or cause the abatement of the nuisance as provided in this chapter
and/or issue a citation to appear in court for a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-1519, 9-5-2017)
5-6-5: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE; COSTS:
   A.   Whenever any person causes, permits or allows such a nuisance to
continue or exist after the expiration of five (5) days from the service of the
notice to abate, or effective date of the notice to abate if a hearing has been
conducted as provided in this chapter, the Village may, at its option, abate or
cause the abatement of the nuisance in the same manner of disposal of unclaimed
motor vehicles provided by the Illinois Vehicle Code 1 . However, if the
nuisance is located on property other than the public right-of-way or property
in the possession or control of the Village, the Village shall, before abating
the nuisance, obtain the consent of the person served with the notice to abate
or an order from the Peoria County Circuit Court or any other court of
competent jurisdiction authorizing the abatement of the nuisance. Nothing in
this section shall be construed as imposing upon the Village a duty to abate
the nuisance specified in this chapter. The actions authorized by this chapter
shall be in addition to and without waiver of any other remedies.
   B.   In the event the Village is required to incur costs to remove and/or
dispose of a disabled motor vehicle parked or stored on any public right-of-
way, the person, firm or corporation in control of said disabled motor vehicle
shall be liable to the Village for the costs incurred. A statement shall be
rendered to the person, firm or corporation liable for the costs incurred in
addition to any citations issued pursuant to violations of the provisions of
this chapter, and if not paid within thirty (30) days of receipt of said
statement, suit by the Village to recover said costs shall be instituted.
   C.   No police officer, the Police Department, the Department of Public
Works or its officers or employees, or a towing service owner or operator or
employee shall be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought
by the registered owner, former registered owner, or his legal representative,
lienholder or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor
vehicle when such motor vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as
provided by this chapter and the Illinois Vehicle Code 2 . (Ord. 2017-1519, 9-
5-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.
2 1. 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.
5-6-6: PENALTY; FAILURE TO PAY:
   A.   Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable, upon conviction
thereof, by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. Each day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2006-1262, 5-2-2006; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Any and all fines imposed by this chapter shall bear interest at a rate
of one percent (1%) per month on the unpaid balance from the date of fine
imposition.
   C.   Upon default in payment of any fine, interest, court costs or
installment thereof for more than thirty (30) days, the defendant shall be
summoned to appear before the County Circuit Court by personal service or
registered mail, return receipt requested, to show cause, if any there be, why
the person should not be held in contempt of court. (Ord. 1055A, 1-3-1991)
CHAPTER 7
STORMWATER SYSTEM DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
5-7-1: Purpose, Intent
5-7-2: Definitions
5-7-3: Applicability
5-7-4: Responsibility For Administration
5-7-5: Ultimate Responsibility
5-7-6: Discharge, Connection Prohibitions
5-7-7: Suspension Of Access
5-7-8: Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges
5-7-9: Monitoring Of Discharges
5-7-10: Requirement To Prevent, Control, And Reduce Stormwater Pollutants By
The Use Of Best Management Practices
5-7-11: Watercourse Protection
5-7-12: Notification Of Spills
5-7-13: Enforcement
5-7-14: Appeal Of Notice Of Violation
5-7-15: Enforcement Measures After Appeal
5-7-16: Cost Of Abatement Of The Violation
5-7-17: Injunctive Relief
5-7-18: Compensatory Action
5-7-19: Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
5-7-1: PURPOSE, INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the village of Peoria Heights through the regulation
of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the storm drainage
system in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are:
   A.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm drainage system
by stormwater discharges by any user.
   B.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the storm drainage
system.
   C.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Employees or designees of the director of
public works designated to enforce this chapter.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section
1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
   DIRECTOR: The director of public works of the village or his designee or any
other person authorized to act on behalf of the village.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in section
5-7-6 of this chapter.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
   A.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not
limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
   B.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual, group, or general area wide basis.
   NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
   PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
   POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
   PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Facilities within the village by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
   STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated
on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-5: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-6: DISCHARGE, CONNECTION PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm
drainage system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to,
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater.
      2.   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to
the storm drainage system is prohibited except as described as follows:
         a.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less than 1 ppm chlorine),
firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
         b.   Discharges specified in writing by the director as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
         c.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the director prior to the time of the test.
         d.   The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the federal environmental
protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   B.   Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      3.   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system, or allows
such a connection to continue. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-7: SUSPENSION OF ACCESS:
   A.   Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The
village may, without prior notice, suspend discharge access to the storm
drainage system for a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons,
or to the storm drainage system or waters of the United States. If the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized
enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the storm drainage system or waters of the United States, or
to minimize danger to persons.
   B.   Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person
discharging to the storm drainage system in violation of this chapter may have
their storm drainage system access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The director will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its storm drainage system access. The violator may
petition the village for a reconsideration and hearing.
   C.   Offense Of Unauthorized Reconnection: A person commits an offense if
the person reinstates storm drainage system access to premises terminated
pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the director. (Ord.
2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-8: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the village
prior to the allowing of discharges to the storm drainage system. (Ord. 2017-
1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-9: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
   A.   Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.
   B.   Access To Facilities:
      1.   The director shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures
in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into
its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow
access to representatives of the village.
      2.   Facility operators shall allow the director ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
      3.   The director shall have the right to set up on any permitted
facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the director to
conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
      4.   The director has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the director and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this chapter. A
person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person
denies the director reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose
of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
      7.   If the director has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there
is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the director may seek issuance of a search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-10: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The village will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for
any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S.
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system
or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing
the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent
practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as
necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 2017-
1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-11: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-12: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of the U.S.,
said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of
hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a
release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized
enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to director within three (3) business days of the
phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the discharge and
the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least three (3) years. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-13: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Whenever the director finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the director may order compliance
by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may
require, without limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      3.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
      5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
      6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   B.   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-14: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
director to the village board. The notice of appeal must be received within
fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the
appeal before the village board or a hearing officer appointed by the president
of the village shall take place within thirty (30) days from the date of
receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the village board shall be
final. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-15: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within fifteen (15)
days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the
authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or
restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or
person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency
or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-16: COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
Within fifteen (15) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of
the assessment within fifteen (15) days. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by
the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become
a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable
to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not
more than twelve (12) equal payments. Interest at the rate of ten percent (10%)
per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first day following
discovery of the violation. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-17: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized enforcement
agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. (Ord. 2017-1504,
4-4-2017)
5-7-18: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this
chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
5-7-19: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 2017-1504, 4-4-2017)
TITLE 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Police Department   1
Non-9-1-1 Requests For Emergency Services   2
False Alarms Service Charges   3
Emergency Services And Disaster Agency   4
Animal Control   5
Vicious And Potentially Dangerous Dogs   5A
Miscellaneous Offenses   6
Cannabis And Drug Paraphernalia   7
Minors   8
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Appointment Of Department Members
6-1-2: Chief Of Police
6-1-3: Deputy Chief Of Police
6-1-4: Procedure For Hiring Officers
6-1-5: Removal Of Officers; Subpoena Provisions
6-1-6: Reimbursement Due Village For Training Expenditures
6-1-7: Police Pension Fund And Board
6-1-1: APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
The chief of police shall be appointed by the village president and board of
trustees. All other appointments of officers of the police department shall be
made by the board of police commissioners as provided by law. (Ord. 666, 8-21-
1967; amd. 2016 Code)
6-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Removal From Office: Any person appointed chief of police of the
village in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may be removed in
accordance with the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 666, 8-21-1967)
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The chief of police shall have the power and authority provided by
law, and shall cause all ordinances of the village to be enforced. It shall be
his duty, upon its coming to his knowledge that the provisions of any ordinance
have been violated, to forthwith make the proper complaint before the proper
court, procure the arrest of the offender, the attendance of witnesses, and the
production of evidence for the successful prosecution of the offender. (1914
Code § 7-1; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   The chief of police shall arrest, with or without a warrant, any
person whom he may find violating any of the ordinances of the village or any
criminal law of the state, and take the offender before the proper court, to be
dealt with according to law and, if necessary, may have such person in custody
detained overnight or Sunday in a proper facility. (1914 Code § 7-2; amd. 2016
Code)
      3.   The chief of police shall have power and authority, and it shall be
his duty, in the village, to serve and execute warrants and other processes for
the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with a violation of any
village ordinance, any crime, misdemeanor or offense against the peace of the
village or state, or held for examination or trial, or taken in execution for
the commission of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any law or ordinance
of the village, and he shall also have power and authority, and it shall be his
duty, to serve any civil process issued by any proper judge in any case in
which the village is a party. (1914 Code § 7-4; amd. 2016 Code)
6-1-3: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Position Established: The position of deputy chief of police of the
village is established.
   B.   Qualifications And Appointment:
      1.   Qualifications:
         a.   The deputy chief of police of the village shall be chosen from
any rank of sworn, full time officers, but the appointee must have at least
three (3) years of full time service as a police officer with the village.
         b.   The deputy chief of police shall have the ability to complete the
necessary paperwork for the department and the chief of police.
         c.   The deputy chief of police must be able to present himself well
with the public and be able to interact with other police departments.
      2.   Appointment: The deputy chief shall be an exempt rank, immediately
below that of chief of police, and the deputy chief shall serve at the
discretion of the chief of police. The deputy chief of police shall be
appointed and hired by the chief of police.
   C.   Training:
      1.   The deputy chief of police shall be in compliance with the standards
set forth by the Illinois state training board.
      2.   The deputy chief of police will complete the supervisory schooling
as mandated by the state of Illinois. Cost for attending the mandated
supervisory schooling shall be paid by the village. Any costs for tuition in
attending the required schooling shall first be approved by the village board
of trustees.
   D.   Supervised By Chief; Purpose: The deputy chief of police shall report
directly to the chief of police. The primary purpose of the deputy chief of
police is to serve as the supervisor to the second, third and fourth shifts of
the village police department.
   E.   Job Summary And Job Functions: The deputy chief of police is
responsible for the duties assigned by the chief of police. In addition, but
not limited to, he has the primary responsibility of management, oversight and
control of the department as established by this code, state law, and
departmental directives, and duties as established by the chief of police. The
essential job functions of the deputy chief of police shall be as follows:
      1.   Serve as supervisor to the department, second shift, and other
shifts as assigned by the chief of police.
      2.   Either work second, third, or fourth shifts, depending on the needs
of the department.
      3.   Work patrol/plain clothes and have supervisory responsibilities.
      4.   Be responsible for direct supervision when the chief of police is
not present and responsible for documentation of citizen complaints.
      5.   Be responsible for job evaluations and commending officers for job
performance above and beyond their duties. This information will be forwarded
to the chief of police.
      6.   Be responsible for preparing a monthly schedule of personnel.
      7.   Follow all department policies, memorandums, orders and rules and
regulations of the department.
      8.   Be assigned to certain internal affairs investigations that are
designated by the chief of police.
      9.   Be provided an unmarked vehicle for official use only.
      10.   Be responsible for any and all duties assigned by the chief of
police. (Ord. 2006-1266, 7-18-2006)
   F.   Compensation: The salary of the deputy chief of police shall be
determined from time to time by the village board of trustees.
   G.   Days Off And Vacation: Days off and vacations will be assigned by the
chief of police.
   H.   Removal Or Discharge: The deputy chief of police may be removed or
discharged by the chief of police without cause. Any person who is appointed as
deputy chief of police and is discharged or removed from the position of deputy
chief of police shall revert to the rank held immediately prior to his
appointment as deputy chief of police. (Ord. 2006-1266, 7-18-2006; amd. 2016
Code)
6-1-4: PROCEDURE FOR HIRING OFFICERS:
   A.   Intent: It is the intent of this section that the police chief have
more responsibility and authority in the hiring of probationary patrol officers
than is presently permitted by state statutes. (Ord. 1072, 2-2-1993)
   B.   Examinations: The board of police commissioners shall develop and
supervise examinations to determine qualified persons for placement on an open
panel of applicants for the position of probationary patrol officer and shall
determine the procedures therefor. Such examinations shall be practical in
character and relate to those matters which will fairly test the capability of
the persons examined to discharge the duties of the position to which they seek
appointment. The examinations shall include written and oral components and
tests of physical qualification and health. Any person who is a citizen of the
United States and who is not disqualified from taking such examination by rules
of the board of police commissioners and who meets the qualifications and
conditions required of applicants by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-
1 et seq., may, upon proper application, submit to such examination without
charge.
   C.   Certification Of Passing Score; Effect: The board of police
commissioners shall certify the names of all applicants who have received a
passing score on the written component and agility test. Said certification
shall remain in effect for two (2) years from the date certified, after which
time, it shall automatically expire unless extended by action of the village
president and board of trustees upon the request of the board of police
commissioners.
   D.   Notice To President And Commissioners Of Vacancy Or Request For
Additional Officer: The police chief shall notify the village president and
board of police commissioners of an existing vacancy or request to make an
addition to the work force. Pursuant to said notification, the village
president shall authorize the board of police commissioners to select an
applicant or applicants from the open panel of applicants for patrol officers,
considering the applicants' qualifications including, but not limited to, test
scores, experience, education, training, particular job skills, and the needs
of the police department.
   E.   Certificate Of Appointment: The board of police commissioners, in
consultation with the police chief, shall issue a certificate of appointment of
an applicant qualified to be hired as a probationary patrol officer determined
by oral interview, background investigation, medical and/or psychological
examination and polygraph examination.
   F.   Conflicting Provisions Repealed: All rules and regulations of the board
of police commissioners and ordinances of the village in conflict with the
provisions of this section, to the extent of such conflict are hereby repealed.
(Ord. 1072, 2-2-1993; amd. 2016 Code)
6-1-5: REMOVAL OF OFFICERS; SUBPOENA PROVISIONS:
   A.   Any police officer who shall be served with a subpoena to appear and
testify or to produce books and papers issued by the village board of police
commissioners or by any commissioner or board member or any person acting under
orders of the board in the course of an investigation or hearing conducted
under the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-17 and who shall
refuse or neglect to appear or to testify or to produce books and papers
relevant to the investigation or hearing as commanded by such subpoena shall,
upon conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, plus those court costs and attorney fees necessarily
incurred in the prosecution thereof. In addition to the remedies above set
forth, the board of police commissioners is hereby authorized to apply to the
circuit court of the 10th judicial circuit of this state for an order
compelling the attendance of witnesses, the production of books and papers, and
the giving of testimony before the board of commissioners, or before any such
commissioner, board member or officer, by attachment for contempt or otherwise
in the same manner as the production of evidence may be compelled before such
court.
   B.   Pursuant to any duly issued and served subpoena, the fees of witnesses
for attendance and travel shall be the same as the fees of the witnesses before
the circuit court of the 10th judicial circuit of this state and shall be paid
from the appropriation for the expenses of the board of police commissioners as
approved by the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. 1074, 4-6-1993;
amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Every person who, having taken an oath or made affirmation before a
board member, commissioner or officer appointed by the board authorized to
administer oaths shall swear or affirm wilfully, corruptly or falsely shall be
guilty of perjury and, upon conviction shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord.
1074, 4-6-1993)
6-1-6: REIMBURSEMENT DUE VILLAGE FOR TRAINING EXPENDITURES:
   A.   Any police officer extended an offer of employment and/or employed by
the village who is required to have training required by the village board of
police commissioners and the laws of the state of Illinois, which includes the
expenses set out in subsection B of this section, shall execute a police
training reimbursement agreement.
   B.   In the event a police officer's employment with the village is
terminated at any time during the first thirty six (36) months of the officer's
date of hire, by reason of termination by the village for just cause or by
reason of the officer voluntarily leaving such employment, the officer shall
reimburse the village for all expenditures incurred by the village in
connection with officer's training, such as expenditures for police training
institute tuition, uniforms, including bulletproof vest, mileage, candidate
screening, and other expenses incurred in training. These expenses shall be set
out on a police training reimbursement agreement.
   C.   The gross total of the training reimbursement cost as set out in any
police training reimbursement agreement which was incurred by the village for
training of the police officer will be reduced by any sum the village may
receive in the future from any state agency or other third party as
reimbursement for expenditures the village incurred as a result of providing
the officer with the training contemplated herein, and the officer shall be
obligated to reimburse the village the sum remaining after any third party
reimbursement is applied.
   D.   Payment of any reimbursement obligation due the village by the officer
shall be due and payable immediately, at the time of the officer's termination
of employment with the village becomes effective.
   E.   The officer shall further agree to pay all reasonable costs incurred by
the village in collecting any sums due and owing to the village, pursuant to
any police training agreement, including reasonable attorney fees and costs and
any other legal expenses.
   F.   The police training reimbursement agreement shall be, in the basic
form, as exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein made a part of
this section. (Ord. 2003-1216, 7-15-2003)
6-1-7: POLICE PENSION FUND AND BOARD:
   A.   Fund Established: There shall be a police pension fund established in
the village as provided by law. (Ord. 401, 8-15-1955)
   B.   Board Of Trustees Of Fund:
      1.   Composition And Term: The board of trustees of the police pension
fund shall consist of five (5) members, two (2) appointed by the village
president, two (2) elected by the members of the police department, and one
elected by the beneficiaries of the pension fund. The elections shall be held
biennially on the third Monday in April, and the term of each member shall be
two (2) years. (Ord. 401, 8-15-1955; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Meetings: The pension board shall meet at least quarterly as
provided by law, and shall hold such additional meetings as may be called by
the president of the pension board. (Ord. 401, 8-15-1955)
   C.   Deposits Into Fund: There shall be deposited in the pension fund the
sums required by law, which shall include five percent (5%) per month deducted
from the salary of each member of the police force, and the proceeds of an
annual tax of not to exceed 0.05 percent which shall be levied; and also three-
fourths (3/4) of the dog license fees, all the monies received for special
detail of police officers, ten percent (10%) of fines collected for violation
of village ordinances, monies received as fines imposed upon police officers,
rewards turned over to the pension fund, and ten percent (10%) of the license
revenue, exclusive of vehicle licenses, which shall be contributed to the
pension fund, as required by statute. (Ord. 401, 8-15-1955; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 2
NON-9-1-1 REQUESTS FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definitions
6-2-2: Non-9-1-1 Request Relayed To Village Communications Center
6-2-3: Monthly Report Of Direct Requests
6-2-4: Penalty
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
   EMERGENCY SERVICES: Includes requests by phone using the "9-1-1" emergency
telephone system or direct request to the Peoria Heights communications center,
the Peoria Heights fire department, or the Peoria Heights police department
including, without limitation, the transportation of a person to a facility or
hospital, and to provide basic life support and advanced life support services.
   PERSON: Includes every natural person, firm, copartnership, limited
partnership, or association or the employees, officers, or agents of any of the
entities set forth in this definition. (Ord. 2009-1321, 1-5-2010; amd. 2016
Code)
6-2-2: NON-9-1-1 REQUEST RELAYED TO VILLAGE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER:
In the event that any "person", as defined in section
6-2-1 of this chapter, receives a non-9-1-1 request for emergency services,
other than a direct request through the village communications center for
emergency services to a person within the village, that person or entity shall
immediately relay the information to the village communications center, and the
person or entity shall inform the caller that, on future emergency calls for
emergency services, the caller should first call 9-1-1 to request emergency
services. (Ord. 2009-1321, 1-5-2010)
6-2-3: MONTHLY REPORT OF DIRECT REQUESTS:
Any "person" or entity, as defined in this chapter, who provides emergency
services in the village from direct calls for emergency services requests shall
provide a monthly report of such direct emergency request calls received by
said person or entity on a form prescribed by the village. (Ord. 2009-1321, 1-
5-2010; amd. 2016 Code)
6-2-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, plus costs. (Ord. 2009-1321, 1-5-2010; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 3
FALSE ALARM SERVICE CHARGES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Service Charges Established
6-3-3: Notice Of Alarm To Alarm User; Determination Of False Alarm
6-3-4: Violation; Penalty
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
   ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged
to signal the occurrence of a fire, robbery, illegal entry or other activity
requiring urgent attention and to which the emergency services of the police,
fire and/or ambulance departments are expected to respond.
   ALARM USER: The person, other than a unit of local, state or federal
government, in control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm
system is maintained.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: A device which is interconnected to a telephone
line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit
by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for
emergency response.
   FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal eliciting a response by emergency services when
a situation requiring a response by them does not in fact exist, but does not
include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm
user, including power outages and telephone service outages.
   LOCAL ALARM: An alarm system which, when activated, causes an audible and/or
visual signaling device to be activated only on the premises within which the
system is installed and which is intended to be heard or seen by others outside
of the protected premises. (Ord. 1117, 7-15-1997)
6-3-2: SERVICE CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
An alarm user shall be charged a service fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
false alarm in excess of three (3) in any calendar year and a fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each false alarm in excess of ten (10) in any
calendar year. (Ord. 1117, 7-15-1997)
6-3-3: NOTICE OF ALARM TO ALARM USER; DETERMINATION OF FALSE ALARM:
Within thirty (30) days after each false alarm, the village police chief shall
notify the alarm user by mailing a notice to the address from which the false
alarm was received. If the alarm user believes that the alarm was not a false
alarm, said alarm user shall reply to the village police chief within ten (10)
days, stating the reasons why the alarm was not a false alarm. In the absence
of such reply, the alarm shall be conclusively presumed to be a false alarm.
The village police chief shall determine, based upon such available information
as may be appropriate and with the alarm user's response, whether or not the
alarm was false and so notify the user. If the alarm is determined to be a
false alarm for which a service fee is due, the user shall remit to the village
the appropriate service fee for such false alarm within thirty (30) days of
notification by the village police chief. (Ord. 1117, 7-15-1997)
6-3-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to pay, when due, any service fee owed
the village in connection with this chapter. Any person who shall be convicted
of violation of this chapter shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 1117, 7-15-1997; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 4
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
6-4-1: Created; Purpose; Composition
6-4-2: Coordinator
6-4-3: Oath Of Office
6-4-4: Functions
6-4-5: Service As Mobile Support Team
6-4-6: Mutual Aid Agreements
6-4-7: Emergency Action
6-4-8: Compensation
6-4-9: Reimbursement By State
6-4-10: Purchases And Expenditures
6-4-11: Office
6-4-12: Appropriation; Tax Levy
6-4-1: CREATED; PURPOSE; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created the village of Peoria Heights ESDA to prevent,
minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from explosion of
atomic or other means from without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal
actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure or
other natural or technological causes, in accordance with the Illinois
emergency management act. The ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and such
additional members as may be selected by the coordinator. (Ord. 872, 4-20-1976;
amd. 2016 Code)
6-4-2: COORDINATOR:
   A.   Appointment: The coordinator of the village ESDA shall be appointed by
the village president and shall serve until removed by same. (Ord. 872, 4-20-
1976; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Duties: The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training, and operation of the ESDA, subject to
the direction and control of the village president as provided by statute.
   C.   Acting Coordinator: In the event of the absence, resignation, death or
inability to serve as the coordinator, the village president or any person
designated by him shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is
made as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 872, 4-20-1976)
6-4-3: OATH OF OFFICE:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the village ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following
oath, which shall be filed with the coordinator:
I,                   do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the Village of Peoria Heights ESDA
organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence.
 
(Ord. 872, 4-20-1976)
6-4-4: FUNCTIONS:
The village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the village as shall
be prescribed in and by the state EMA plan and program prepared by the
governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
governor and, in addition, shall perform such duties outside the corporate
limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other
political subdivision, municipality, or quasi- municipality entered into as
provided in the state EMA act. (Ord. 872, 4-20-1976; amd. 2016 Code)
6-4-5: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
   A.   All or any members of the village ESDA organization may be designated
as members of a mobile support team created by the director of the state EMA as
provided by law. (Ord. 872, 4-20-1976; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the
coordinator of the village ESDA organization.
   C.   Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or
officer, while serving on call to duty by the governor or the state director,
shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and
immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a
paid officer or employee of the village, while so serving, shall receive from
the state reasonable compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 872, 4-20-1976)
6-4-6: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
The coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other villages
or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the village president and by the state
director of EMA. (Ord. 872, 4-20-1976; amd. 2016 Code)
6-4-7: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of Illinois of an explosion of atomic or other means from without or by means
of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake,
telecommunications failure or other natural or technological causes, it shall
be the duty of the village ESDA to cooperate fully with the state EMA and with
the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. 872,
4-20-1976; amd. 2016 Code)
6-4-8: COMPENSATION:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the village, if
called for training by the state director of EMA, shall receive for the time
spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held; members who are not such village employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the village
president. (Ord. 872, 4-20-1976; amd. 2016 Code)
6-4-9: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The village treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the state director of EMA, compensation
for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the village in response to a call by the governor or state director of
EMA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident
to ESDA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 872, 4-20-1976; amd. 2016 Code)
6-4-10: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
   A.   The village president, on recommendation of the village coordinator of
ESDA, may authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the village in
a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from explosion of
atomic or other means from without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal
actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure or
other natural or technological causes.
   B.   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the village coordinator
of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or materials as may be necessary for such purposes, in view
of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
normally prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or obligations, as
authorized by the state EMA act; provided, that if the village board of
trustees meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord. 872, 4-20-1976; amd. 2016 Code)
6-4-11: OFFICE:
The village president is authorized to designate space in a village building,
or elsewhere, as may be provided by the village president for the village ESDA
as its office. (Ord. 872, 4-20-1976)
6-4-12: APPROPRIATION; TAX LEVY:
The village president and board of trustees may make an appropriation for ESDA
purposes in the manner provided by law, and may levy in addition, for ESDA
purposes only, a tax not to exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars
($100.00) of the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all
other taxes, as provided by the state EMA act. However, that amount collectible
under such levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita.
(Ord. 872, 4-20-1976; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
6-5-1: Citation To County Animal Control Code
6-5-2: Adoption Of County Animal Control Code
6-5-3: Enforcement By Peoria County
6-5-4: Enforcement By Village
6-5-5: Farm Animals Prohibited
6-5-6: Waste Removal
6-5-7: Kennels
6-5-8: Kennel License Revocation
6-5-9: Impoundment Of Kennel Pets
6-5-10: Penalties
6-5-1: CITATION TO COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL CODE:
For purposes of this chapter, the "county animal control code" means chapter 5,
"animals and fowl", of the code of Peoria County. (Ord. 2016-1463, 3-15-2016)
6-5-2: ADOPTION OF COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL CODE:
The village of Peoria Heights hereby adopts by reference the county animal
control code as it now exists or may from time to time hereafter be amended.
(Ord. 2016-1463, 3-15-2016)
6-5-3: ENFORCEMENT BY PEORIA COUNTY:
Officers or other representatives of Peoria County may enforce the county
animal control code within the corporate limits of the village as an authorized
delegate of the village under the terms of intergovernmental agreements
authorizing such enforcement entered into from time to time by the village of
Peoria Heights with Peoria County (an "intergovernmental agreement"). (Ord.
2016-1463, 3-15-2016)
6-5-4: ENFORCEMENT BY VILLAGE:
Police officers of the village and other officers of the village may enforce
the county animal control code within the corporate limits of the village.
(Ord. 2016-1463, 3-15-2016)
6-5-5: FARM ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in section
10-7A-2 of this code, the keeping, housing, raising or pasturing of members of
the swine, ovine, bovine, caprine or equine families and poultry consisting of
domesticated birds raised for show, eggs or meat is prohibited within the
corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2016-1463, 3-15-2016)
6-5-6: WASTE REMOVAL:
That the owner of any animal shall cause the prompt and proper removal of any
such animal's waste wherever it may exist within the village. (Ord. 2016-1463,
3-15-2016)
6-5-7: KENNELS:
   A.   No person shall own three (3) or more dogs or cats (under 3 months of
age excepted) either for profit or for personal pleasure or otherwise, without
being considered the operator of a kennel. The operator of a kennel shall
comply with the following regulations:
      1.   If a kennel is operated for profit, the kennel operator shall pay to
the village clerk or authorized delegate a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
annually and said kennel shall be located in an area zoned for business
purposes as defined in the current Peoria Heights zoning ordinance.
      2.   If operated for any purpose other than profit, the kennel operator
shall pay an initial application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and ten
dollars ($10.00) annually thereafter and furnish a sworn statement to the
effect that the kennel is operated as a nonprofit undertaking.
      3.   All new licenses, regardless of when during the calendar year they
were first issued, shall expire on December 31 of that calendar year. Renewed
licenses become effective on January 1 of the applicable calendar year and
expire on December 31 of that calendar year.
      4.   During the term of any intergovernmental agreement, applications for
kennel licenses shall be submitted to and approved by Peoria County animal
protection services or any successor entity. If no intergovernmental agreement
is in effect, such applications shall be submitted to and approved by the
village administrator of the village of Peoria Heights.
   B.   Whether operated for profit or otherwise, no kennel shall be permitted
within a radius of three hundred feet (300') of any dwelling house unless both
the owner and occupant of the dwelling house consent to the same; the applicant
to furnish such consent in writing.
   C.   All dog kennels shall be kept at all times in a clean and sanitary
condition and dogs kept therein shall be reasonably restrained from annoying
the neighborhood or the general public by barking, yelping, howling or
screeching.
   D.   By accepting a license, all kennel licensees shall be deemed to have
consented to periodic inspection of the kennel premises. Said inspection shall
be performed by the Peoria Heights police department or an authorized delegate
before license issuance or upon receipt of a complaint. Annual inspections may
be required. All kennel licensees shall conform to the following additional
requirements:
      1.   All dogs and/or cats must be provided with a continuous supply of
fresh water, sufficient food to maintain acceptable body weight, proper
shelter, protection from weather and sufficient veterinary care to prevent
suffering.
      2.   If dogs and/or cats are kept or maintained within a structure or
building, that structure or building shall meet all applicable Peoria County
health department standards and not constitute a nuisance or danger to health
and welfare of its inhabitants nor surrounding residents.
      3.   If dogs and/or cats are maintained outside a building during a
substantial portion of the day and/or night, a shelter of sufficient height and
width to permit such animal to stand up and turn around inside when fully grown
shall be provided and shelter shall provide shade from the sun.
      4.   The location of all kennels shall be in accordance with the setback
provisions for principal structures as for the applicable zoning district as
set forth in the current Peoria Heights zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2016-1463, 3-
15-2016)
6-5-8: KENNEL LICENSE REVOCATION:
The violation of any provision of this chapter pertaining to the licensing of
kennels shall upon conviction, result in the revocation of license privileges
by the issuing entity for a period of not less than three (3) months nor more
than two (2) years, the length of such revocation period to be determined by
the number and severity of the violations. After expiration of the revocation
period, said kennel license shall not be automatically reinstated. The former
licensee must reapply for the license and show an ability to conform to any and
all applicable ordinance provisions. Upon a satisfactory showing of
conformance, a new kennel license may be issued. (Ord. 2016-1463, 3-15-2016)
6-5-9: IMPOUNDMENT OF KENNEL PETS:
The Peoria Heights police department or authorized delegate may impound the
animals of any owner not in possession of a kennel license as required by this
chapter and if so impounded may be redeemed by the owner or the owner's
delegate only upon payment of all lawful fees due pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter and after application for and approval of a kennel license. (Ord.
2016-1463, 3-15-2016)
6-5-10: PENALTIES:
Any person violating sections
6-5-5 through
6-5-7 of this chapter shall be subject to penalties imposed under the terms of
the county animal control code. (Ord. 2016-1463, 3-15-2016)
ARTICLE A. VICIOUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS
SECTION:
6-5A-1: Definitions
6-5A-2: Identification Of Vicious Dogs And Potentially Dangerous Dogs
6-5A-3: Consequences And Conditions Of Dangerous Dog Determination
6-5A-4: Consequences And Conditions Of Vicious Dog Determination
6-5A-5: Exemptions From Provisions
6-5A-6: Violations; Penalties
6-5A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Any of the following:
   A.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two (2) separate occasions within
the prior thirty six (36) month period, engages in any behavior that requires a
defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the
dog are off the property of the owner or custodian of the dog.
   B.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person or otherwise engages in
aggressive behavior, causing a less "severe injury" than as defined in this
section.
   C.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted
injury, or otherwise caused injury to a domestic animal off the property of the
owner or custodian of the dog.
   D.   1. Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of the
owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed or unattended by its
owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe possesses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or
      2.   A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause
serious physical injury.
   E.   Any dog which has shown aggressive behavior to other animals and/or
people, which would exhibit unprovoked aggression without any notice or
verifiable coercion by a person or animal.
   F.   Any dog which, when unprovoked, has attacked or attempted to attack,
including bites, another human or another animal, either on public or private
property.
   G.   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
without provocation to cause injury or otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals.
   H.   Any individual dog that attacks a domestic animal without provocation
by that animal.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY: A physical injury that creates a substantial risk
of death or that causes death, serious disfigurement, protracted impairment of
health, impairment of function of any bodily organ, or plastic surgery.
   SEVERE INJURY: Any physical injury to a human being that results in a major
fracture, muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures
or corrective or cosmetic surgery.
   VICIOUS DOG: Any of the following:
   A.   A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes severe
injury or severe physical injury, or death, or a dog that has been found to be
a dangerous dog on more than one occasion;
   B.   Any dog that engages in or has been found to have been trained in
exhibitions of fighting;
   C.   Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed to be a
potentially dangerous dog, which, after its owner/custodian has been notified
of this determination, continues the behavior of a potentially dangerous dog.
(Ord. 2007-1287, 10-2-2007)
6-5A-2: IDENTIFICATION OF VICIOUS DOGS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS:
   A.   Investigation; Notice Requirements:
      1.   Any law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer or animal
control officer employed by or under contract with the village who suspects
that a dog may be a "vicious dog" or a "potentially dangerous dog", as defined
in section
 6-5A-1 of this article, may conduct an investigation to determine whether or
not the dog has committed any act or displays any characteristics which qualify
it as a vicious dog and/or a potentially dangerous dog. If, upon the completion
of such investigation, the officer concludes that the dog is a vicious dog or a
potentially dangerous dog, such officer shall issue a written notice of
determination, which includes at least the following: (Ord. 2007-1287, 10-2-
2007; amd. 2016 Code)
         a.   A description of the dog.
         b.   Information available concerning the ownership of the dog.
         c.   A statement or conclusion that the dog is a "vicious dog" or a
"potentially dangerous dog" within the meaning of section
6-5A-1 of this article.
         d.   A description of the acts or characteristics which led the law
enforcement officer, code enforcement officer or animal control officer
employed by or under contract with the village to conclude that the dog is a
vicious dog or a potentially dangerous dog.
         e.   Notice to the owner or the custodian that the vicious dog or
potentially dangerous dog must be licensed and housed in accordance with the
requirements of section
 6-5A-3 of this article.
         f.   Notice that the owner or custodian may appeal the determination
of the law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer or animal control
officer employed by or under contract with the village to the mayor within
seven (7) working days after the determination is served upon the owner or
custodian.
      2.   The law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer or animal
control officer employed by or under contract with the village shall serve the
notice of determination on the owner or custodian by certified mail or hand
delivery to the last known address of the owner or custodian.
   B.   Appeals:
      1.   Notice Of Appeal; Failure To File: The owner may appeal any
determination that the owner's dog is a vicious dog or a potentially dangerous
dog. An appeal must be directed to the mayor and must be filed by the owner in
the office of the village clerk within seven (7) working days after receipt of
the notice of determination which identifies the dog as a vicious dog or
potentially dangerous dog. Should the owner fail to appeal the determination
within seven (7) working days, the determination of the investigating officer
that the dog is a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog shall become final.
      2.   Hearing Requirements:
         a.   Upon receipt of an appeal, the mayor, or such person as the mayor
may designate to act on the mayor's behalf, shall convene a hearing for the
purpose of determining whether the dog in question is a vicious dog or
potentially dangerous dog.
         b.   The hearing shall be held within no less than five (5) nor more
than ten (10) working days after the mayor or his designee serves a notice of
the time, date and location of the hearing upon the owner or custodian of the
allegedly vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog.
         c.   The hearing shall be conducted informally and shall remain open
to the public.
         d.   At the hearing, the owner or custodian shall have the opportunity
to present evidence to explain why the dog should not be declared a vicious dog
or potentially dangerous dog. The owner or custodian shall have the right to be
represented by legal counsel at the owner's expense.
         e.   The law enforcement officer or animal control officer employed by
or under contract with the village who made the initial determination that the
dog is vicious or potentially dangerous, and any other person(s) having
knowledge of the facts and circumstances, may be heard by the mayor or his
designee and shall be subject to cross examination by the owner or custodian or
the owner's or custodian's attorney.
         f.   The mayor or his designee shall decide all issues for or against
the owner or custodian of the dog regardless of whether the owner or custodian
appears at the hearing.
      3.   Mayor's Decision: Within five (5) working days after the conclusion
of the hearing, the mayor or his designee shall determine whether or not the
dog is a "vicious dog" or "potentially dangerous dog" within the meaning of
section
6-5A-1 of this article. The mayor or his designee shall notify the owner or
custodian in writing of its determination. The decision of the mayor or his
designee shall be final.
   C.   Immediate Impoundment; Notice And Appeal: If any officer of the village
determines that the public safety requires the immediate impoundment of a dog
as authorized by this section, the officer shall, within a reasonable time,
notify the owner or custodian of the facts and circumstances relating to the
impoundment. Upon receipt of such notification, the owner or custodian may
appeal the determination of the officer to the mayor or his designee in
accordance with the procedures established in this section for the
identification of vicious dogs. (Ord. 2007-1287, 10-2-2007)
6-5A-3: CONSEQUENCES AND CONDITIONS OF DANGEROUS DOG DETERMINATION:
   A.   The consequences and conditions of a dangerous dog determination are as
follows:
      1.   The dog shall be properly licensed, microchipped, and vaccinated at
the owner's expense prior to release to the dog's owner or custodian. The
village may include the designation in the registration records of the dog
after the court has determined that the designation applies to the dog.
      2.   The dog, while on the owner's property, shall, at all times, be kept
indoors, or in a securely fenced yard or enclosure from which the dog cannot
escape, which shall be a minimum of a six foot (6') high chainlink or wooden
privacy fence, which will automatically close when someone is entering or
exiting the enclosure, installed in the area where the dangerous dog is
maintained upon the premises and into which children cannot trespass. The yard
or enclosure must be inspected and approved in writing by the village prior to
release of the dog to its owner or custodian.
      3.   The dog may be off the owner's premises only if it is muzzled and
restrained by a substantial leash, not exceeding six feet (6') in length, and
if it is under the control of an adult capable of restraining and controlling
the dog. At no time may the dog be left unattended while off the owner's
premises.
      4.   The owner or custodian of the dog shall notify the village police
department immediately in the event the dog is at large, has committed an
attack on any person or animal, has been sold or otherwise disposed of, or has
died.
      5.   The dog must complete an obedience course at the owner's expense
within sixty (60) days after release of the dog to its owner or custodian. The
course shall be a course approved by the village.
      6.   The dog must be spayed or neutered at the expense of the owner or
custodian prior to the release of the dog to its owner or custodian.
      7.   The dog may be required to wear a bright fluorescent yellow collar
visible at fifty feet (50') in normal daylight, which will be provided by the
village at the owner's expense.
      8.   The owner or custodian of the dog may be required to maintain
general liability insurance covering property damage and bodily injury caused
by a potentially dangerous dog, with a combined single limit of three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence, and may be required to show
proof of such insurance within thirty (30) days after the court has made its
determination. Verification of said policy and copies of the policy showing it
is paid and in full force and effect shall be brought to the village hall and
reviewed by the code enforcement officer every thirty (30) days.
      9.   All charges for services performed by the village and its employees
pursuant to this section and all fines shall be paid prior to the release of
the dog to its owner or custodian. If said charges and fines are not paid
within thirty (30) days after the date the services are performed or the fines
are ordered to be paid, the dog shall be deemed to be abandoned to the village.
(Ord. 2007-1287, 10-2-2007)
      10.   The owner of a dog which has been determined to be a dangerous dog
shall pay a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each separate basis upon which said determination was
made. Court costs in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) may be
assessed.
      11.   Owner(s) of the dangerous dog shall have fifteen (15) days from the
date of the dangerous dog finding to comply with the aforementioned
requirements. If these requirements are not met, the dog in question may be
removed from the premises by order of the code enforcement officer of the
village, and the owner(s) may be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each infraction. (Ord. 2007-1287, 10-2-2007; amd. 2016
Code)
   B.   The mayor or any village law enforcement officer, code enforcement
officer or animal control officer employed by or under contract with the
village may impose such other reasonable conditions as are deemed necessary to
protect the public safety and welfare. (Ord. 2007-1287, 10-2-2007)
6-5A-4: CONSEQUENCES AND CONDITIONS OF VICIOUS DOG DETERMINATION:
The consequences and conditions of a vicious dog determination are as follows:
   A.   A dog determined to be a vicious dog may be destroyed by the village
police department and/or a veterinarian chosen by the village and/or the Peoria
County animal control office when it is found, after proceedings conducted as
provided in this article, and that the release of the dog would create a
significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   If it is determined that a dog found to be vicious shall not be
destroyed, the mayor shall impose the same conditions for ownership and
continual custodial care of a dangerous dog as required by section
6-5A-3 of this article and shall require the additional conditions required by
this section and any other conditions necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
   C.   In addition to the requirements for enclosures set out in subsection
6-5A-3A2 of this article, an enclosure shall be enclosed on all sides and shall
be locked by a padlock. It may be required to have a top and a cement floor.
The enclosure must be approved in writing by the village chief of police or his
designee.
   D.   The owner or custodian of a vicious dog must give written notice of the
vicious dog determination to the United States post office (local branch) and
all utility companies which provide services to the premises where the dog is
kept. The owner or custodian shall provide a copy of such notice to the
department within thirty (30) days after the court determination that the dog
is vicious.
   E.   The owner or custodian of the dog may be required to maintain general
liability insurance covering property damage and bodily injury caused by a
vicious dog, with a combined single limit of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, and may be required to show proof of such
insurance within thirty (30) days after the court has made its determination.
Verification of said policy and copies of the policy, showing it is paid and in
full force and effect, shall be brought to the village hall and reviewed by the
code enforcement officer every thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2007-1287, 10-2-2007)
   F.   The owner or custodian of the dog shall post one or more signs on the
premises at a location(s) approved by the Peoria County animal control
department stating that a dog, which has been determined to be vicious, resides
on the premises.
   G.   The owner or custodian of a dog which has been determined to be a
vicious dog pursuant to the provisions of this article shall pay a fine as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each separate basis upon which said determination was
made. Said fine shall be paid to the village.
   H.   Owner(s) of the vicious dog shall have fifteen (15) days from the date
of the vicious dog finding to comply with the requirements of this section. If
these requirements are not met, the dog in question may be removed from the
premises by order of the code enforcement officer of the village, and the owner
(s) may be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each infraction. (Ord. 2007-1287, 10-2-2007; amd. 2016
Code)
   I.   The owner of a dog determined to be a vicious dog may be prohibited
from owning, possessing, controlling or having custody of any dog for a period
of up to three (3) years if it is found at the hearing conducted pursuant to
the petition to declare the dog vicious that ownership or possession of a dog
by that person would create a significant threat to the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. 2007-1287, 10-2-2007)
6-5A-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
This article shall not apply to veterinarians or to guide dogs for the blind or
hearing impaired, support dogs for persons with a physical disability, and
sentry, guard, or police owned dogs, provided an attack or injury to a person
occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption
under this section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies
in accordance with state law and performing duties as expected. (Ord. 2007-
1287, 10-2-2007; amd. 2016 Code)
6-5A-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Possession Of Vicious Or Dangerous Dog Prohibited: Unless in compliance
with this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or in
any way possess, within the corporate limits of the village, a vicious or
dangerous dog.
   B.   Fines:
      1.   If a dog, after a hearing as provided by this article, is found to
be a dangerous or vicious dog, the owner or custodian may be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code, plus costs.
      2.   The failure of an owner or custodian of a dog released to the owner,
after hearing pursuant to this article, to comply with any of the conditions
imposed shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   C.   Release Of Dog; Failure To Pay Fines Or Abide By Conditions:
      1.   No dog shall be released to the owner or custodian until fines and
costs have been paid. If the fine and costs have not been paid by the time
administrative review is completed, the dog shall be considered abandoned to
the village and may be destroyed.
      2.   Failure of an owner or custodian of a dog, which has been determined
to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog, that has been released to the owner or
custodian after a determination hearing pursuant to this article, to comply
with any of the conditions imposed pursuant to this article, may be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each day that the noncompliance continues. (Ord. 2007-
1287, 10-2-2007; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Aid In An Offense
6-6-2: Assault And Battery
6-6-3: Disorderly Conduct
6-6-4: Fights
6-6-5: Disturbing The Peace
6-6-6: Disturbing Assemblies
6-6-7: Damage To Property
6-6-8: Depositing Offensive Substances Onto Public Ways
6-6-9: Posting Advertisements
6-6-10: Interference With Village Wireless Reception
6-6-11: Live Sex Acts Businesses
6-6-12: Indecent Acts, Materials And Dress
6-6-13: Houses Of Prostitution
6-6-14: Gambling And Gambling Houses
6-6-15: Public Intoxication; Sleeping In Public
6-6-16: Vagrancy
6-6-17: False Representation Of Village Officials
6-6-18: Weapons
6-6-19: Penalty
6-6-1: AID IN AN OFFENSE:
No person shall aid, abet or encourage any unlawful act or any violation of any
ordinance of the village. (1914 Code § 10-49; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-2: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
No person shall, within the limits of the village, fight, strike, or assault
any other person, or commit an assault and battery upon the person of another.
(1914 Code § 10-2; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT 1 :
A person commits disorderly conduct when he/she knowingly:
   A.   Does any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
   B.   Through any utterance, gesture, or display, creates a clear and present
danger of a breach of the peace or imminent threat of violence; or
   C.   With intent to harass, annoy or intimidate another, makes a telephone
call, whether or not conversation thereby ensues. This subsection includes
collection agencies or employees thereof as defined in the state collection
agency act; or
   D.   Transmits in any manner, to any person or agency, a report of a fire,
bomb, natural disaster, crime in progress, accident, sick or injured person, or
any other emergency situation knowing at the time of such transmission that
there is no reasonable ground to believe that such a condition exists; or
   E.   Transmits in any manner to any police officer, public officer, or
public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground to
believe that such an offense has been committed; or
   F.   Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity
which is likely to produce a breach of the peace after being ordered to do so
by a police officer or any official with the authority to make such an order;
or
   G.   Obstructs or interferes with the performance of any police officer,
firefighter, emergency medical technician, public utility worker, street
construction worker, or other person or agency while engaged in service to
public safety, public infrastructure, or public or privately owned utilities;
or
   H.   Enters upon the property of another and, for a lewd or unlawful
purpose, deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening; or
   I.   As the operator of a motor vehicle, causes any stone, dirt, gravel, or
other object to be heedlessly hurled or discharged by rapid acceleration or
spinning of tires on any public street or highway in the village; or
   J.   Urinates, defecates, or causes any human or animal waste to be placed
or discarded upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, or any part of any public
building, or of any building or grounds where the public gathers or has access
to, or in any other place, whether public or private, where such act could be
observed by any member of the public, except in such place that has been
designated as a restroom when fixtures provided for such purpose are properly
utilized; or
   K.   Initiates, engages in, simulates, encourages or promotes any fight or
physical altercation between two (2) or more individuals on any public
property, or private property where any member of the public could reasonably
view such altercation, regardless of whether any person involved in such
altercation desires or declines criminal prosecution. Exemptions shall include
properly sanctioned and comported sports events and self-defense as allowed
pursuant to Illinois law; or
   L.   Utters profane, obscene or abusive words or performs profane, obscene
or abusive acts or gestures directed to or within the view or hearing of
another, with the intent to provoke a breach of the peace; or (Ord. 2006-1259,
2-21-2006)
   M.   Yells, shouts, whistles or activates a horn, other than the use of a
motor vehicle horn used only as a warning for safety purposes, or other
unnecessary noise or light producing device or object, or creates an
unnecessary commotion of any type between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day; or (Ord. 2006-1259, 2-21-
2006; amd. 2016 Code)
   N.   Becomes intoxicated to the degree as to be a danger to personal or
public safety by staggering, falling, lying, sitting or obstructing in any
manner a street, sidewalk, railroad track or any public way; or
   O.   Disturbs any passerby or disrupts lawful orderly public assembly upon
any street, sidewalk or other place open to the public by placing obstructions
upon or across the same, by throwing objects of any kind or by jeering or
deriding any person in any manner, with intent to disturb any person or disrupt
any lawful assembly; or
   P.   Causes or permits any room, house, shop, building, or place of any
description to become the gathering place of disorderly persons, causes or
permits any unreasonable noise, or causes or permits criminal acts of any type.
No person owning or in possession, charge or control of such premises shall
permit the disturbance, disruption, or destruction of the peace of the
neighborhood in which such building or premises is situated. Three (3)
violations of this subsection within a twelve (12) month period shall be
grounds for the village to declare such premises a public nuisance; or
   Q.   Intentionally engages in any act of nudity whereby the genitals,
buttocks, anus, or female breast below the top of the areola is exposed, when
the person performing such act knows or should reasonably know that he/she is
within the view of the public, or performs any lewd exposure of the body or
fondling or caressing of the body with the intent to arouse or satisfy the
sexual desire of another; or
   R.   Engages in or simulates any sex act when the person performing such act
knows or should reasonably know that he/she is within the view of the public;
or
   S.   Displays, exhibits or distributes any material in any form that is
considered obscene or offensive (when considered as a whole by the average
person applying contemporary community standards), or that a minor would
otherwise be protected from viewing or listening to by existing law, when that
person knows or should reasonably know that the material is within view of the
public. (Ord. 2006-1259, 2-21-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-4-1C of this code for penalty provisions.
6-6-4: FIGHTS:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, by agreement, to fight within
the limits of the village, either with or without gloves, or to cause any dogs
to fight, or to encourage dogs in fighting within the limits of the village, or
to cause any cocks to fight within the limits of the village. (1914 Code § 10-
6; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-5: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, at any place within the limits
of the village, to do any act, or say anything, or follow any trade whereby the
peace, happiness or comfort of any other person is disturbed. (1914 Code § 10-
21; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-6: DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES:
No person shall, within the limits of the village, disturb any lawful
assemblage or association of people by rude or indecent behavior or by any
other means. (1914 Code § 10-3; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-7: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
   A.   No person shall wilfully or negligently break, deface, injure or
destroy any public property, any tree in the public street, any streetlight,
light post, water pipe, water hydrant, telephone or telegraph post or telephone
or telegraph wires, or any insulator within the limits of the village. (1914
Code § 10-11; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   No person shall, in the village, be guilty of defacing any building or
buildings, fence, sign, tree box, water pipe, hydrant, lamppost, or other
property belonging to the village, or any private corporation or person, by
cutting, breaking, daubing with paint or other substance, or by hitching horses
or other animals to, or by driving against the same, or shall, in any other
manner, deface, tear down, injure or destroy the same. (1914 Code § 10-41; amd.
2016 Code)
6-6-8: DEPOSITING OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES ONTO PUBLIC WAYS:
It is hereby made an offense to throw the carcass of any animal, or any offal,
manure, refuse matter, foul matter or slops upon or in any of the streets,
alleys, public grounds or watercourses within the village. (1914 Code § 10-20;
amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-9: POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS:
No person shall stick, nail, paint, brand or stamp, or in any other manner put
upon any house, fence, wall, pavement or other public or private place in the
village, any written, printed, painted or other advertisement, bill, notice,
sign or poster, without having first obtained the consent of the owner or
occupant, or officer having control of any such house, fence, wall, pavement or
other public or private place. (1914 Code § 10-40; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-10: INTERFERENCE WITH VILLAGE WIRELESS RECEPTION:
No person shall have in his or her possession or own or operate in the village
any type of radio receiver, transceiver or transmitter so constructed that it
emits energy or radio waves so tuned as to cause interference with the mobile
or portable unit of radio equipment in use by the village police department, on
frequencies now assigned to the village police department, or on frequencies
that may be assigned in the future to the village police department by the
federal communications commission. (Ord. 143, 12-2-1935; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-11: LIVE SEX ACTS BUSINESSES:
   A.   Definitions: In this section, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
   CONSIDERATION: The payment of money or the exchange of any item of value
for: 1) the right to enter the business premises, or any portion thereof; or 2)
the right to remain on the business premises, or any portion thereof; or 3) the
right to purchase any item permitting the right to enter or remain on the
business premises, or any portion thereof; or 4) the right to a membership
permitting the right to enter or remain on the business premises, or any
portion thereof.
   LIVE SEX ACT: Any act whereby one or more persons engage in a live
performance or live conduct which contains oral sexual contact or sexual
intercourse.
   LIVE SEX ACT BUSINESS: Any business in which one or more persons may view,
or may participate in, a live sex act for a consideration.
   OPERATE AND MAINTAINS: To organize, design, perpetuate, or control. Operate
and maintain includes providing financial support by paying utilities, rent,
maintenance costs, or advertising costs, supervising activities or work
schedules, and directing or furthering the aims of the enterprise.
   ORAL SEXUAL CONTACT: Oral contact with the penis, vulva, or anus.
   SEXUAL INTERCOURSE: Penetration into the penis, vulva, or anus by any part
of the body or any object or manual masturbatory contact with the penis or
vulva.
   B.   Live Sex Acts Businesses Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate and maintain a live sex act business in the village.
   C.   Nuisance Declared: Operation of a live sex act business is a public
nuisance per se which may be abated by order of the county circuit court.
   D.   Abatement Provisions: The village attorney, in the name of the village
of Peoria Heights, may apply to the county circuit court for an order
permitting the village to abate violations of this section. After notice to the
operator of a live sex act business, the judge shall conduct a hearing and take
evidence as to whether a live sex act business is being operated in violation
of this section. If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the judge determines
that a live sex act business is being operated in the village in violation of
this section, an order shall be entered authorizing the village to abate the
violation by closing the business. A copy of the order shall be delivered to
the operator of the business and mailed to the owner of the property upon which
the business is located.
   E.   Interpretation Of Provisions: Nothing in this section shall be
construed to apply to the nonobscene presentation, showing, or performance of
any play, drama, or ballet in any theater, concert hall, fine arts academy,
school, institution of higher education, or similar establishment as a form of
expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as
differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of sex for the purpose of
advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. (Ord.
2011-1344, 7-5-2011)
6-6-12: INDECENT ACTS, MATERIALS AND DRESS:
   A.   No person shall, within the limits of the village, appear or be seen in
a state of nudity, or shall appear or be seen in an indecent or lewd dress, or
shall make any indecent exposure of his or her person, or be guilty of any
indecent or rude acts or behavior, or shall exhibit, sell, or offer to sell, or
in any manner dispose of any indecent or lewd book, picture or other thing, or
shall exhibit or perform any indecent, immoral or lewd play or other
representation. (1914 Code § 10-7; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   No person shall exhibit or perform, or assist in exhibiting or
performing, in the village, any obscene, indecent or lewd play or
representation, or shall knowingly permit the same to be exhibited or performed
in any building or hall owned or controlled thereby. (1914 Code § 10-28; amd.
2016 Code)
   C.   No person shall, in any public place, open to public view within the
village, write or draw, cut, make or exhibit any lewd or indecent word,
sentence, design or figure. (1914 Code § 10-25; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   No person shall bring, or cause to be brought, into the village for the
purpose of sale or exhibition, or shall keep, sell, offer or expose for sale,
or give away, any obscene, immoral or indecent publication, book or pamphlet,
paper, print, picture, illustration, model, cast, instrument or article of
indecent or immoral use, or shall advertise the same for sale or exhibition, or
shall have the same in his possession without intending to sell it. (1914 Code
§ 10-27; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-13: HOUSES OF PROSTITUTION:
   A.   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to keep, individually or
conjointly with others, or in any manner to maintain or encourage, any house of
ill fame, bawdyhouse or house of assignation, or any other building or place
for immoral, lewd or indecent practices, within the limits of the village, or
within three (3) miles of the boundary line of the village nearest thereto, or
within the limits of the village, to frequent or be found at any such house of
ill fame, bawdyhouse, house of assignation or building, or place wherein are
indulged immoral, lewd or indecent practices. (1914 Code § 10-8; amd. 2016
Code)
   B.   No person shall be an inmate or occupant of, or shall frequent or be
found in, any bawdyhouse, house of ill fame or assignation, or place used for
the practice of fornication or adultery within the village. (1914 Code § 10-29;
amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   No person shall, within the village, entice, influence or persuade any
person to enter or frequent any bawdyhouse, house of ill fame or assignation,
or place used for the practice of fornication or adultery, and no person shall
induce or persuade any minor to enter or frequent, or shall allow or permit any
minor to remain in any such house or place. (1914 Code § 10-30; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   In any action or suit arising under subsection B or C of this section,
the fact that any house is a house of ill fame or assignation, or that any
place is used for the practice of fornication or adultery, may be prima facie
proven, by evidence, that such is the general reputation of the same. (1914
Code § 10-31)
6-6-14: GAMBLING AND GAMBLING HOUSES:
No any person shall, within the limits of the village, keep, maintain or
operate, either by himself, his servants or agents, any game of chance, or any
gaming house, table, room, or any place whatsoever, wherein or whereat any game
of chance shall be played for money or other property, and no person shall be
found playing at any game of chance, for money or other property, within the
limits of the village. (1914 Code § 10-9; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-15: PUBLIC INTOXICATION; SLEEPING IN PUBLIC:
No person shall be found drunk or intoxicated or asleep in or upon any street,
alley, public square or public place within the limits of the village, or in or
upon any private lot or premises, without the consent of the lawful occupant
thereof. (1914 Code § 10-4; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-16: VAGRANCY:
   A.   No person shall obstruct any street corner or other public place of the
village by lounging in or about the same. (1914 Code § 10-33; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Any person within the village able to work and maintain himself in any
legitimate calling or business, not having any visible means of support, who
lives idly without employment, or who loiters or strolls about begging, or
frequenting gambling houses, disorderly or bawdy houses or places where
intoxicating liquors are sold, or who shall otherwise lead an idle or
profligate course of life; or who shall have in his or her possession any
instrument used for counterfeiting or the commission of a burglary, or for
picking locks or pockets, or other implements or device used by cheats and
swindlers, without being able to give a good and satisfactory account of his
possession of the same; or who shall trespass upon private property in the
nighttime, or habitually sleep in sheds or stables, outhouses, barns,
unoccupied dwelling houses, or in the open air without being able to give a
satisfactory account of himself, and all habitual night walkers or persons
strolling or walking about the streets at late and unusual hours of the night
without being able to give a satisfactory account of themselves, shall be
deemed vagrants. (1914 Code § 10-45; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-17: FALSE REPRESENTATION OF VILLAGE OFFICIALS:
No person shall, within the limits of the village, falsely represent himself to
be an officer of the village, or shall, without being first duly authorized by
the authorities of the village, or by authority of some law of the state of
Illinois, exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or
powers of an officer of the village. (1914 Code § 10-5; amd. 2016 Code)
6-6-18: WEAPONS:
   A.   Discharge Of Weapons: It is hereby declared unlawful for any person
within the limits of the village to discharge any cannon, revolver or other
firearm without first obtaining permission so to do from the village board of
trustees. (1914 Code § 10-12; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Concealed Weapons:
      1.   Prohibited: No person within the village shall carry or wear under
his clothing or concealed about his person any pistol, revolver, derringer,
bowie knife, dirk, knife, razor, dagger, slungshot, metallic knuckles or other
dangerous or deadly weapons of a like character. (Ord. 580, 1-27-1964)
      2.   Exemptions: Nothing in this section shall be so construed as to
prevent any United States, state, county or village officer, or any agent of
any express company, while in the discharge of his duties as such agent, from
carrying or wearing any such weapons, concealed or otherwise, as may be
necessary in the discharge of his duty. (1914 Code § 10-48)
6-6-19: PENALTY 1 :
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day said violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense. (2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. This penalty does not apply to section 6-6-3 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 7
CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
6-7-1: Cannabis
6-7-2: Drug Paraphernalia
6-7-3: Penalty
6-7-1: CANNABIS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this subsection:
   CANNABIS: Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing
or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and
any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such
plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
or chemical synthesis; and shall not include the mature stalks of such plant,
fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake
or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
   CASUAL DELIVERY: The delivery of not more than ten grams (10 g) of any
substance containing cannabis without consideration.
   DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession of cannabis, with or without consideration, whether or not there is
an agency relationship.
   GARBAGE: Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food or food products.
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES: The village of Peoria Heights and/or its police force.
   MANUFACTURE: The production, preparation, propagation, compounding,
conversion or processing of cannabis, either directly or indirectly, by
extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of
chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis,
and includes any packaging or repackaging of cannabis or labeling of its
container; except, that this term does not include the preparation,
compounding, packaging, or labeling of cannabis as an incident to lawful
research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale.
   PERSON: Any individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision
or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any
other entity.
   PRODUCE OR PRODUCTION: Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting.
   STATE: Includes the state of Illinois and any state, district, commonwealth,
territory, insular possession thereof, and any area subject to the legal
authority of the United States Of America.
   B.   Possession Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to
possess marijuana, hashish, and other substances which are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
or chemical synthesis; and shall not include the mature stalks of such plant,
fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake
or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. (Ord.
2007-1280, 4-17-2007; amd. 2016 Code)
6-7-2: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this subsection:
   CANNABIS: Shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in subsection
6-7-1A of this chapter.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102
of the Illinois controlled substances act, as if that definition were
incorporated herein.
   DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are peculiar to and marketed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing
into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the
cannabis control act or the Illinois controlled substance act. The term
includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits peculiar to and marketed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance.
      2.   Isomerization devices peculiar to and marketed for use in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled
substance.
      3.   Testing equipment peculiar to and marketed for private home use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis
or controlled substances.
      4.   Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and marketed for cutting
cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons.
      5.   Objects peculiar to and marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human
body including, where applicable, the following items:
         a.   Water pipes.
         b.   Carburetion tubes and devices.
         c.   Smoking and carburetion masks.
         d.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
         e.   Carburetor pipes.
         f.   Electric pipes.
         g.   Air driven pipes.
         h.   Chillums.
         i.   Bongs.
         j.   Ice pipes or chillers.
      6.   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is
for use in violation of this section. (Ord. 2007-1280, 4-17-2007)
   B.   Sale Or Delivery:
      1.   Prohibited: Any person who keeps for sale, offers for sale, or sells
or delivers for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia
commits an offense. (Ord. 2007-1280, 4-17-2007; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Nuisance Declared: Any store, place or premises from which or in
which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold
or delivered for any commercial consideration is declared to be a public
nuisance.
   C.   Possession Prohibited:
      1.   A person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with
the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis
or a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a
controlled substance for that use, commits an offense.
      2.   In determining intent under subsection C1 of this section, the trier
of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or a
controlled substance to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a
controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 2007-1280, 4-17-2007)
6-7-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punishable as provided in subsection
1-4-1D of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day said violation continues. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 8
MINORS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Curfew Regulations
6-8-2: Tobacco Products And Accessories Regulations
6-8-3: Truancy
6-8-1: CURFEW REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions: Whenever used in this section, the following words and
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   CURFEW HOURS: 1. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturday;
      2.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. on Sunday; and
      3.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN: 1. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
      2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
   PARENT: A person who is:
      1.   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person;
or
      2.   At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
   REMAIN: To:
      1.   Linger or stay; or
      2.   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer
or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   B.   Offenses:
      1.   A minor commits a curfew offense when he or she remains in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
      2.   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or
control of a minor commits a curfew offense when he or she knowingly permits
the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
during curfew hours.
   C.   Defenses: It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this
section that the minor was:
      1.   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
      2.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      3.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      4.   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      5.   Involved in an emergency;
      6.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
      7.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
      8.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      9.   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
emancipation of minor's act.
   D.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no defense in subsection C of this section is present. (2016 Code)
   E.   Penalties: Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall,
upon conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation; except, that neither a person who has
been made a ward of the court under the juvenile court act of 1987, nor that
person's legal guardian, shall be subject to any fine. In addition to or
instead of the fine imposed by this subsection, the court may order a parent,
legal guardian, or other person convicted of a violation of subsection B of
this section to perform community service as determined by the court; except,
that the legal guardian of a person who has been made a ward of the court under
the juvenile court act of 1987 may not be ordered to perform community service.
The dates and times established for the performance of community service by the
parent, legal guardian, or other person convicted of a violation of subsection
B of this section shall not conflict with the dates and times that the person
is employed in his or her regular occupation. (Ord. 1112, 1-21-1997; amd. 2016
Code)
6-8-2: TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND ACCESSORIES REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
   MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   SMOKELESS TOBACCO: Any finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf tobacco that is
intended to be placed in the oral cavity.
   TOBACCO ACCESSORIES: Cigarette papers, pipes, and holders of smoking
materials of all types, designed primarily for the smoking or ingestion of
tobacco products or of substances made illegal under any statute or of
substances whose sale, gift, barter, or exchange is made unlawful under this
section.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Cigarettes, cigars, smokeless tobacco, or tobacco in any
of its forms. (Ord. 1111, 1-21-1997)
   B.   Purchase By, Sales Or Delivery To Minors Prohibited:
      1.   No minor shall buy any tobacco product or tobacco accessory.
      2.   No person shall sell, buy for, distribute samples of or furnish any
tobacco products or tobacco accessories to any minor.
   C.   Possession By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any minor to
possess any tobacco product or tobacco accessory. Any minor found to be in
possession of any tobacco products or tobacco accessories shall be subject to
having such items removed from said minor's possession by any law enforcement
officer who has become aware of the possession of such items.
   D.   Use Of False Identification Prohibited: No minor in the furtherance or
facilitation of obtaining tobacco products or tobacco accessories shall display
or use false or forged identification card or transfer, alter, or deface an
identification card. (Ord. 1111, 1-21-1997; amd. 2016 Code)
   E.   Warning To Minors: Any person, firm, partnership, company, or
corporation operating a place of business where tobacco products and/or tobacco
accessories are sold or offered for sale shall post in a conspicuous place upon
the premises a sign upon which there shall be imprinted the following
statement:
SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR TOBACCO ACCESSORIES TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF
EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE OR THE MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A
SALE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
(Ord. 1111, 1-21-1997)
   F.   Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of this section shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 1111, 1-21-1997; amd. 2016 Code)
6-8-3: TRUANCY:
   A.   Prohibited; Exemptions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years enrolled in a public, private or parochial school and residing within the
corporate limits of the village to absent himself or herself from attendance at
school without parental permission. Any person who shall so absent himself or
herself shall be guilty of the offense of truancy and be subject to the penalty
hereinafter set forth.
      2.   Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other causes
beyond the control of the person so absenting himself or herself from school
without parental permission shall not constitute truancy if permission for such
absence has substantially been obtained from the parent or legal guardian.
   B.   Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: It is unlawful for a parent,
legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his custody or
control to violate subsection A1 of this section. (Ord. 1149, 6-15-1999)
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating subsection A1 of this section shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day during which or on which any
person violates subsection A1 of this section shall be deemed a separate
offense. (Ord. 1149, 6-15-1999; amd. 2016 Code)
TITLE 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
General Traffic Regulations   1
Parking Regulations   2
Skateboards, Roller Skates, Bicycles
And Motorized Scooters   3
Neighborhood Electric Vehicles   4
Impoundment And Towing Of Vehicles   5
Low-Speed Gas-Powered Bicycles   6
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Scope
7-1-2: Illinois Vehicle Code Adopted
7-1-3: Penalty
7-1-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this title shall apply to traffic upon all the public
streets, highways and alleys in the Village. (1914 Code § 10-57)
7-1-2: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., as
passed, approved, and amended is hereby adopted by reference by the Village of
Peoria Heights as if fully set out herein. In the event of any inconsistency
between the provisions of this title and any provisions of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, the terms of this title shall apply. (Ord. 2018-1559, 6-19-2018)
7-1-3: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with any of
the provisions of this title or who shall control a vehicle which violates or
fails to comply with any of the provisions hereof shall be fined as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1914 Code § 10-58; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2018-1559, 6-19-
2018)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Method Of Parking
7-2-3: Parking Vehicles With Expired Plates
7-2-4: Parking During Snowfall
7-2-5: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
7-2-6: Parking On Private Property
7-2-7: Parking Trailers, Boats Or Recreational Vehicles On Streets
7-2-7-1: Parking Of Vehicles With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Ten Thousand
Pounds
7-2-8: Parking Prohibitions And Restrictions In Specific Places
7-2-9: Twenty Four Hour Parking Prohibited
7-2-10: Loading And Unloading
7-2-11: Signs Posted
7-2-12: Lessors Of Visitor Vehicles
7-2-13: Enforcement; Responsibility For Violations
7-2-14: Exemption From Compliance With Certain Limitations On Parking
7-2-15: Portable Storage Units
7-2-16:    Temporary Dumpsters
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
   OPERATOR: Any person who is driving or is assuming physical control of a
vehicle.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association,
limited partnership partner, or any city or state subdivision thereof; and
includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative therefor.
   VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power,
and snowmobiles as defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act 1 .
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise prescribed, a device shall
be considered to be a vehicle until such time it either comes within the
definition of a "junk vehicle", as defined by Village ordinance, or a junking
certificate is issued for it. (Ord. 2004-1235, 11-16-2004; amd. 2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 40/1-1 et seq.
7-2-2: METHOD OF PARKING:
   A.   Parallel Parking: Except when otherwise provided by a Village
ordinance, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one- way roadway shall be so
stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction
of authorized traffic movement, with its right hand wheels within twelve inches
(12") of the right hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of
the right hand shoulder, or with its left hand wheels within twelve inches
(12") of the left hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the
left hand shoulder.
   B.   Angle Parking: Angle parking on any roadway is only permitted where
specifically permitted by Village ordinance; except, that angle parking shall
not be permitted on any Federal aid or State highway unless the Illinois
Department of Transportation has determined that the roadway is of sufficient
width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of
traffic. (Ord. 2004-1235, 11-16-2004)
7-2-3: PARKING VEHICLES WITH EXPIRED PLATES:
No person may stop, park, or leave standing upon a public street, highway, or
roadway a vehicle upon which is displayed an Illinois registration plate or
plates or registration sticker after the termination of the registration period
for which the registration plate or plates or registration sticker was issued
or after the expiration date set under section 3-414 or 3-414.1 of the Illinois
Motor Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2004-1235, 11-16-2004)
7-2-4: PARKING DURING SNOWFALL:
   A.   Declaration Of Snow Emergency: Whenever there is an excessive snow
accumulation or a forecast for two (2) to four (4) or more inches or when
weather conditions deem it necessary, it shall be within the discretion of the
Mayor or official designee, upon consultation with appropriate administrative
staff, to declare a weather/snow emergency.
   B.   No Parking On Snow Routes: In the event of such declaration, vehicular
parking shall be prohibited on certain village streets and highways designated
and posted as "emergency snow routes" to facilitate street clearing, proper
movement of vehicular traffic, emergency operations, or to protect life and/or
property as follows: Bellevue Place, Boulevard Avenue, Central Avenue, Columbus
Avenue, Cox Avenue, Glen Avenue, Glen Elm Drive, Kelly Avenue, Lake Avenue,
Moneta Avenue, Monroe Avenue, and Terrace Court.
   C.   Effect Of Declaration: Upon declaration, said emergency shall be in
effect for a minimum of twenty four (24) hours or until further notice.
Vehicles shall be removed from the above designated routes one hour after the
emergency is announced to take effect.
   D.   Enforcement: Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with
the provisions of this section shall be subject to the issuance of a traffic
citation for illegal vehicular parking and possible towing of the vehicle at
the owner's expense. (Ord. 919, 11-20-1979; amd. 2016 Code)
7-2-5: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   Parking Privileges: Vehicles displaying person with disabilities
identification devices or decals as issued by the secretary of state (including
person with disabilities parking permits, transporter of person with
disabilities parking permits, person with disabilities vehicle registration
plates and disabled veteran vehicle registration plates) may be parked at
specifically designated parking spaces for persons with disabilities within the
village, and may further park in conformity with sections 11-1301.1, 1301.2,
and 1301.3 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 . Nothing in this subsection,
however, shall be interpreted as permitting any vehicle to be parked in a
village owned parking lot or deck without paying the designated fee; nor shall
it be interpreted as permitting a vehicle to park at any metered parking space
which has a maximum time limit of thirty (30) minutes or less without paying
the required fee. A person to whom privileges were granted shall, at the
request of a police officer or any other person invested by law with authority
to direct, control or regulate traffic, present an identification card with a
picture as verification that the person is the person to whom the special
registration plates, special decal or device was issued.
   B.   Designation Of Spaces:
      1.   The board of trustees is authorized to determine and designate, in
accordance with the village schedule P or this section, places which shall be
reserved for parking for vehicles for persons with disabilities.
      2.   The owners or lessees of private property within the village are
hereby authorized to determine and designate, by proper signs, places which
shall be reserved for the parking of vehicles displaying persons with
disability parking devices as set forth in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Violations:
      1.   No vehicle shall be parked in a space designated for vehicles for
persons with disabilities unless such vehicle shall have displayed thereon a
person with disabilities parking device as set forth in subsection A of this
section.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for an individual with a vehicle displaying a
person with disabilities license plate or parking decal or device issued to a
disabled person to park in a space designated for persons with disabilities if
the individual is not the authorized holder of a person with disabilities
license plate or parking decal or device and is not transporting the authorized
holder of a person with disabilities license plate or parking decal to or from
the parking location and the person uses the person with disabilities license
plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted through the
person with disabilities license plates or parking decals as set forth in
subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2004-1234, 11-16-2004; amd. 2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.1, 5/11-1301.2, 5/11-1301.3.
7-2-6: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   No motor vehicles, watercraft, trailers, recreational vehicles or
anything else of a vehicular nature may be parked in the front yard of any home
or business. "Front yard" shall be defined as that portion of the property even
with and/or in front of the primary structure on the property. If no primary
structure is located there, no vehicles can be parked there.
   B.   No paved surface may be added to a front yard or back yard, subsequent
to the effective date hereof, without approval from the Village Administrator
or his designee or the Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 2006-1270, 11-21-2006)
7-2-7: PARKING TRAILERS, BOATS OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON STREETS:
No recreational vehicle may be parked on the street unless the parking is of a
temporary nature. No trailer, boat trailer or any vehicle, other than a
passenger car, truck, van or the like, may be parked on the street unless the
parking is of a temporary nature. "Temporary nature" shall be defined as a
twenty four (24) hour period, and no more than one 24-hour period per week. In
the event that such above named vehicle would require to be parked on the
street for longer than a twenty four (24) hour period, it will still be
considered as "temporary". A onetime permit for twenty five dollars ($25.00)
can be obtained for such temporary period, not to exceed two (2) weeks, after
review by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Village Administrator. (Ord.
2006-1270, 11-21-2006)
7-2-7-1: PARKING OF VEHICLES WITH A GROSS WEIGHT IN EXCESS OF TEN THOUSAND
POUNDS:
It shall be unlawful to stop or park motor vehicles with a gross weight in
excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds upon any street, road or highway in the
Village of Peoria Heights, Illinois, provided, however, that any such motor
vehicle may stop or park upon any road, highway or street for the sole purpose
of making a delivery or picking up a load for a period of time no longer than
is necessary to load, unload or deliver material but in no event for a period
in excess of thirty (30) minutes or for a period of time no longer than is
necessary to embark or discharge passengers. (Ord. 2018-1567, 8-21-2018)
7-2-8: PARKING PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS IN SPECIFIC PLACES:
   A.   Specific Streets; P Schedule:
      1.   It is hereby determined that, upon the basis of engineering, traffic
and police investigation as authorized by law, certain portions and areas along
or upon certain streets of the Village should be designated by the President
and Board of Trustees as no parking areas. The no parking areas upon those
streets or portions thereof are described in schedule P and hereinafter
designated as "no parking", "loading zone", or "restricted parking" locations
to be enumerated on said schedule by street location. It is hereby declared in
the interest of safety and public health that there shall be restricted parking
in the areas of those streets or portions thereof as described in schedule P
when appropriate signs are so erected in said areas giving notice thereof.
Schedule P shall be on file in the Office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 2010-
1325, 3-16-2010)
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stop any vehicle
along or upon any roadway in the Village in any place designated as a
restricted parking area as set forth in schedule P. The operator, person in
possession, owner, or lessee of any said vehicle parked in violation of the
restricted areas as set forth in schedule P shall be subject to a fine and
penalty.
   B.   Additional Areas: It shall be unlawful for any person, operator, lessee
or owner of any motor vehicle to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in
violation of any of the provisions of this subsection.
      1.   It shall be unlawful to stop, stand, or park:
         a.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
         b.   On a sidewalk.
         c.   Within an intersection.
         d.   On a crosswalk.
         e.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.
         f.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
         g.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
         h.   On any railroad tracks.
         i.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking,
other than parking or loading signs set forth in schedule P.
         j.   On any controlled access highway.
         k.   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
         l.   In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a
current annual registration sticker or current temporary permit pending
registration.
      2.   Standing or parking a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers, is unlawful and prohibited as
follows:
         a.   In front of a public or private driveway.
         b.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
         c.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
         d.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of
a roadway.
         e.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly signposted).
         f.   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      3.   Parking a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers, is unlawful and prohibited as follows:
         a.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing.
         b.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
      4.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into
any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(Ord. 2004-1235, 11-16-2004; amd. Ord. 2019-1596, 8-20-2019)
7-2-9: TWENTY FOUR HOUR PARKING PROHIBITED:
No vehicle of any kind or description, or any part of the same, shall be
permitted to stand or remain in any of the streets, avenues, alleys or other
public grounds of the Village for more than twenty four (24) consecutive hours.
(1914 Code § 18-15; amd. 2016 Code)
7-2-10: LOADING AND UNLOADING:
   A.   No vehicle shall stand backed up to the curb except when actually
loading or unloading. (1914 Code § 10-56; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   A vehicle waiting at the curb shall give place to a vehicle about to
load or unload. (1914 Code § 10-56)
7-2-11: SIGNS POSTED:
The Village may furnish, install and maintain proper signs for the enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-1235, 11-16-2004)
7-2-12: LESSORS OF VISITOR VEHICLES:
   A.   Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and
who leases such vehicle to others, after receiving written notice of a
violation of this chapter involving such vehicle, shall, upon request, provide
such police officers as have authority of the offense, and the court having
jurisdiction thereof, with a written statement of the name and address of the
lessee at the time of such offense and the identifying number upon the
registration plates and registration sticker or stickers of such vehicle.
   B.   No person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease
agreement shall be liable for the violation of any parking or standing
regulation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Village involving such
vehicle during the period of the lease; provided, that upon the request of the
appropriate authority received within one hundred twenty (120) days after the
violation occurred, the lessor provides, within sixty (60) days after such
receipt, the name and address of the lessee. The driver's license number of the
lessee may be subsequently individually requested by the appropriate authority
if needed for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-1235, 11-16-2004)
7-2-13: ENFORCEMENT; RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to park such vehicle upon
the street in violation of any sign where parking is heretofore or shall
hereafter be prohibited during the designated hours or at all times as the case
may be. Whenever any vehicle shall have been stopped, standing or parked in
violation of any provisions of this chapter, the operator of the motor vehicle
and/or the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be subject to
the penalty for such violation as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   B.   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter and the
operator or registered owner of the vehicle is not present, the Chief of Police
or any member of the Village of Peoria Heights Police Department observing such
violation may issue a citation and leave a copy thereof on the vehicle.
   C.   The Chief of Police or any member of the Village of Peoria Heights
Police Department is authorized, in his or her discretion, to remove or cause
the removal of any vehicle which is parked in violation of this chapter at the
registered owner's expense, if one or more of the following conditions exist:
      1.   The vehicle remains parked in violation of this chapter for more
than twenty four (24) consecutive hours following the issuance of a citation;
      2.   The vehicle has been issued three (3) or more citations for a
violation of this chapter and which are unpaid at the time of the violation at
issue; or
      3.   The vehicle has been issued three (3) or more citations for a
violation of this chapter within a thirty (30) day period prior to the
violation at issue.
   D.   The Police Department shall keep a record of each vehicle removed in
accordance with this section. The record shall include a description of the
vehicle, its license plate number, date and time of its removal, where it was
removed from, the location where it was removed to, and the name and address of
its owner or operator, if known.
   E.   Within twenty four (24) hours after a vehicle is removed pursuant to
this section, the Village shall notify, certified mail, return receipt
requested, the owner of record at his or her last known address, as indicated
by the vehicle's registration, of his or her right to request a hearing before
a Hearing Officer that will be conducted to determine whether the subject
vehicle is eligible for removal pursuant to this section. However, no such
notice need be sent to the owner of record if the owner is personally served
with the notice within twenty four (24) hours after the vehicle is removed and
the owner acknowledges receipt of the notice in writing. The written notice
shall state the penalties that may be imposed if no hearing is requested,
including that a vehicle not released by payment of a fine plus any and all
towing and storage fees may be sold or disposed of by the Village in accordance
with applicable law.
   F.   Any vehicle removed under this section shall be released prior to a
hearing to any person entitled to lawful possession of said vehicle upon
payment of a fine plus any and all towing and storage fees. If a person
entitled to lawful possession of said vehicle does not pay the applicable fine
plus any and all towing and storage fees within thirty (30) days after the
vehicle is removed or after the Hearing Officer's written determination,
whichever is later, then such vehicle may be disposed of in accordance with the
procedure set forth for disposal of unclaimed or abandoned vehicles as provided
by law.
   G.   The owner of record seeking a hearing under this section must file a
written request for a hearing with the Chief of Police at the Peoria Heights
Village Hall, 4901 N. Prospect Road, Peoria Heights, Illinois, no later than
fifteen (15) days after the notice was mailed or otherwise given under this
section.
A hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued for good cause by order
of the Hearing Officer, no later than thirty (30) days after the request for a
hearing has been filed.
All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at
the hearing. At the hearing, the formal rules of evidence shall not apply, and
hearsay evidence shall be admissible.
If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that the vehicle was used in violation of this chapter, the Hearing
Officer shall enter an order requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded
until the owner pays the applicable fine plus any and all towing and storage
fees. If the Hearing Officer determines that the vehicle was not in violation
of this chapter, he or she shall order the return of the vehicle to the owner
of record.
For the purposes of this section, the Hearing Officer shall be a licensed
attorney who is not an employee of the Village. (Ord. 2018-1536, 1-2-2018)
7-2-14: EXEMPTION FROM COMPLIANCE WITH CERTAIN LIMITATIONS ON PARKING:
   A.   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to approve requests for
exemptions from compliance with certain limitations on parking on public
streets but only under the following circumstances:
      1.   The person seeking an exemption resides adjacent to a public street
subject to limitations on the hours during which vehicles may be parked on such
adjacent street, but such limitations do not prohibit parking at all times.
      2.   The person seeking an exemption has insufficient space at his or her
place of residence to park all vehicles utilized by persons living at the
residence on an improved driveway.
   B.   An approved exemption shall allow parking only on the public street
adjacent to the residence of the person requesting the exemption and then only
during hours when parking would otherwise be prohibited. An exemption shall not
apply to any other rule or regulation governing the parking of vehicles.
   C.   No more than two (2) vehicles may be parked on the public street under
authority of any such exemption at any one time.
   D.   The Chief of Police shall grant such an exemption through a letter
signed by the Chief of Police which describes the exemption.
   E.   The Chief of Police shall revoke an exemption if he finds that the
recipient no longer qualifies for the exemption because of some change in
circumstances. (Ord. 2017-1529, 11-28-2017)
7-2-15: PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS:
   A.   For purposes of this Section, portable storage unit means a large
container, storage unit, parking crate or other portable structure (such as,
but not limited to PODS), which is transportable and is designed and used for
the temporary storage of household goods, personal items and other materials
used in moving from one place to another.
   B.   Portable storage units shall be allowed within the Village subject to
the following:
      1.   Portable storage units shall not be placed on Village-owned property
or public right of way.
      2.   The property on which the portable storage unit is placed shall be
occupied by a principal building.
      3.   Portable storage units shall only be allowed on paved surfaces and
shall only be allowed for a period not to exceed 60 days in any one-year
period.
(Ord. 2022-1683, 7-19-2022)
7-2-16: TEMPORARY DUMPSTERS:
   A.   For purposes of this Section, Temporary Dumpster means a large
container designed for the receiving, transporting and dumping of waste
materials on a temporary basis during demolition or construction projects. The
term “temporary dumpster” does not include garbage receptacles used for normal
waste collection services provided by a licensed waste hauler on a regularly
scheduled basis.
   B.   Temporary Dumpsters shall be allowed within the Village subject to the
following:
      1.   Temporary Dumpsters shall not be placed on Village-owned property or
public right of way.
      2.   The property on which the temporary dumpster is placed shall be
occupied by a principal building.
      3.   No litter, rubbish, debris, or construction materials may extend
beyond the height and width of the temporary dumpster; all items must be
contained within the temporary dumpster.
      4.   Temporary dumpsters shall only be allowed on paved surfaces.
      5.   Temporary dumpsters shall only be allowed for a period not to exceed
sixty (60) days in any one-year period. Upon written request from the property
owner, the Chief of Police in his discretion may grant an extension if the
property owner is diligently pursuing removal activities.
(Ord. 2024-1728, 4-2-2024)
CHAPTER 3
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED SCOOTERS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Prohibited Acts
7-3-3: Obedience To Traffic Control Devices
7-3-4: Yield Right Of Way
7-3-5: Signs Posted
7-3-6: Application Of Provisions
7-3-7: Enforcement
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
   BICYCLE: A device with two (2) or three (3) wheels in tandem, propelled by
pedals and having handlebars and a saddlelike seat.
   BUSINESS CENTER: An area where there is located the privately owned real
property upon which a business/commercial development is situated, which
development is open to the general public and primarily devoted to retail sales
and services from shops and stores situated therein, although, it may also
contain some offices and eating places, as well as other accessory uses
compatible with a retail sales shopping area.
   MINOR: A person who has not obtained the age of eighteen (18) years. A
person who has obtained the age of eighteen (18) years is of legal age for all
purposes under this chapter.
   MOTORIZED SCOOTER: A scooter or scooter cart which is motorized and powered
by a battery or similar device to be used only by a disabled person.
   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS: Those areas of walkways in the business center which
are open to the general public exclusively for persons who are walking or
otherwise afoot or in wheelchairs.
   PRIVATELY OWNED ROADWAYS AND PARKING AREAS: Those areas in the business
district which are open to the general public for vehicular traffic and
parking, and for persons who are walking or otherwise afoot or in wheelchairs.
   PUBLIC PLACE: All publicly owned buildings and grounds and all privately
owned buildings and grounds which are customarily open to the public.
   PUBLIC WAY: Any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks, and rights of way in the
village of Peoria Heights.
   ROLLER SKATE OR IN-LINE SKATE: A shoe or similar device worn on the foot
that has wheels or a cylindrical device affixed to its sole and which would
enable the wearer to skate or propel oneself in sidewalks, gutters, streets or
hard surfaces.
   SCOOTER: A platform or footboard mounted between two (2) wheels controlled
by an upright steering handle and which is propelled by human power and/or
motorized power.
   SIDEWALK AND STREET: Refer to any public sidewalk or street within the
specified business district or other specified public property.
   SKATEBOARD: A mechanism on wheels, often resembling wheels on roller skates,
which are fastened to a platform, commonly constructed to accommodate a
standing person. Skateboards are normally propelled by the operator pushing off
the ground with one foot or by force of gravity.
   SPECIFIED BUSINESS CENTER: That area beginning at the intersection of Glen
Avenue and Prospect Road, then proceeding one block east on the north side of
Glen Avenue to the intersection of Glen Avenue and Columbus Avenue and then
proceeding southerly along the west side of Columbus Avenue to the intersection
of Columbus Avenue with Marietta Avenue and then proceeding west on the north
side of Marietta Avenue to the east side of the intersection of Marietta Avenue
and Prospect Road, then proceeding north on Prospect Road to Kelly Drive and
then west on the south side of Kelly Drive until its western termination point
and then north on Kelly Drive to the north side of Kelly Drive and then east on
the north side of Kelly Drive to Prospect Road; then north on Prospect Road to
Seiberling Avenue, then west on Seiberling Avenue until it terminates at the
private property line at its westerly edge and then north along the westerly
edge along Seiberling Avenue to the north side of Seiberling Avenue and then
east to Prospect Road; then north on the west side of Prospect Road to the
south side of Duryea Avenue, then west on the south side of Duryea Avenue to
Atlantic Avenue and then north on the east side of Atlantic Avenue to Glen
Avenue and then east on the south side of Glen Avenue to the intersection with
Prospect Road, being the point of beginning. The "specified business center"
shall include, as to any public way described in the "specified business
center", all of the public sidewalks contiguous to a public street that are
described in the "specified business center".
   TOWER PARK/VILLAGE HALL AREA: An area beginning at the intersection of Glen
Avenue with Prospect Road then proceeding west along the north side of Glen
Avenue to Park Avenue then north along the west side of Park Avenue to the
intersection with the north line of Kingman Avenue, then east on the north side
of Kingman Avenue to the intersection with Euclid Avenue; then westerly along
the southwesterly side of Euclid Avenue to where the extended line of the north
side of Park Place intersects with the north line of Euclid Avenue, then
southeasterly along the northeasterly line of Euclid Avenue to the intersection
with the north line of Kingman Avenue, then easterly along the north line of
Kingman Avenue to the intersection with the west line of Prospect Road and then
south along the west line of Prospect Road to the intersection with Glen
Avenue, being the place of beginning. The "Tower Park/village hall area" shall
include, as to any public way described in the "Tower Park/village hall area",
all of the public sidewalks contiguous to a public street that is described in
the "Tower Park/village hall area". (Ord. 2003-1212, 4-1-2003)
7-3-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate or engage in any of the
following acts:
   A.   Ride, propel or in any manner operate a skateboard, scooter, roller
skate, in-line skate, bicycle or similar self- propelled device upon any public
way, public street, public sidewalk, public alley or public place located
within the specified business center area or Tower Park/village hall area.
   B.   No person shall ride, propel or in any manner operate a skateboard,
scooter, roller skate, in-line skate, bicycle or similar self-propelled device
in the specified business center and on, along or over any pedestrian walkway,
privately owned roadway or parking area situated within a business center
located anywhere within the village where a sign has been posted prohibiting
such activity.
   C.   No person riding upon a skateboard, bicycle, scooter and/or using
roller skates or in-line skates or similar self- propelled device shall go upon
any roadway or sidewalk in such a manner as to endanger the safety of the
skateboard, bicycle or scooter rider, and/or roller skater, in-line skater or
pedestrians. When operating a skateboard, scooter, bicycle, roller skates, in-
line skates or similar self-propelled device upon any street, a skateboard,
bicycle or scooter rider and/or roller skater or in-line skater, or anyone
using a similar device, shall ride with the flow of traffic and ride as close
to the curb as possible and/or shall not restrict the flow of traffic.
   D.   No person shall operate a skateboard, scooter, roller skates, bicycle,
in-line skates or similar self-propelled device upon a street or sidewalk
during the hours between a half hour after sunset and a half hour before
sunrise without wearing a reflective device on both the front and back of the
skateboard, bicycle or scooter rider and/or roller skate or in-line skate user.
   E.   Any person riding or operating on a skateboard, scooter, roller skates,
bicycle, in-line skates or similar self-propelled device shall not attach the
same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. (Ord. 2003-1212, 4-1-
2003)
   F.   1. No person shall ride, propel or in any manner operate a skateboard,
scooter, roller skates, in-line skates, bicycle, or similar self-propelled
device on any private property or within a specified business center where
signs have been posted at the entrance or displayed properly on the property
prohibiting the use of skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, scooters,
bicycles or similar self-propelled device and has accomplished the following:
         a.   Posted a sign, as described below, along each exterior entrance
to a shopping center, which is in plain view of pedestrians and motorists.
Additional signs as described below may be posted within the interior of the
shopping center. These signs shall be continually maintained by the owner or
manager of the private property. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the private property to erect a sign of prohibition in conformity with this
chapter.
         b.   Delivered a written notification to the chief of police, not less
than twenty four (24) hours prior to posting the signs described below, that
invokes the provisions of this chapter as of a certain date which shall be
specified in the notice.
      2.   The manager or owner of the private property may withdraw the sign
and the property from the provisions of this chapter by removing the signs
required by this chapter and notifying the chief of the police in writing of
such withdrawal. The manager or owner shall deliver a written notification to
the chief of police, not less than twenty four (24) hours prior to posting the
signs as described in this subsection, that invokes the provision of this
section, as of a date certain, which shall be specified in the notice. (Ord.
2003-1212, 4-1-2003; amd. 2016 Code)
7-3-3: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   Any person operating a skateboard, scooter, roller skates, in-line
skates, bicycle or similar self-propelled device shall obey the instructions of
official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a skateboard, scooter, roller
skates, in-line skates, bicycle or similar self-propelled device shall disobey
the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the
skateboard, scooter or bicycle and/or removes said roller skates or in-line
skates or similar device to make any such turn, in which event, such person
shall obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (Ord. 2003-1212, 4-1-
2003)
7-3-4: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY:
Whenever a person is riding a skateboard, bicycle or scooter and/or using
roller skates or in-line skates, such person shall yield the right of way to
any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing
such pedestrian, so as not to endanger the safety of the pedestrian. (Ord.
2003-1212, 4-1-2003)
7-3-5: SIGNS POSTED:
   A.   The chief of police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk,
roadway, public way or public place prohibiting the riding of skateboards,
bicycles or scooters or the use of roller skates or in-line skates or similar
self-propelled devices by any such person as prohibited in this chapter, and
when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey them. Any sign
prohibiting the use of skateboards, scooters, bicycles, roller skates, in-line
skates or similar self- propelled devices provided in this chapter shall state
"Use Of Skateboards, Scooters, Roller Skates, In-Line Skates, Bicycles Or
Similar Devices Are Prohibited", and below that "Village Of Peoria Heights,
Ordinance No. 2003-1212". The letters of prohibition shall be two inches (2")
in height and shall be printed in black with white background. The sign shall
not exceed two hundred eighty (280) square inches in area. (Ord. 2003-1212, 4-
1-2003; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Signs posted on privately owned roadways and parking ways prohibiting
the use of skateboards, scooters, bicycles, roller skates, and in-line skates
as prohibited by this chapter shall conform to this section. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the private property to erect a sign of
prohibition in conformity with this section. (Ord. 2003-1212, 4-1-2003)
7-3-6: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   This chapter is applicable to any person who operates a skateboard,
scooter, roller skates, in-line skates, bicycle or similar self-propelled
device in or on any public way, public place, Tower Park/village hall area,
specified business center area, or any area, sidewalk, street or property in
which the use of such devices are prohibited by this chapter.
   B.   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward under the age of
eighteen (18) shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   This chapter shall not apply to a disabled person operating a motorized
scooter in the prohibited areas as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2003-1212,
4-1-2003)
7-3-7: ENFORCEMENT:
Any village police officer who observes any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter is authorized to seize the offender's skateboard,
roller skates, bicycle, scooter, in-line skates or other similar recreational
devices and to hold same in the village police station. In the event of such
seizure, the offender, if an adult, may secure the return of the article after
twenty four (24) hours have elapsed since the seizure. In the case of a minor,
the articles seized may be returned only to the parent or guardian of such
minor offender, after twenty four (24) hours have elapsed since the seizure.
(Ord. 2003-1212, 4-1-2003)
CHAPTER 4
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definition
7-4-2: Restricted Operation Generally
7-4-3: Persons With Disabilities; Permit Requirements
7-4-4: Insurance Requirements
7-4-5: Operation Regulations
7-4-6: Required Equipment
7-4-7: Signs Posted
7-4-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, "neighborhood electric vehicle" means a self-
propelled, electronically powered, four-wheeled motor vehicle which is capable
of attaining in one mile a speed of more than twenty (20) miles per hour, but
not more than twenty five (25) miles per hour, and which conforms to federal
regulations under 49 CFR part 571.500. (Ord. 2005-1242, 7-5-2005)
7-4-2: RESTRICTED OPERATION GENERALLY:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive or operate a neighborhood electric vehicle on any street or
highway under the jurisdiction of the village. (Ord. 2005-1245, 8-16-2005)
7-4-3: PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Request For Exemption Permit: Subject to the limitations set forth in
this chapter, any person with disabilities 1 , with a valid Illinois driver's
license issued in his or her name by the secretary of state of the state of
Illinois may request the village board to operate a neighborhood electric
vehicle on any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the village where
the posted speed limit is thirty five (35) miles per hour or less. An
authorized neighborhood electric vehicle is not prohibited from crossing a road
or street at an intersection where the road or street has a posted speed limit
of thirty five (35) miles per hour or more, unless such crossing is prohibited
in this chapter or in any resolution or permit issued under this chapter.
   B.   Review Of Request; Decision: Any permit request will be reviewed by the
village board, and based upon the volume, speed and character of the traffic on
the roadway, the village board will decide whether a neighborhood electric
vehicle can operate safely on the roadway and that the public safety will not
be jeopardized.
   C.   Contents Of Permit: Any permit granted by the village board to operate
a neighborhood electric vehicle on roadways of the village will specifically
designate the portions of the roadways where the neighborhood electric vehicle
may be operated.
   D.   Restrictions On Permit: This section shall not be construed as
permitting or granting any person operating a neighborhood electric vehicle to
drive upon any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the city of Peoria,
the county of Peoria, the Peoria park district or any other municipality or to
drive upon or cross any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the
Illinois department of transportation.
   E.   Physician's Statement Required: Prior to being granted any permit to
operate a neighborhood electric vehicle on any street or roadway under the
jurisdiction of the village, the person requesting a permit to operate a
neighborhood electric vehicle shall provide the village board with a signed,
written statement from a physician, licensed to practice medicine in the state
of Illinois, to the effect that the operator is able to safely operate the
neighborhood electric vehicle upon the roadways of the village in a fashion
that would not be inimical to the public safety or the safety of the operator
or his/her passengers.
   F.   Term Of Permit; Renewal: A permit issued pursuant to this section shall
be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. A permit may be
reissued upon the reapplication and compliance with the provisions of this
chapter by the applicant and after review by the village board.
   G.   Permit Fee: A permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid
to the village clerk before any permit is issued. (Ord. 2005-1245, 8-16-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. As defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-159.1.
7-4-4: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
The neighborhood electric vehicle, driver and passengers shall be covered with
either automobile insurance to the extent required by state law or by
comprehensive general liability insurance with a combined single limit of two
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). Written proof of the insurance
coverage must be filed with the village administrator prior to permission being
granted to operate a neighborhood electric vehicle in the village. (Ord. 2005-
1245, 8-16-2005)
7-4-5: OPERATION REGULATIONS:
When on a street or highway under the jurisdiction of the village, a
neighborhood electric vehicle shall be operated in accordance with the
following regulations:
   A.   The neighborhood electric vehicle shall have its headlights and
taillamps lighted at all times.
   B.   Any person operating a neighborhood electric vehicle, as authorized in
this chapter, shall travel on the street or highway in the same direction as
traffic and as near the right side of the roadway as possible.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person operating a
neighborhood electric vehicle, pursuant to a permit, on streets or roadways
under the jurisdiction of the village shall obey any and all traffic
regulations set forth in either any ordinance of the village or in the Illinois
vehicle code. (Ord. 2005-1245, 8-16-2005)
7-4-6: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
No neighborhood electric vehicle may be operated on a street or highway under
the jurisdiction of the village unless, at a minimum, the vehicle conforms to
the federal regulations under 49 CFR part 571.500, and it has the following
additional safety equipment:
   A.   Brakes.
   B.   Steering apparatus.
   C.   Tires.
   D.   Rearview mirror.
   E.   Red reflectorized warning devices on the front and rear.
   F.   A slow moving emblem, as required of other vehicles by 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-709, on the rear of the neighborhood electric vehicle.
   G.   A headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of at
least five hundred feet (500') to the front.
   H.   A taillamp that emits a red light visible from a distance of at least
one hundred feet (100') from the rear.
   I.   Brake lights.
   J.   Turn signals.
   K.   Seat belts for driver and all passengers. (Ord. 2005-1242, 7-5-2005)
7-4-7: SIGNS POSTED:
After the village board determines that a neighborhood electric vehicle may
safely operate on a roadway in the village and adopts a resolution authorizing
the operation on the village streets, appropriate signs shall be posted. (Ord.
2005-1245, 8-16-2005)
CHAPTER 5
IMPOUNDMENT AND TOWING OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-5-1: Immediate Seizure And Impoundment Of Vehicles Used In Commission Of
Offenses
7-5-1-1: Offenses Leading To Vehicle Seizure And Impoundment
7-5-1-2: Authority Of Officers To Impound
7-5-1-3: Notice Of Impoundment
7-5-1-4: Administrative Fee; Release And Disposition Of Vehicle
7-5-1-5: Preliminary Hearing
7-5-1-6: Final Hearing
7-5-2: Towing Of Vehicles As Requested Or Ordered By Village
7-5-2-1: Authorized Towing Companies
7-5-2-2: Insurance Requirements
7-5-2-3: Duties And Requirements Of Towing Companies
7-5-2-4: Removal From Towing List
7-5-2-5: Solicitation Of Business By Towing Companies Prohibited
7-5-2-6: Towing And Storage Fees
7-5-1: IMMEDIATE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES USED IN COMMISSION OF
OFFENSES:
7-5-1-1: OFFENSES LEADING TO VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
A motor vehicle used in violation of the statutes hereinafter set forth shall
be subject to seizure and impoundment under this section
7-5-1:
Illinois cannabis control act                          720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
Illinois controlled substances act article IV          720 ILCS 570
Drug paraphernalia control act                         720 ILCS 600/1 et seq.
Driving under the influence                            625 ILCS 5/11-501
Illinois criminal code of 1961, as amended, article    720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.
24 (deadly weapons)
Driving with a suspended or revoked driver's license   625 ILCS 5/6-303
Driving with no valid license, but not in cases where
the driver has a valid driver's license but does not   625 ILCS 5/6-101
have the license on his or her person
Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer        625 ILCS 5/11-204
Aggravated fleeing or attempting to elude a police     625 ILCS 5/11-204.1
officer
Reckless driving                                       625 ILCS 5/11-503
Any felony for which seizure is authorized under the   720 ILCS 5/36-1
Illinois criminal code of 1961
Leaving the scene of or failing to report an accident  625 ILCS 5/11-401
with death or injury
Leaving the scene of an accident with vehicle damage   625 ILCS 5/11-402
Failure to give aid or information                     625 ILCS 5/11-403
Failure to give information after striking unattended  625 ILCS 5/11-404
vehicle or other property
Failure to report an accident to the police authority  625 ILCS 5/11-407
 
(Ord. 2008-1303, 10-7-2008)
7-5-1-2: AUTHORITY OF OFFICERS TO IMPOUND:
When an officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject
to seizure and impound as listed in section
7-5-1-1 of this chapter, the officer shall:
   A.   Notify the on duty supervisor, or if no supervisor is on duty, notify
the next supervisor that is on duty of the seizure and impoundment and the
nature of the offense.
   B.   Inventory and provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility
listed on the towing list as provided in section
7-5-2 of this chapter. If the vehicle is towed to a location not on the village
towing list, the officer shall notify the person taking possession of the
vehicle that it is to be held until the village police department authorizes
its release.
   C.   When practical, the officer shall allow the removal of personal
property from the vehicle prior to towing if the property is not needed for
evidence, subject to forfeiture or otherwise needed to be maintained by the
police. Officers generally will not wait at the scene of any seizure to allow
the removal of personal property or the summoning of persons to remove
property. Persons under arrest will generally not be allowed to remove property
prior to their release.
   D.   Prepare a written police report, notice of seizure (when immediately
deliverable) and tow report, when practical, prior to ending his or her shift.
The preparation of the police report allows for the conduct of a preliminary
hearing, supervisory review and review by the evidence custodian for possible
release of personal property. The report shall state whether the vehicle or
property contained therein is subject to forfeiture or is to be held for any
other reason. (Ord. 2008-1303, 10-7-2008)
7-5-1-3: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Immediately upon seizure of the vehicle pursuant to this section
7-5-1, the officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the
vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the
fact of the vehicle's seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a
preliminary hearing as provided in this section
7-5-1. When no person is present to receive said notification, officers shall
make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner of record.
   B.   Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant
to this section
7-5-1, the village shall notify, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
the owner of record at his or her last known address, as indicated by the
vehicle's registration, of his or her right to request a final hearing before
the hearing officer that will be conducted to determine whether the subject
vehicle is eligible for impoundment pursuant to this section
7-5-1. However, no such notice need be sent to the owner of record if the owner
is personally served with the notice within ten (10) days after the vehicle is
impounded and the owner acknowledges receipt of the notice in writing.
The written notice as required in this subsection B shall state the penalties
that may be imposed if no hearing is requested, including that a vehicle not
released by payment of the penalty, fees and remaining towing/storage fees may
be sold or disposed of by the village in accordance with applicable law. (Ord.
2008-1303, 10-7-2008)
7-5-1-4: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE; RELEASE AND DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE:
   A.   A vehicle impounded under this section
7-5-1 shall be released prior to hearing to a person entitled to lawful
possession of said vehicle upon payment to the police agency of a fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), plus any and all towing and storage charges. The fee
set forth in this subsection will be refunded by the village in the event that,
upon final hearing as provided in section
7-5-1-6 of this chapter, the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was
not used in the commission of a violation as set forth in section
7-5-1-1 of this chapter. Under such circumstance, the vehicle shall be released
from impoundment to its owner. (Ord. 2008-1303, 10-7-2008; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section
7-5-1, whenever a person, corporation, or business entity with a valid lien or
valid security interest against a vehicle impounded under this section
7-5-1 has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be
given to the person or agent for said entity with a valid lien, to refund to
the village the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts
necessary to pay all lienholders of record, up to the total amount of penalties
and fees imposed under this chapter.
   C.   If a person entitled to lawful possession does not redeem the impounded
vehicle within thirty (30) days after the vehicle is impounded or after the
hearing officer's written determination, whichever is later, then such vehicle
shall be disposed of in accordance with the procedure set forth for disposal of
unclaimed or abandoned vehicles as provided by law. (Ord. 2008-1303, 10-7-2008)
7-5-1-5: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
   A.   Whenever the owner of a vehicle seized pursuant to this section
7-5-1 requests in writing, within twelve (12) hours after the seizure, and hand
delivered to the Peoria Heights police department, 4901 N. Prospect Road,
Peoria Heights, Illinois, a preliminary hearing on probable cause, a hearing
officer appointed by the village shall conduct at the village hall such
preliminary hearing within seventy two (72) hours of the seizure, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
   B.   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the preliminary hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply
at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible.
   C.   If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines that there is
probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the commission of any
crime or violation described in section
7-5-1-1 of this chapter, the hearing officer shall order the continued
impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this section
7-5-1 unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the village a cash bond of
five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus fees for towing and storing of the vehicle
as provided in subsection
7-5-1-4A of this chapter. If the hearing officer determines that there is no
such probable cause, the vehicle will be returned without penalty or other
fees.
   D.   For purposes of this section, the hearing officer shall be a licensed
attorney who is not an employee of the village. (Ord. 2008-1303, 10-7-2008)
7-5-1-6: FINAL HEARING:
   A.   The owner of record seeking a hearing must file a written request for a
hearing with the village chief of police at the Peoria Heights village hall,
4901 N. Prospect Road, Peoria Heights, Illinois, no later than fifteen (15)
days after the notice was mailed or otherwise given under section
7-5-1-3 of this chapter.
   B.   The hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued for good
cause by order of the hearing officer, no later than forty five (45) days after
the request for a hearing has been filed.
   C.   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the
hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible.
   D.   If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in the commission of
any of the violations described in section
7-5-1-1 of this chapter, the hearing officer shall enter an order requiring the
vehicle to continue to be impounded until the owner pays a penalty of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), plus fees for towing and storage of the vehicle as
provided in subsection
 7-5-1-4A of this chapter. The penalty and fees shall be a debt due and owing
the village. However, if a cash bond has been posted, the bond shall be applied
to the penalty. If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not used
in commission of such a violation, he or she shall order the return of the
vehicle or the fee as provided in subsection
7-5-1-4A of this chapter.
   E.   For purposes of this section, the hearing officer shall be a licensed
attorney who is not an employee of the village. (Ord. 2008-1303, 10-7-2008)
7-5-2: TOWING OF VEHICLES AS REQUESTED OR ORDERED BY VILLAGE:
7-5-2-1: AUTHORIZED TOWING COMPANIES:
   A.   Towing List: The chief of police shall maintain a "towing list"
containing the names of four (4) qualified towing companies as determined by
the chief of police to respond to requests for the towing of vehicles made by
the village police department.
   B.   Application For Placement On Towing List: Those towing companies
wishing to be considered for placement on the towing list shall submit an
application to the village police department within thirty (30) days of the
effective date hereof. Those towing companies who previously submitted an
application pursuant to ordinance 2005-1251 shall be considered for placement
on the towing list without the refiling of an application.
   C.   Four Companies Chosen; Remainder On File: The chief of police shall
consider the applications of all towing companies submitted and shall select
the four (4) towing companies which, in his judgment, are most qualified for
inclusion on the towing list. The applications of those towing companies not
placed on the towing list shall be placed on file and held by the village
police department. The decision of the chief of police regarding selections for
the towing list shall be final.
   D.   Required Information On Towing List: The name and phone number of each
of the four (4) selected towing companies shall be placed on the towing list,
which shall be utilized in all cases in which a vehicle is to be towed from a
public way or public property or from any private property at the request or
direction of the village police department. Towing companies not on the towing
list shall not be used unless all companies on the towing list are unavailable.
   E.   Selection Of Towing Company To Call: The names on the towing list shall
be selected on a rotating basis; that is, the name shall be selected which next
succeeds the last towing company called for towing services. However, the chief
of police is authorized to use towing companies out of sequence where proximity
to the vehicle to be removed and estimated response time make it more practical
to do so, or where the size or weight of the vehicle to be removed requires the
use of specialized equipment, or when circumstances, in the judgment of the
chief of police, make such action practical. In the event that a car owner
requests that a particular towing company be used, that company may be used,
and such use shall not affect the towing company's place in the rotation of use
under this section
7-5-2.
   F.   Selection Of New Company: Whenever a towing company is removed from the
towing list, the chief of police shall select from the applications on file,
the towing company which, in his judgment, is most qualified to be added to the
towing list. (Ord. 2008-1303, 10-7-2008)
7-5-2-2: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Each listed towing company shall maintain the following insurance
policies:
      1.   Garage Keeper's Policy: A garage keeper's legal liability policy
covering fire, theft, windstorm, vandalism and explosion in the amount of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00), and providing that each vehicle suffering damage
being deemed a separate claim.
      2.   Garage Liability Policy: A garage liability policy covering the
operation of the owner's business, equipment or other vehicles for any bodily
injury or property damage. This policy shall be in the minimum amount of two
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for any one person injured or
killed and a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for more
than one person killed or injured in any accident, as well as an additional
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage.
   B.   Each policy required under this section must contain an endorsement by
the carrier providing ninety (90) days' notice to both the village and the
insured in the event of any change in coverage under the policy. (Ord. 2008-
1303, 10-7-2008)
7-5-2-3: DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS OF TOWING COMPANIES:
   A.   All tow trucks shall be equipped with warning lights and other
equipment required under state law and have working two-way communications
radio equipment on the same frequency as a base station located at the point
where calls are received.
   B.   The towing company shall provide continuous twenty four (24) hour per
day service each day of the year, and there shall be an attendant available at
all times for the purpose of receiving calls and receiving and releasing stored
vehicles.
   C.   The towing company shall assume all liability and shall indemnify and
hold harmless the village from any such liability for damages sustained by
vehicles while being towed or stored and for all personal injuries occurring to
any of the towing company's employees or other persons and shall maintain the
required insurance policies.
   D.   The village shall assume no responsibility or liability for any vehicle
removed from any place without the authority of the chief of police.
   E.   The towing company shall not release any vehicle directly impounded by
the village without authorization by the chief of police.
   F.   The towing company shall maintain records and a claim check system to
assure release of vehicles to the rightful owners or authorized persons. Such
records shall be open to the village police department for investigation of
specific complaints and for compiling surveys under this chapter.
   G.   The towing company shall permit any person appointed by the chief of
police to inspect its wreckers, vault, security room or storage area at such
times as the chief of police shall deem appropriate. (Ord. 2008-1303, 10-7-
2008)
7-5-2-4: REMOVAL FROM TOWING LIST:
The chief of police may remove or suspend any towing company from the towing
list in the event of any of the following:
   A.   The towing company violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or any other local, state or federal law or
regulation.
   B.   The towing company is no longer actively engaged in the towing
business.
   C.   The chief of police is not satisfied with the services rendered by the
towing company to the village. (Ord. 2008-1303, 10-7-2008)
7-5-2-5: SOLICITATION OF BUSINESS BY TOWING COMPANIES PROHIBITED:
No towing company may respond to the scene of an accident or emergency for the
purpose of towing vehicles unless specifically called there by the police
department or a person involved in the accident or emergency. This section is
intended to prohibit towing companies from soliciting business at accident or
emergency scenes and shall not be construed to prohibit any towing company from
contracting with any person, firm or corporation; provided, that the towing
company does not solicit towing contracts at the scene of any accident or
emergency. (Ord. 2008-1303, 10-7-2008)
7-5-2-6: TOWING AND STORAGE FEES:
   A.   Fees Established:
      1.   The following schedule of maximum fees shall be in effect for all
tow calls received off the rotation tow list and shall be prominently displayed
at every office or storage facility:
Standard towing fee (i.e., use of flatbed truck, clean up, dollies, $150.00
etc.)
Exception location fee (winching)                                   40.00
Lot storage fee (per day)                                           35.00
Inside storage fee (per day)                                        40.00
Interrupted towing fee                                              30.00
Service fee (i.e., jump start, tire change, fuel, etc.)             40.00
Snow emergency tow                                                  50.00
Emergency openings after closing/special trips                      50.00
 
      2.   Where special or unusual circumstances require an exceptional amount
of extra work or equipment, a higher fee may be charged; provided, that the
owner or operator of the vehicle to be serviced is informed of the additional
fee in advance, if such person is available to be notified.
   B.   Payment Of Fees:
      1.   The owner or person in possession of any towed and stored vehicle
shall pay all costs incidental to towing and storage to the towing company. A
receipt for payment shall be issued to said person.
      2.   In the event that a vehicle is towed at the request of the village
police department pursuant to section
7-5-1-1 of this chapter, said vehicle shall be held until the required fees
have been paid pursuant to section
7-5-1-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-1303, 10-7-2008; amd. Ord. 2022-1672, 4-5-
2022)
CHAPTER 6
LOW-SPEED GAS-POWERED BICYCLES
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definition
7-6-2: Registration; Fees
7-6-3: Application Of Traffic Laws
7-6-4: Excessive Noise Prohibited
7-6-5: Penalty; Impoundment
7-6-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, "LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLE" shall mean: A two (2) or three
(3)-wheeled device with fully operable pedals and a gasoline motor of less than
one horsepower, whose maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered
solely by such a motor while ridden by an operator who weighs one hundred and
seventy (170) pounds, is less than twenty (20) miles per hour. (Ord. 2021-1661,
7-20-2021)
7-6-2: REGISTRATION; FEES:
   A.   Any resident within the Village owning and operating a low-speed gas
bicycle within the Village shall register the same with the Police Department.
The owner shall furnish the Police Department with his or her name and address,
the make and serial number of the low-speed gas bicycle, and any other
information as the Police Department may require.
   B.   Upon registration of a low-speed gas bicycle and payment of the
registration fee provided for herein, the Police Department shall issue to the
owner a registration sticker to be firmly attached to the bicycle in such a
manner as the Chief of Police shall prescribe.
   C.   At the time of initial registration, a registration fee of five hundred
dollars ($500) shall be made. Subsequent annual registration fees in the amount
of five hundred dollars ($500) shall be due prior to the expiration of the
prior registration. (Ord. 2021-1661, 7-20-2021)
7-6-3: APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS:
Every person riding a low-speed gas bicycle upon a roadway within the village
shall be subject to all of the provisions of this title, as well as the laws of
this state applicable to low-speed gas bicycles.
   A.   A person may operate a low-speed gas bicycle only if the person is at
least sixteen (16) years of age.
   B.   A person may not operate a low-speed gas bicycle at a speed greater
than twenty (20) miles per hour upon any highway, street, or roadway.
   C.   A person may not operate a low-speed gas bicycle on a sidewalk. (Ord.
2021-1661, 7-20-2021)
7-6-4: EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause noise levels from the operation of
a low-speed gas bicycle in excess of eighty (80) dBA in any area within the
corporate limits of the Village. (Ord. 2021-1661, 7-20-2021)
7-6-5: PENALTY; IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of no less than seventy-five dollars
($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such
violation. Every day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
   B.   Impoundment. In addition to fines as set forth in subsection A., any
person who has been issued a citation for the same offense under this Article
and found guilty or pled guilty to such citation within the previous twelve
months shall, at the time of issuance of the second such citation for the same
offense, be required to surrender the low-speed gas bicycle to the police
officer or other authorized officer of the village who issues the citation. The
surrendered low-speed gas bicycle shall be impounded and held by the police
department and shall be returned to the owner only after one of the following
conditions is met:
      1.   The person to whom the citation was issued has paid all outstanding
fines or registration fees related to the citation as well as fees and costs to
the village for impoundment in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      2.   In the event that the person to whom the citation was issued
requests, in writing and within forty-eight (48) hours of the seizure, a
hearing before a village hearing officer, and following such hearing, the
person to whom the citation was issued has presented to the Police Department
proof that a determination of not guilty was entered by the Village Hearing
Officer for the cited offense.
   C.   Failure to Retrieve Impounded Bicycle.
      1.   If a low-speed gas bicycle impounded pursuant to this Chapter is not
retrieved from the Police Department within thirty-five (35) days after the
entry of a determination of liability or non-liability by the administrative
hearing officer with regard to the citation resulting in impoundment of the
low-speed gas bicycle, the Chief of Police shall send written notice to the
owner thereof that the low-speed gas bicycle will be deemed abandoned and
disposed of by the Police Department if it is not retrieved by the owner within
thirty (30) days of the date of said notice.
      2.   If the low-speed gas bicycle remains unclaimed thirty (30) days
after the provision of a notice as described in subsection C.1. above, the
Police Department may dispose of said low-speed gas bicycle as it sees fit.
      3.   Any payment received by the Police Department in exchange for the
low-speed gas bicycle will be applied to any fines and fees owed by the owner
from whom it was impounded. (Ord. 2021-1661, 7-20-2021)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Streets, Sidewalks And Public Ways   1
Filling, Grading And Excavation   1A
Stop Sign Charitable Solicitations   1B
Water Use And Service   2
Water System   2A
Groundwater; Water Supply Contamination   2B
Cross Connection Control   2C
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Sidewalk Standards
8-1-2: Damage To Curbs And Gutters Prohibited
8-1-3: Obstructing, Damaging Public Ways
8-1-4: Safety Devices Required
8-1-5: Fires Prohibited On Paved Roadways
8-1-6: Relocation Or Remediation Of Utility Facilities; Aesthetic Requirements
8-1-1: SIDEWALK STANDARDS:
   A.   Thickness: All sidewalks shall be a minimum of six inches (6") thick.
Sidewalks at driveway locations shall be thickened to match the thickness of
the driveway pavement.
   B.   Width: Sidewalks shall not be less than four feet (4') in width.
   C.   Subgrade: Sidewalk subgrade material shall be free of debris, organic
material, plastic clays, and other material prone to freeze-thaw damage.
Subgrade material shall be compacted per IDOT standards to prevent settling
under the traffic of building materials delivery vehicles.
   D.   Location:
      1.   Sidewalks shall be located on both sides of the street within the
right-of-way. (2016 Code)
      2.   Upon a petition signed by the property owners of at least seventy
five percent (75%) of the property frontage in feet of a side of a block in the
Village, the Village President and Board of Trustees may grant the property
owners in the block the right, permission and authority by resolution to
construct a new sidewalk in a location other than as herein provided. (Ord.
204, 9-16-1940)
   E.   ADA: All sidewalks shall conform to all current Americans With
Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.
   F.   Minimum Geometry Requirements: Sidewalk geometry shall comply with this
subsection, State of Illinois requirements, and ADA requirements. Minimum
geometry requirements shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Grade (longitudinal slope) shall not exceed eight percent (8%) (1
inch per 1 foot). Landings shall be provided at regular intervals as per the
current ADA guidelines.
      2.   Cross slope (transverse slope) standard shall be two percent (2%)
(1/4 inch per foot) downward in the direction of the back of the curb.
      3.   ADA ramps shall be provided at all necessary locations per IDOT and
ADA requirements. Minimum face to face of the curb width on sidewalk ramps
shall be four feet (4').
   G.   Material Requirements: Sidewalks shall be constructed of portland
cement concrete (PCC) from an IDOT approved plant using IDOT approved mix
design and material.
   H.   Construction Requirements: Sidewalks shall be constructed per the
following standards:
      1.   Forms: Steel forms shall be used. Lumber forms may be used when
constructing sidewalk ramps, curved pavement, or small projects. However, in no
case shall the sidewalk be less than six inches (6") thick.
      2.   Expansion Joints: Expansion joints, three-fourths inch (3/4")
thickness, should be placed only at the junctions of the pavement and sidewalk
and at the intersection of sidewalks.
      3.   Ramp Impressions: Only transverse grooving is allowed on sidewalk
ramps.
      4.   Constructed Width: When constructing sidewalk ramps, the minimum
sidewalk is four feet (4'). Sidewalk ramp curbs shall be installed such that
the four foot (4') width minimum is not compromised, i.e., the four foot (4')
width shall be maintained throughout, face to face of the sidewalk curbs.
      5.   Timing: Sidewalks should be constructed prior to the occupancy of
buildings/subdivision. Forms shall be stripped in accordance with the IDOT
standard specification, and the sidewalk shall be backfilled immediately after
the forms are stripped.
      6.   Inspection And Testing: All inspecting and testing procedures shall
be followed as stated in the Illinois department of transportation construction
manual. (2016 Code)
   I.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who shall authorize, contract
for or construct any sidewalk on any public street so that the same shall not
conform to this section shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and said sidewalk may be torn out and
removed by the village through its authorized employees and agents. (Ord. 204,
9-16-1940; amd. 2016 Code)
8-1-2: DAMAGE TO CURBS AND GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to ride, drive or lead
any animal or animals, either attached to or detached from any vehicle of any
kind, upon, over or across any curbing or any substitute therefor in the
village after the same has been set for use as such along or upon any street or
alley in the village.
   B.   It shall also be unlawful for any person to throw any material of any
kind upon or against either side of any curbing after the same has been set in
the village to be used as a bridge or means of getting to or from any property,
or in any manner obstruct any gutter or waterway in the village of which any
curbing forms a part. (1914 Code § 22-1)
   C.   Any person, either directly or indirectly, violating any of the
provisions of this section shall, for each offense, be fined as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1914 Code § 22-2; amd. 2016 Code)
8-1-3: OBSTRUCTING, DAMAGING PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Prohibited Generally: Any person who shall dig in, build upon or in any
manner obstruct or injure any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other
public property within the village, except by authority of the village board,
shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for every such offense. (1914 Code § 10-13; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Obstructing Vision At Intersections: It shall be unlawful for the
owner, lessee or person in possession, charge or control of any premises to
permit any tree or shrub to grow or other obstruction to be erected or
maintained in such a manner as to unreasonably obstruct the line of sight of
traffic or traffic lights at intersections within the village. Any person, firm
or corporation violating any of the provisions of this subsection, or any rule
or regulation made in compliance herewith, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 266A, 1-7-1946; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Buildings, Fences And Hedges:
      1.   No person shall erect or place any fence or building, wholly or in
part, upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public ground. Any
building, fence or other obstruction upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or
public ground in the village shall be deemed a nuisance, and it shall be lawful
for any member of the board of trustees or the chief of police to cause the
same to be removed or taken down in such a manner as shall be deemed best; and
every person who shall oppose or resist the execution of the orders of said
member of the board or of the chief of police in the premises shall forfeit and
pay a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1914 Code § 18-8; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   No porch, gallery, stoop, steps, cellar door, stair, rail, or
platform erected, or to be erected, within the village shall be allowed to
extend upon or into any sidewalk; and no bow window shall extend into or over
any sidewalk more than two feet (2') nor less than eight feet (8') above the
grade line, nor shall any cellar door, at its outer edge, rise or project above
the surface of the sidewalk. (1914 Code § 18-13)
      3.   No hedge fence shall be permitted to extend over or into any part of
any public highway in the village. It is hereby made the duty of the owner,
occupant, or agent of any premises upon which there is a hedge fence in
violation of the provisions of this subsection, to remove that part of said
fence extending over or into the highway as aforesaid within ten (10) days
after written notice to do so is served upon him by the chief of police. If any
owner, occupant, or agent shall fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of
this subsection, he shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. If service of said notice cannot be made
upon the owner, occupant, or agent of said premises, or if there is not
compliance with said notice within ten (10) days after the service thereof,
that part of the fence which is in violation shall be removed under the
direction of the Chief of Police, and the expense of removal shall be recovered
by the Village from the owner of said premises in any court of competent
jurisdiction. (1914 Code § 18-14; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   Permit To Obstruct:
      1.   Whoever shall, within the limits of the Village, do any act in any
way interfering with the use by the public of any street, alley or public
grounds in the Village without first obtaining permission therefor from the
Village Board shall be deemed guilty of an offense. This subsection is intended
to and does apply as well to those persons and corporations who have
heretofore, by negotiation, secured privileges in the Village, as to every
other person. And any person, persons or corporations by themselves, servants
or agents violating any of the provisions of this subsection, shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1914 Code § 10-22; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   a. Any person, company or corporation who shall encumber or
obstruct, or cause to be encumbered or obstructed, any street, alley, or other
public place in the Village by placing therein or thereon any building
materials, or any article or thing whatsoever, without having first obtained
written permission from the Village President or the Director of Public Works,
shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense.
         b.   The party obtaining such permission shall first give bond in such
penal sum as the Village President or the Director of Public Works may direct,
conditioned that he shall comply with all the conditions mentioned in said
permit, and shall cease to encumber or obstruct said street, alley or other
public place, after the expiration of the time mentioned in said permit, and
shall thereupon, without cost to the Village, restore said street to as good
condition in all respects as before his use, occupation, encumbrance or
obstruction thereof, and shall remove all material and debris from the space so
occupied, and shall indemnify and save harmless the Village and its officers
against and from all costs, judgments and decrees which may be recovered
against the Village, or any of its officers, in any proceeding arising from or
growing out of the use or obstruction of said street as aforesaid, or by reason
of any excavation, opening or obstruction, or other impediment left in said
street, or by reason of any accident or casualty occurring before the
completion of said work in consequence of said obstruction or impediment. (1914
Code § 18-4; amd. 2016 Code)
   E.   Removal Of Obstructions: Any member of the Village Board, the Village
President, or Chief of Police is hereby authorized to order any article or
thing whatsoever which may encumber or obstruct any highway, street or alley
within the Village to be removed. Any such encumbrance or obstruction remaining
more than six (6) hours in any highway, street or alley as aforesaid shall be
deemed a nuisance, and it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to abate the
same forthwith. (1914 Code § 18-5)
8-1-4: SAFETY DEVICES REQUIRED:
Whenever any person shall do any work which shall require the digging up, use
or occupancy of any street, alley, highway or public ground, such person shall,
during the nighttime, put up and maintain such barriers and lights as will
effectually prevent accidents in consequence of such digging up, use or
occupancy of said street, alley, highway or public ground. (1914 Code § 18-12)
8-1-5: FIRES PROHIBITED ON PAVED ROADWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to start, ignite or maintain a fire within
the roadway boundaries of any public street or highway within the Village which
has been improved with a bituminous surface. A violation of this section shall
be considered a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 215, 11-3-1941; amd. 2016 Code)
8-1-6: RELOCATION OR REMEDIATION OF UTILITY FACILITIES; AESTHETIC REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Findings: The findings set by the Board of Trustees are incorporated
herein by reference.
   B.   Definitions:
   PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT: A construction project of the Village for the benefit
or use of its citizens.
   UTILITY COMPANY: Any entity that owns, controls, operates or manages any
utility facilities in the Village. This includes, without limitation, providers
of electricity, water, and gas, and waste disposal, telecommunications and
cable services.
   UTILITY FACILITIES: Any infrastructure utilized for the purpose of providing
to the public heat, cold, power, electricity, water, light, oil or gas, or
waste disposal, telecommunications or cable services including, without
limitation, transmission and distribution pipes, mains, lines, poles, conduits,
wires, cables, fixtures, and other necessary equipment.
   VILLAGE PROPERTY: Property owned by the Village and/or property over which
the Village has dominion and control.
   C.   Relocation Or Remediation May Be Required:
      1.   Upon a finding by the Village that any utility company's utility
facilities located on Village property: a) constitute a threat to, or
impairment of, the health, safety or welfare of the Village citizens; and/or b)
will impede the completion of a public works project undertaken for the health,
safety or welfare of the Village citizens, the Village may require the utility
company, at the utility company's sole expense, to relocate or otherwise
remediate its utility facilities as approved by the Village.
      2.   The Village shall provide due notice to the utility company of its
finding and provide the utility company with a schedule of the time frame
within which the utility company must relocate or otherwise remediate its
utility facilities in coordination with the Village.
      3.   In the event that the utility company cannot complete the relocation
or remediation within the time frame mandated by the schedule, the utility
company shall continue to work diligently to complete the relocation or
remediation and shall immediately provide the Village with the time frame
within which the utility company will complete the relocation or remediation,
with said time frame not exceeding thirty (30) days beyond the schedule
provided by the Village, unless otherwise agreed to by the Village.
   D.   Aesthetic Requirements: All new and relocated utility facilities
located on Village property shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All structures associated with any utility facilities, including any
wireless facility (as defined in section
9-5A-2 of this Code), shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings and improvements.
      2.   All electrical and mechanical equipment, including any wireless
facility (as defined in section
9-5A-2 of this Code), must be of neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure or utility pole so as to
make the equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
   E.   Penalties: The Village may impose a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code per offense as a penalty for each violation of this section.
Each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. The Village
may also obtain an injunction or other appropriate legal or equitable relief to
prevent or remedy any violation hereof. (Ord. 2018-1566, 7-17-2018)
ARTICLE A. FILLING, GRADING AND EXCAVATION
SECTION:
8-1A-1: Definitions
8-1A-2: Permit Required
8-1A-3: Application For Permit; Issuance
8-1A-4: Permit And Inspection Fee
8-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
provided in this section:
   EXCAVATION: Shall include removal, stripping or disturbance of soil, earth,
sand, rock, gravel or other similar substance from the ground.
   FILLING: Shall include the placing of any soil, earth, sand, rock, gravel or
other substance on the ground.
   GRADING: Shall include any operation involving excavation and/or filling.
   GROUND: Shall include, but shall not be limited to, land above and below and
the 100-year flood line of the Illinois River and the banks and beds of any
river. (Ord. 992, 4-17-1984)
8-1A-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No excavation, grading or filling shall be commenced in the village unless a
permit is first obtained as hereinafter provided or unless excepted in this
section or this article:
   A.   Building Permit: Under the provisions of a duly issued building permit.
(Ord. 992, 4-17-1984)
   B.   Excavation For Streets And Repairs: Necessary grading, removal or
excavation of topsoil, or other materials shall be permitted within the limits
of the right of way of any existing street, or for the purpose of constructing
streets and other related improvements within the area of new subdivisions when
made in accordance with subdivision plans approved by the planning commission
and zoning board of appeals, which subdivision plans shall establish the
elevations and grades of said streets and/or the location of said improvements
and for which a street opening permit or a sewer connection permit has been
issued. (Ord. 992, 4-17-1984; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Other Construction Work: Construction work relating to drains,
utilities, or sanitary sewerage systems for which a street opening and/or other
necessary permits have been issued by the village board. (Ord. 992, 4-17-1984)
8-1A-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; ISSUANCE:
   A.   Application for an excavation permit shall be made by the property
owner or his authorized agent, and shall be made to the building inspector as
enforcement officer, on forms provided thereby. An application in duplicate
shall be accompanied by a detailed statement of the proposed work and the
purpose thereof and why the excavation, grading and/or filling is clearly
incidental to the improvement of the property, and written copies, if required,
of the permits granted by the Peoria pleasure and park district.
   B.   Subsequent to the permit application having been filed, with the
accompanying fee, a permit, if all the requirements of this article have been
met, shall be issued as herein authorized. (Ord. 992, 4-17-1984)
8-1A-4: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEE:
A fee to cover the cost of the permit and inspections shall be charged as
determined by the village board and shall be set out on a schedule of
excavation fees to be filed with the village clerk. (Ord. 992, 4-17-1984)
ARTICLE B. STOP SIGN CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
SECTION:
8-1B-1: Definitions
8-1B-2: Prohibition
8-1B-3: Eligibility
8-1B-4: Board Of Trustees To Issue Permits
8-1B-5: Limited Number Of Permits
8-1B-6: Application
8-1B-7: Required Conditions Of Permit
8-1B-8: Violations
8-1B-9: Penalties
8-1B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Any group, organization, fund, community chest,
fraternity, or other entity which has obtained an exemption from taxation
pursuant to the provisions of title 26 United States Code section 501(c) or
(d), also known as the internal revenue code.
   DONATION: Cash or anything of value given with charitable or benevolent
intention and without any expectation of receiving something in return.
   SOLICITOR: Anyone who solicits donations at the corner of Prospect Road and
Seiberling Avenue within the village of Peoria Heights.
   STOP SIGN FUNDRAISER: Any event where automobiles are hailed, flagged, or
otherwise approached when stopped and funds are requested or solicited from the
occupants of the vehicle or anything of value is exchanged with the occupant of
a vehicle. (Ord. 2019-1614, 12-17-2019)
8-1B-2: PROHIBITION:
No one shall engage in solicitation of donations from automobiles within the
streets of the village or any other stop sign fundraising activities except as
permitted by this article or at any other location than the stop signs at the
corner of Prospect Road and Seiberling Avenue. (Ord. 2019-1614, 12-17-2019)
8-1B-3: ELIGIBILITY:
Only charitable organizations based in the village are eligible to obtain a
permit to hold a stop sign fundraiser. (Ord. 2019-1614, 12-17-2019)
8-1B-4: BOARD OF TRUSTEES TO ISSUE PERMITS:
The board of trustees shall take applications and issue permits for stop sign
fundraisers in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2019-1614,
12-17-2019)
8-1B-5: LIMITED NUMBER OF PERMITS:
No more than four (4) total stop sign charitable solicitation permits shall be
issued in any calendar year. Stop sign charitable solicitation permits shall be
issued only to charitable organizations that are affiliated with the village or
that have offices located in the village. Permits shall be issued in order of
receipt of application and approval by the board of trustees. Applications
received in excess of the four (4) annual permits will be automatically denied
and referred to reapply in the subsequent calendar year. (Ord. 2019-1614, 12-
17-2019)
8-1B-6: APPLICATION:
Applications for permission to conduct a stop sign fundraiser must be submitted
in full on village approved forms to the village administrator.
   A.   The application shall contain, in addition to other items required by
the board of trustees, the following information:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of the person making the
application and organizing the event.
      2.   Name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of the
charitable organization.
      3.   The authorized and responsible head of the charitable organization.
      4.   Activities to be conducted at the fundraiser.
      5.   Proposed time and duration of the fundraiser.
      6.   Names of all solicitors who will be in the public right-of-way
during the stop sign fundraiser.
      7.   Individual signed waivers of liability from each participating
solicitor in accordance with section
8-1B-7D  of this code.
      8.   Two (2) executed stop sign fundraiser indemnification agreements
signed by an authorized representative of the charitable organization in
accordance with section
8-1B-7E  of this code.
      9.   Proof of recognition by the United States Internal Revenue Service
of the charitable organization’s not-for-profit status as a 501(c) or 501(d)
charitable organization in the form of a determination letter issued by the
Internal Revenue Service.
   B.   Upon favorable action by the board of trustees, and the filing of all
required documents, the board of trustees shall issue a stop sign charitable
solicitation permit for the stop sign fundraiser.
   C.   If the board of trustees denies an application for a permit, it shall
notify the applicant of its decision and the grounds therefor by certified
mail, return receipt requested. (Ord. 2019-1614, 12-17-2019)
8-1B-7: REQUIRED CONDITIONS OF PERMIT:
The charitable organization agrees to abide by all required conditions of the
stop sign charitable solicitation permit as listed below.
   A.   Reflective vests and other protective devices are required to be used
by solicitors for safety purposes. The board of trustees requires the use of
cones or barricades, and such devices shall be utilized in accordance with the
instructions of the superintendent of public works or his or her designee.
   B.   In no event shall the board of trustees grant permission to conduct a
stop sign fundraiser before 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.
   C.   The board of trustees has the right to choose the weekend said stop
sign fundraiser will occur.
   D.   Each participating solicitor shall execute a release of liability
waiver as prepared by the village and approved by the charitable organization,
or their designated representative, prior to participation in a stop sign
fundraiser event.
   E.   Each charitable organization must provide two (2) original copies of
the stop sign fundraiser indemnification agreement to the village for approval
by the board of trustees as part of the application for a stop sign charitable
solicitation permit.
   F.   A copy of the stop sign charitable solicitation permit as issued by the
board of trustees for the stop sign fundraiser must be kept at the location of
the fundraiser and must be shown to any member of the public or any officer,
employee, or representative of the village upon demand.
   G.   Solicitors shall not verbally or physically induce contributions by
intimidation, coercion, obstruction, or duress. Nor shall solicitors treat the
public in a rude, insolent, or discourteous manner.
   H.   Solicitors shall not obstruct traffic flow or endanger the public in
any fashion. At no time will signs, barricades, solicitors, or other objects
obstruct the view or impede the use of the street, sidewalk, or intersection.
   I.   Charitable organizations must display a sign or signs of at least one
and a half (1.5) square feet in area which identifies the organization and
cause for the fundraiser during the event. Said sign(s) shall be placed so that
they are visible to vehicles traveling in each direction before they reach the
intersection. (Ord. 2019-1614, 12-17-2019)
8-1B-8: VIOLATIONS:
It is a violation of this article to fail to comply with any provision hereof,
any condition imposed on the permit, or for any individual to engage in stop
sign fundraising within the village without the permission of the village board
of trustees. (Ord. 2019-1614, 12-17-2019)
8-1B-9: PENALTIES:
For purposes of this section, each day upon which unlawful solicitation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense. Any or all of the following penalties may
be imposed for violation of this article:
   A.   A fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation.
   B.   Any permit issued to a charitable organization shall be subject to
revocation in the event of violations of any provision of this article.
      1.   If the board of trustees has reason to believe that a permit holder
has violated any of the provisions of this article, the board shall immediately
suspend the license and give the permit holder written notice in person or by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
      2.   The notice must contain a statement by the board of trustees of the
facts which have resulted in the suspension of the stop sign charitable
solicitation permit.
   C.   If a permit issued to a charitable organization is revoked pursuant to
subsection B of this section, the charitable organization, its direct
affiliates, and participating solicitors shall be disqualified from
consideration for further permits for a period of not less than two (2) years
from the date of revocation. (Ord. 2019-1614, 12-17-2019)
CHAPTER 2
WATER USE AND SERVICE
ARTICLE A. WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-2A-1: Use Of Village System Required
8-2A-2: Authority To Turn On Water; Responsibility For Service
8-2A-3: Application For Service; Deposit Required
8-2A-4: Compliance With Village Plumbing Requirements; Exceptions
8-2A-5: Water Taps
8-2A-6: Service Devices
8-2A-7: Water Meters
8-2A-8: Excavations For Installation
8-2A-9: Responsibility For Repairs
8-2A-10: Rates And Charges
8-2A-11: Delinquent Bills
8-2A-12: Restricted And Prohibited Acts
8-2A-13: Users Outside Corporate Limits
8-2A-14: Penalty
8-2A-1: USE OF VILLAGE SYSTEM REQUIRED:
After the effective date of ordinance 805, passed October 17, 1972, all persons
owning, occupying or using premises in the village limits shall secure their
water from the village water supply at such time as water mains are convenient
to make connection to the premises. In the event any owner or owners fail to
comply with the provisions of this section, notice shall be served upon said
owner or owners. Legal proceedings shall be instituted to enforce compliance.
Such notice shall be served by certified mail to owner or owners of said
premises. (Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-2013)
8-2A-2: AUTHORITY TO TURN ON WATER; RESPONSIBILITY FOR SERVICE:
Water from the village shall be turned on for service to any premises only by
the director of public works or his authorized agent. The owner of real
property shall be responsible for water service to all properties - rental and
owner occupied. (Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-2013)
8-2A-3: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Application For Service: Application to have water service shall be
made in writing by the homeowner or authorized agent at the water department
office during normal working hours. The application shall be an agreement made
by the water department and the homeowner to abide by and to accept all
provisions of this article and any other applicable ordinances governing the
use of the village water supply. Documentation showing proof of ownership is
requested at the time of application.
   B.   Deposit Required: A deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be made
with each application; the sum to be retained by the village to ensure payment
of such due amounts when service is permanently discontinued. This deposit,
less any owed still due to the village, shall be refunded without interest.
(Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-2013; amd. Ord. 2023-1720, 12-19-2023)
8-2A-4: COMPLIANCE WITH VILLAGE PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTIONS:
No water service to any premises shall commence unless the plumbing complies
with village ordinances; provided, temporary service for construction work may
be allowed by the director of public works or authorized agent. (Ord. 2013-
1385, 5-7-2013)
8-2A-5: WATER TAPS:
   A.   Permit Required; Fee: Taps to the water main shall not be less than
three-fourths inch (3/4"), and shall be made by a licensed bonded plumber, and
shall not be made without making application for permit from the director of
public works or authorized agent at the water department office. The fee for
any water main taps shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 2013-1385, 5-
7-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Responsibility For Costs: All expense of connection work, tap or new
service will be to the applicant.
   C.   Specifications: Services will be no less than three-fourths inch (3/4")
copper or plastic, with service meaning from the main to premises. In addition,
all plastic lines shall include a tracer wire.
   D.   Inspections: The director of public works or authorized agent will
inspect all connections and new services. (Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-2013)
8-2A-6: SERVICE DEVICES:
   A.   All services shall consist of the following:
      1.   Full circle stainless steel tap clamp.
      2.   Corporation stop.
      3.   Copper or plastic pipe with tracer wire.
      4.   Curb stop.
      5.   Stop box.
   B.   Curb stops will be located anywhere from the curb line to the sidewalk,
unless not applicable. (Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-2013)
8-2A-7: WATER METERS:
   A.   Metered Water And Remote Reading Device Required: All premises will be
metered before habitation. Meters will be supplied, maintained and serviced
when needed by the village. Said meters will meet the requirements of the
village water department. All premises will have a remote meter reading device
needed to facilitate the village touch read system.
   B.   Reading Meters: The director of public works shall cause all services
to be read as follows:
      1.   Residential, quarterly.
      2.   Commercial, monthly.
   C.   Estimate Of Rates: At any time a meter cannot be read for any reason,
the water office will estimate an average rate of consumption and will then
notify owners of premises by written notice to make repairs of the metering
device. If owners do not comply, termination of service will be used to make
necessary repairs to metering devices.
   D.   Testing Meters: Any water service consumer may submit a written request
for testing of their metering device. Any such testing shall be at the
consumer’s expense and performed by a third-party at their then current rates.
If the test shows said water meter is not within three percent (3%) accurate,
it shall be repaired or replaced and the testing fee will be refunded.
   E.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   If any user causes or permits the breakage of seals on a water meter
on his premises or the removal thereof, he shall be in violation of this
article.
      2.   No water meter may be removed without notification by the user to
the village.
      3.   Upon determination of guilt showing a violation of this subsection
E, the user shall be fined, upon conviction, an amount equal to twice the
amount of his water charges for the previous year, or the charges made at his
premises, but not to exceed the maximum set out in section
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 896, 9-6-1977; amd. Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-2013; 2016 Code; Ord. 2023-1720,
12-19-2023)
8-2A-8: EXCAVATIONS FOR INSTALLATION:
Excavations for installing services or repairs to same shall be under
compliance of this article and other village ordinances relating to street
openings and also state and federal environmental protection agency (EPA)
guidelines. (Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-2013)
8-2A-9: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIRS:
All repairs made from the curb box to the premises, including the premises,
will be done at the owner's expense by a licensed bonded plumber. The village
shall be responsible for repairs of all services from the main to the curb box,
including curb stop, water meter and remote reader. The village reserves the
right to make repairs by work force or by a licensed bonded plumber in the case
of an emergency at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-2013)
8-2A-10: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   User Rates:
      1.   Rates Established: The rates to be charged to users of water
supplied by the municipal water plant of the village shall be as follows:
A five percent (5%) increase for:
   Per Thousand Minimum Charge
                        Per Thousand Minimum Charge
   May 1, 2025 - November 30, 2025
 Residential:                       
  First 6,000 gallons $14.704      $88.22
  Next 4,000 gallons  8.046         
  Next 20,000 gallons 5.485         
  Next 10,000 gallons 2.532         
  Next 10,000 gallons 2.402         
  Over 50,000 gallons 2.183         
 Business:                          
  First 3,000 gallons 13.089       39.27
  Next 3,000 gallons  9.979         
  Next 4,000 gallons  8.041         
  Next 20,000 gallons 5.173         
  Next 10,000 gallons 3.363         
  Next 10,000 gallons 2.401         
  Over 50,000 gallons 2.183         
 Country club:                      
  First 3,000 gallons 13.089       39.27
  Next 3,000 gallons  8.919         
  Next 4,000 gallons  7.173         
  Next 20,000 gallons 4.860         
  Over 30,000 gallons 1.993         
   December 1, 2025 - November 30, 2026
 Residential:                       
  First 6,000 gallons $15.439      $92.63
  Next 4,000 gallons  8.448         
  Next 20,000 gallons 5.759         
  Next 10,000 gallons 2.659         
  Next 10,000 gallons 2.521         
  Over 50,000 gallons 2.292         
 Business:                          
  First 3,000 gallons 13.743       41.23
  Next 3,000 gallons  10.478        
  Next 4,000 gallons  8.443         
  Next 20,000 gallons 5.432         
  Next 10,000 gallons 3.531         
  Next 10,000 gallons 2.521         
  Over 50,000 gallons 2.292         
 Country club:                      
  First 3,000 gallons 13.743       41.23
  Next 3,000 gallons  9.365         
  Next 4,000 gallons  7.532         
  Next 20,000 gallons 5.103         
  Over 30,000 gallons 2.093         
 
      2.   Summary Of Minimum Charges: Beginning May 1, 2025, through November
30, 2025, the availability charge for all existing residential water service
connections, whether they are active or inactive, will be billed at a minimum
charge of eighty-eight dollars and twenty-two cents ($88.22). The Country Club
and Businesses, whether they are active or inactive accounts, will be billed a
minimum charge of thirty-nine dollars and twenty-seven cents ($39.27).
Beginning on December 1, 2025, the availability charge for all existing
residential water service connections, whether they are active or inactive,
will be billed at a minimum charge of ninety-two dollars and sixty-three cents
($92.63), and the Country Club and Businesses, whether they are active or
inactive accounts, will be billed a minimum charge of forty-one dollars and
twenty-three cents ($41.23).
      3.   Effective Date Of Rates: All water rates as herein stated shall
become effective and in all respects shown to commence with the December 1,
2023, billing cycle.
   B.   Monthly Infrastructure Fee:
      1.   In addition to the user charges based on the water rates in
subsection A of this section, each metered user of the water system shall pay a
monthly infrastructure fee of five dollars ($5.00), billed on the same schedule
as the billing for user charges. All revenue generated by the infrastructure
fee imposed by this subsection B shall be deposited in the waterworks fund
maintained by the village.
      2.   The monthly infrastructure fee established by this subsection B
shall become effective beginning with the month of May 2014, but shall be
billed to users only with quarterly statements for water service submitted to
users on or after August 1, 2014.
   C.   Insufficient Funds Fee: The water department shall charge a twenty five
dollar ($25.00) fee on all insufficient funds checks (NSF). If check and fee
are not paid within two (2) working days after notification, either by door tag
or phone, water service will be terminated until any and all payments and fees
are paid.
   D.   Billing: All fees provided for under this Chapter are the
responsibility of the owner of the real property receiving the water service.
Statements reflecting all fees owed shall be billed to said property owner at
their tax mailing address; provided however, that property owners may elect to
only receive fee statements via email. Property owners electing to receive fee
statements via email are responsible for maintaining the email address(es)
associated with their account and updating the Village water department with
any change in mailing address. (Ord. 2006-1269, 9-19-2006; amd. Ord. 2011-1353,
11-15-2011; Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-2013; Ord. 2014-1407, 5-20-2014; 2016 Code;
Ord. 2016-1492, 12-6-2016; Ord. 2019-1613, 11-19-2019; Ord. 2023-1715, 11-21-
2023; Ord. 2023-1720, 12-19-2023; Ord. 2025-1759, 4-1-2025)
8-2A-11: DELINQUENT BILLS:
   A.   Termination Of Service; Payment Required For Reinstatement: Water
service may be terminated for any premises which account remains unpaid for a
period of thirty (30) days after the statement is rendered and mailed or
emailed. To restart service, customers will pay the account in full or be
responsible to work out a payment arrangement with the director of public works
or authorized agent during normal business hours.
   B.   Lien Provisions For Severe Delinquencies:
      1.   Payment of any charges, rates and fees required under this article
shall be severely delinquent if left unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days
after the statement has been rendered, which will result in a lien filing on
said premises by the village water department.
      2.   At such time, the water department will notify the owner or owners
of said real estate that a lien on said property will be made as prescribed by
Illinois law. The water office will file with the county recorder a notice of
lien claim, which shall conform to applicable law, and a copy of the notice
will be sent to the owner or owners of the real estate referenced by tax
identification number.
      3.   Any lien claim so filed may be enforced by foreclosure. The village
may also elect to sue the occupant or user of the real estate property in a
civil action to recover money due for any service rendered under this article,
plus attorney fees and court costs.
      4.   Property subject to a lien for unpaid water service charges shall be
sold for nonpayment, and the proceeds shall be applied to pay any and all
charges after deducting costs as in the case of foreclosure of statutory liens.
Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the village. The
village attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction over
such proceedings against any property for which a lien was filed.
(Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-2013; amd. Ord. 2023-1720, 12-19-2023)
8-2A-12: RESTRICTED AND PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Sale, Purchase Of Water:
      1.   No water shall be resold or distributed by the applicant for water
service unless approved by the director of public works. (Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-
2013)
      2.   a. No public utility engaged in the sale and distribution of water,
other than the village water department, shall sell, furnish and distribute
water to any person, firm or corporation for use and consumption within the
boundaries of the village.
         b.   No person, firm or corporation located or residing within the
boundaries of the village shall purchase water from an outside public utility
engaged in the business of selling and distributing water for use and
consumption within the village boundaries. (Ord. 190, 7-3-1939)
         c.   Any violation of the terms of this subsection A2 shall be a
misdemeanor and each day that such violation exists shall be considered a
separate offense. For each violation of this subsection A2, there shall be
imposed a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 190, 7-3-1939; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Tampering With, Damage To System: It shall be unlawful for any person
to tamper with or alter any part of the village water system unless authorized
by the director of public works or authorized agent. Persons so doing will
incur the cost of any repair needed because of the same. (Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-
2013)
8-2A-13: USERS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS:
   A.   Regular Rates Apply:
      1.   From and after September 1, 1934, the rates for water furnished by
the village waterworks to users who reside outside of the corporate limits of
the village shall be the same as those charged water users residing within the
corporate limits of the village.
      2.   Any subsequent changes in rates to water users shall apply equally
to water users residing within and to those residing without the corporate
limits of the village.
   B.   Service And Maintenance By Village:
      1.   Distribution mains for water furnished by the village waterworks
beyond the corporate limits of the village and service mains from such
distribution mains to stop boxes shall be serviced and maintained by the
village waterworks without charge to the water users.
      2.   Water meters on premises of users of water of the village waterworks
beyond the corporate limits of the village shall be serviced and maintained
without cost to such water users. (Ord. 130, 8-20-1934)
8-2A-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article, upon written notice to the
owner or owners, subject to water service termination and/or upon conviction,
shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and each day a violation continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2013-1385, 5-7-2013; amd. 2016
Code)
ARTICLE B. GROUNDWATER; WATER SUPPLY CONTAMINATION
SECTION:
8-2B-1: Setbacks From Public Water Supply
8-2B-2: Use Of Groundwater As Potable Water Prohibited
8-2B-1: SETBACKS FROM PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Statute Authority; Purpose; Scope: Pursuant to the authority conferred
by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-125-4 and 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/14.2 and 5/14.3 and in the interest of securing the public health, safety and
welfare; to preserve the quality and quantity of groundwater resources in order
to assure a safe and adequate water supply for the present and future
generations; and to preserve groundwater resources currently in use and those
aquifers having a potential use as a public water supply, the provisions of
this section shall apply to all properties located within the minimum setback
zone established under section 14.2 of the environmental protection act 1
("act") and this section, and the maximum setback zone established under
section 14.3 of the act 2  and this section.
   B.   Definitions: Except as stated in this section, and unless a different
meaning of a word or term is clear from the context, the definitions of words
or terms in this section shall be the same as those used in the act and the
Illinois groundwater protection act 3 .
   ACT: The environmental protection act 4 .
   AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
   BOARD: The Illinois pollution control board.
   MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE: The area around a community water supply well
established under section 14.3 of the act and this section, and described in
appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part hereof.
   MINIMUM SETBACK ZONE: The area around a community water supply well
established under section 14.2 of the act and this section, and described in
appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part hereof.
(Ord. 1067, 6-2-1992; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection D or E of this section, no person
shall place a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or
new potential route within the minimum setback zone of four hundred feet (400')
of wells 7, 9, and 11, IEPA wells 50194, 50196, and 50198, all shown on exhibit
A attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part hereof, and located
in the southeast one-quarter of section fifteen T.9N R.8E., Peoria Heights,
Peoria County, Illinois.
      2.   Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no person shall
place a new potential primary source within the maximum setback zone of one
thousand feet (1,000') of wells 7, 9, and 11, IEPA wells 50194, 50196, and
50198, all shown on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein and
made a part hereof, and located in the southeast one-quarter of section fifteen
T.9N R.8E., Peoria Heights, Peoria County, Illinois.
   D.   Waivers, Exceptions And Certifications Of Minimal Hazard:
      1.   If, pursuant to section 14.2(b) of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or a new potential
route is granted a waiver by the agency, such owner shall be deemed to have a
waiver to the same extent from subsection C1 of this section.
      2.   If, pursuant to section 14.2(c) of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source (other than land filling or land treating), new
potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted an exception by
the board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent
from subsection C1 of this section.
      3.   If, pursuant to section 14.2(c) of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source (other than land filling or land treating) is granted
an exception by the board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to
the same extent from subsection C2 of this section.
      4.   If, pursuant to section 14.5 of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential
route is issued a certificate of minimal hazard by the agency, such owner shall
not be subject to subsection C1 of this section to the same extent that such
owner is not subject to section 14.2(d) of the act.
   E.   Exclusion: Subsection C1 of this section shall not apply to new common
sources of sanitary pollution as specified pursuant to section 17 of the act
and the regulations adopted thereunder by the agency; however, no such common
sources may be located within the applicable minimum distance from a community
water supply well specified by such regulations. (Ord. 1067, 6-2-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5/14.2.
2 2. 415 ILCS 5/14.3.
3 3. 415 ILCS 55/1 et seq.
4 4. 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
8-2B-2: USE OF GROUNDWATER AS POTABLE WATER PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
   POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption including,
but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes,
or preparing foods.
   B.   Areas Where Use Prohibited: Except for such uses or methods in
existence before the effective date hereof, the use or attempt to use a potable
water supply groundwater from within the corporate limits of the village, as
described in exhibits A and B attached to the ordinance codified herein by the
installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited.
This prohibition expressly includes the village. (Ord. 2014-1401, 2-18-2014)
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 2014-1401, 2-18-2014; amd. 2016
Code)
ARTICLE C. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-2C-1: Cross Connections Prohibited
8-2C-2: Backflow Prevention Devices
8-2C-3: Investigations And Inspections; Entry Powers
8-2C-4: Disconnection Of Service
8-2C-5: Responsibility For Cleanup Costs
8-2C-1: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or
maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary
or emergency water supply other than that of the public water supply of the
village may enter the supply or distribution system of said public water supply
system. (Ord. 1062, 12-17-1991)
8-2C-2: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in accordance with
the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890. In accordance
with said Illinois plumbing code or in the judgment of the director of public
works, if an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of
the public water supply system, the director of public works shall give notice
to the water customer to install such a device immediately. The water customer
shall, at his or her own expense, install such an approved device at a location
and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, the Illinois
environmental protection agency and all applicable local regulations, and shall
cause the inspection and testing of said device upon installation and as
required by the Illinois plumbing code, the Illinois environmental protection
agency and all applicable local regulations. (Ord. 1062, 12-17-1991)
8-2C-3: INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS; ENTRY POWERS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the director of public works to cause
inspections and/or investigations to be made of any and/or all commercial,
industrial and other properties served by the public water supply system of the
village to determine whether actual or potential hazards to said public water
supply system may exist. Such inspections and/or investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years or
as often as the director of public works shall deem necessary. Records of such
inspections and/or investigations shall be maintained and available for review
for a period of at least five (5) years.
   B.   The director shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by the village public water system for the purpose of verifying
the presence or absence of cross connections. On demand, the owner, lessees or
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the director of public
works any information which said director may request regarding the piping
system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal to furnish said
requested information shall be deemed evidence of the presence of improper
connections as provided in this article. (Ord. 1062, 12-17-1991)
8-2C-4: DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE:
The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any
property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this article
is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as may be
deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply. Water service to said property shall not be restored until such
conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions
of this article, and until a reconnection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) is paid
to the village. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected if
the director of public works determines that an imminent danger of harmful
contamination to the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be
followed by written notification of the cause for disconnection. Immediate
disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply; provided,
that in the reasonable opinion of the director of public works or the Illinois
environmental protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply system.
Neither the village, its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for
any injury, damages, or lost revenue which may result from termination of said
customer's water supply in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
article, whether or not said termination was with or without notice. (Ord.
1062, 12-17-1991)
8-2C-5: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS:
The customer responsible for back siphoned or back pressured material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed,
maintained, or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 1062, 12-17-1991)
TITLE 9
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
Administration And Enforcement   1
Building Codes And Regulations   2
Fire Code   3
Sign Code   4
Wireless Telecommunications Towers And Antennas   5
Small Wireless Facilities In Public Right-Of-Way   5A
Flood Damage Prevention   6
Control Of Erosion, Sediment And Stormwater   7
Residential Property   8
Residential Rental Registration Code   8A
Standards For Residential Property   8B
Tri-County Multi-Jurisdictional Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan   9
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building-Electrical Inspector
9-1-2: Contractor Insurance Requirements
9-1-3: Payment Of Prevailing Wage Required
9-1-1: BUILDING-ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
   A.   There is hereby created a position of building-electrical inspector
(known as building inspector) in the administration department in the village
of Peoria Heights. The duties of code enforcement are to be performed by a
sworn officer of the village of Peoria Heights police department, under the
authority of the chief of police.
   B.   The building inspector shall be selected by the village administrator
with the advice and consent of the village president. This selection shall be
based solely on the basis of qualifications including, but not limited to,
specific professional education and actual experience in and knowledge of the
duties of the position, as specified in this section. The building inspector
shall be classified as an on call, as needed employee of the village of Peoria
Heights with a rate and method of compensation to be set by the village
president and the board of trustees.
   C.   The building inspector shall be responsible to the village
administrator, village president, and board of trustees for proper
implementation of the responsibilities as follows:
      1.   Inspection of commercial and residential buildings and structures in
the course of construction alteration, electrical functioning and repair for
compliance with the village's international residential/commercial building
codes, national electrical code and zoning ordinance referenced standards to
obtain conformance with adopted codes.
      2.   Reviews submitted building and site plans prior to issuance of a
building permit.
      3.   Communicate with permit applicants, architects, engineers,
contractors, the village administrator and the director of public works to
ensure substantial compliance with adopted codes and ordinances.
      4.   Writes permits and permit processing.
      5.   Conducts inspections to assist other departments such as fire,
police, housing, public works, and administration as needed.
      6.   Available to public for inquiries from individuals regarding
international residential/commercial building codes, national electrical codes
and zoning ordinance and related items.
      7.   Performs other related duties as assigned by the village president,
village administrator and/or board of trustees.
   D.   The building inspector shall, in addition to the qualifications in
subsection B of this section, have the following qualifications:
      1.   Necessary knowledge of international residential/commercial
buildings codes, national electrical code, and the zoning ordinance of the
village of Peoria Heights and other ordinances necessary to enforce compliance
with the ordinances and codes relative to building construction, maintenance
and repair within the village of Peoria Heights.
      2.   Knowledge of applicable state, federal and local ordinances, laws,
rules and regulations.
      3.   Knowledge of principles, practices, methods, techniques and all
aspects of building construction, electrical wiring maintenance and
international residential/commercial building codes, national electrical code
and zoning ordinance enforcement. (Ord. 2016-1466, 4-5-2016)
9-1-2: CONTRACTOR INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Insurance Required; Amounts: Contractors and subcontractors shall
obtain insurance of the types and in the amounts as listed in this section:
      1.   Commercial General And Umbrella Liability Insurance:
         a.   The contractor shall maintain commercial general liability
(hereinafter "CGL") and, if necessary, commercial umbrella insurance with a
limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence.
If such CGL insurance contains a general aggregate limit, it shall apply
separately to the project/location.
         b.   CGL insurance shall be written on the insurance services office
(hereinafter "ISO") occurrence form or a substitute form providing equivalent
coverage, and shall cover liability arising from premises, operations,
independent contractors, products-completed operations, personal injury and
advertising injury, and liability assumed under an insured contract (including
the tort liability of another assumed in a business contract).
         c.   The village shall be included as an insured under the CGL, using
the ISO additional insured endorsement form or a substitute form providing
equivalent coverage, and under the commercial umbrella, if any. This insurance
shall apply as primary insurance with respect to any other insurance or self-
insurance afforded to the village.
         d.   There shall be no endorsement or modification of the CGL limiting
the scope of coverage for liability arising from pollution, explosion,
collapse, or underground property damage.
      2.   Continuing Completed Operations Liability Insurance:
         a.   The contractor shall maintain commercial general liability (CGL)
and, if necessary, commercial umbrella liability insurance with a limit of not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence for at least one
year following substantial completion of the work.
         b.   Continuing CGL insurance shall be written on the ISO occurrence
form, or substitute form providing equivalent coverage, and shall, at a
minimum, cover liability arising from products-completed operations and
liability assumed under an insured contract.
         c.   Continuing CGL insurance shall have a products-completed
operations aggregate of at least two (2) times its each occurrence limit.
         d.   Continuing commercial umbrella coverage, if any, shall include
liability coverage for damage to the insured's completed work equivalent to
that provided under the required endorsement form.
      3.   Business Auto And Umbrella Liability Insurance: The contractor shall
maintain business auto liability and, if necessary, commercial umbrella
liability insurance with a limit of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for each accident. Such insurance shall cover liability arising
out of any auto including owned, hired and nonowned autos.
      4.   Workers' Compensation Insurance:
         a.   The contractor and subcontractor shall maintain workers'
compensation insurance as provided in this subsection A4 and as required by
Illinois statute. The workers' compensation insurance and/or umbrella and/or
employer liability required insurance limits shall not be less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each accident for bodily injury by accident or one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each employee for bodily injury by disease.
         b.   If the village has not been included as an insured under the CGL
using the ISO additional insured endorsement form under the commercial general
and umbrella liability insurance required in the contract, the contractor
waives all rights against the village and its officers, officials, employees,
volunteers and agents for recovery of damages arising out of or incident to the
contractor's work.
   B.   General Insurance Provisions:
      1.   Evidence Of Insurance:
         a.   Prior to beginning work, the contractor shall furnish the village
with a certificate(s) of insurance and applicable policy endorsement(s),
executed by a duly authorized representative of each insurer, showing
compliance with the insurance requirements in this section.
         b.   All certificates of insurance shall provide for thirty (30) days'
written notice to the village prior to the cancellation or material change of
any insurance referred to therein. Written notice to the village shall be by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
         c.   Failure of the village to demand such certificate, endorsement or
other evidence of full compliance with these insurance requirements or failure
of the village to identify a deficiency from evidence that is provided shall
not be construed as a waiver of the contractor's obligation to maintain such
insurance.
         d.   The village shall have the right, but not the obligation, of
prohibiting the contractor or any subcontractor from entering the project site
until such certificates or other evidence that insurance has been placed in
complete compliance with these requirements is received and approved by the
village.
         e.   Failure to maintain the required insurance may result in
termination of the contract at the village's option.
         f.   With respect to insurance maintained after final payment in
compliance with a requirement above, an additional certificate(s) evidencing
such coverage shall be promptly provided to the village whenever requested.
         g.   The contractor shall provide certified copies of all insurance
policies required above within ten (10) days of the village's written request
for said copies.
      2.   Cross Liability Coverage: If the contractor's liability policies do
not contain the standard ISO separation of insureds provision, or a
substantially similar clause, they shall be endorsed to provide cross liability
coverage.
      3.   Deductibles And Self-Insured Retentions: Any deductibles or self-
insured retentions must be declared to the village. At the option of the
village, the contractor may be asked to eliminate such deductibles or self-
insured retentions as respects the village, its officers, officials, employees,
volunteers and agents or required to procure a bond guaranteeing payment of
losses and other related costs including, but not limited to, investigations,
claim administration and defense expenses.
      4.   Subcontractors: The contractor shall cause each subcontractor
employed by the contractor to purchase and maintain insurance of the type
specified in this section. When requested by the village, the contractor shall
furnish copies of certificates of insurance evidencing coverage for each
subcontractor.
   C.   Prevailing Wage Act: All contractors and subcontractors shall comply
with the prevailing wage act of the state of Illinois and all case law
interpreting the prevailing wage act. The contractor and subcontractor and
shall provide all required notices and keep all records of their wages paid to
their employees, as required, including certified payroll records as required
by the prevailing wage act.
   D.   Indemnification: To the fullest extent permitted by law, the contractor
and subcontractor shall indemnify and hold harmless the village, the mayor and
board of trustees, and village officers, officials, employees, volunteers and
agents from and against all claims, damages, losses and expenses including, but
not limited to, legal fees (attorney and paralegal fees and court costs)
arising out of or resulting from the performance of the contractor's work;
provided, that any such claim, damage, loss or expense: 1) is attributable to
bodily injury, sickness, disease or death, or injury to or destruction of
tangible property, other than the work itself, including the loss of use
resulting therefrom; and 2) is caused in whole or in part by any wrongful or
negligent act or omission of the contractor, any subcontractor, anyone directly
or indirectly employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any of them may
be liable, except to the extent it is caused in part by a party indemnified
hereunder. Such obligation shall not be construed to negate, abridge, or
otherwise reduce any other right or obligation of indemnity which would
otherwise exist as to any party or person described in this subsection. The
contractor shall similarly protect, indemnify and hold and save harmless the
village, the mayor and board of trustees, and village officers, officials,
employees, volunteers and agents against and from any and all claims, costs,
causes, actions and expenses including, but not limited to, legal fees incurred
by reason of the contractor's breach of any of its obligations under, or the
contractor's default of, any provision of the contract.
   E.   Sexual Harassment Policy: Every contractor or subcontractor contracting
with the village is required to have a written sexual harassment policy as
recommended:
Recommendation: Your sexual harassment policy should be drafted in language
easy to understand and any revisions should be reviewed by legal counsel. A
copy of your policy should be posted in a prominent and accessible location to
assure all employees will be notified of the company's position.
 
In order to conduct business with the Village of Peoria Heights, you must have
a written sexual harassment policy that conforms to the new act.
   F.   Change Orders: The village and contractor agree that changes in the
work are sometimes required and necessary. Any change orders requested by the
village and/or the contractor or subcontractor shall be submitted to each other
in writing, reviewed by the village or its representative, and final written
approval by the village representative is necessary in order to assure that the
work is completed on schedule and according to any change order. The village
administrator may authorize in writing any change order for an amount of less
than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Change orders in the amount of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more must be approved by the board of
trustees. (Ord. 2013-1378, 2-5-2013)
9-1-3: PAYMENT OF PREVAILING WAGE REQUIRED:
   A.   Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or
other entity that receives any form of funding for a project from the village
pursuant to the village’s redevelopment plans adopted in accordance with the
TIF Act and the BDD Act shall, as a condition of such funding, fully comply
with all of the requirements of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, 820 ILCS 130/
0.01, et seq., for all work undertaken as part of such project.
   B.   Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or
other entity that receives any form of funding for a project from the village
pursuant to the village’s redevelopment plans adopted in accordance with the
TIF Act and the BDD Act shall, as a condition of such funding, require all
contractors performing any work undertaken as part of such project to provide
evidence of participation in an apprentice and training program approved by and
registered with the United States Department of Labor Office of Apprenticeship
and Training (or a reasonably equivalent program) applicable to the work to be
performed on the project. (Ord. 2019-1615, 12-17-2019)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Building Codes Adopted; Amendments
9-2-1-1: Codes Adopted
9-2-1-2: Amendments To Codes
9-2-2: Permit Fees
9-2-3: Rapid Entry Key Lockbox System
9-2-4: Location And Specifications Of Numbers
9-2-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED; AMENDMENTS:
9-2-1-1: CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Those certain documents, one (1) copy of each of which are on file in
the office of the village clerk, being marked and designated as the
international residential code, 2018 edition, including appendix A through and
including appendix T, is hereby adopted as the residential code, the
international building code, 2018 edition, including appendices C, E, F, G, I,
J, and N, is hereby adopted as the building code, the international mechanical
code, 2018 edition, including appendix A, is hereby adopted as the mechanical
code, the international property maintenance code, 2018 edition, including
appendix A, is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code, and the NFPA 70
national electrical code, 2014 edition, is hereby adopted as the electrical
code of the village. Those certain documents, three (3) copies of each of which
are on file in the office of the village clerk, being marked and designated as
the Illinois Energy Conservation Code found at Title 71, Part 600 of the
Illinois Administrative Code, is hereby adopted as the energy code, and the
Illinois plumbing code found at Title 77, Part 890 of the Illinois
administrative code, is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the village.
   B.   The international residential code, 2018 edition, is adopted for the
regulation and governing of the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition
of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height with separate means of
egress as herein provided and provides for the issuance of permits, for the
collection of fees, and for the making of inspections. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said international residential
code, 2018 edition, on file in the office of the village are hereby referred to
and adopted as the residential code and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in section
9-2-1-2  of this chapter.
   C.   The international building code, 2018 edition, is adopted for the
regulation and governing of the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, for the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and
the demolition of such structures as herein provided and for the issuance of
permits, collection of fees, and making of inspections. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said international building
code, 2018 edition, on file in the office of the village are hereby referred to
and adopted as the building code and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in section
9-2-1-2 of this chapter.
   D.   The NFPA 70 national electrical code, 2014 edition, is adopted for
regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of electrical systems in the village and providing for
the issuance of permits, collection of fees, and making of inspections. Each
and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said national
electrical code, 2014 edition, on file in the office of the village are hereby
referred to and adopted as the electrical code and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in section
9-2-1-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-1359, 12-20-2011; amd. 2016 Code)
   E.   The international mechanical code, 2018 edition, is adopted for
regulating the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of
mechanical systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide
control of environmental conditions and related processes within buildings.
Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said
international mechanical code, 2018 edition, on file in the office of the
village are hereby referred to and adopted as the mechanical code and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
9-2-1-2  of this chapter.
   F.   The international property maintenance code, 2018 edition, is adopted
for regulation and governing of all existing residential and nonresidential
structures and all existing premises by establishing minimum requirements and
standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light,
ventilation, space, hearing, sanitation, protection from the elements, a
reasonable level of safety from fire and other hazards, and for a reasonable
level of sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, an owner’s
authorized agent, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures
and premises; and for administration, enforcement and penalties. Each and all
of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said international
property maintenance code, 2018 edition, on file in the office of the village
are hereby referred to and adopted as the property maintenance code and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
9-2-1-2  of this chapter.
   G.   The Illinois energy conservation code found at Title 71, Part 600 of
the Illinois administrative code, as may be hereafter amended from time to
time, is adopted for the purpose of regulating the design and construction of
buildings for the effective use and conservation of energy over the useful life
of each building. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of said Illinois energy conservation code, on file in the office of the
village are hereby referred to and adopted as the energy code and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this section, with additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
9-2-1-2  of this chapter.
   H.   The Illinois plumbing code found at Title 77, Part 890 of the Illinois
administrative code, as may be hereafter amended from time to time, is adopted
for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for materials,
construction, alteration and inspection of all plumbing placed in or in
connection with any building within the corporate limits of the village. Each
and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said Illinois
plumbing code, on file in the office of the village are hereby referred to and
adopted as the plumbing code and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed
in section
9-2-1-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-1359, 12-20-2011; amd. 2016 Code; Ord.
2019-1605, 9-17-2019)
9-2-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODES:
   A.   International Residential Code: The following sections of the
international residential code, 2018 edition, are hereby revised as follows:
      Section R101.1. Insert: Village of Peoria Heights.
      Section R105.3.1. Insert: If the applicant, or any of its officers,
directors, members, or partners in the case of a business applicant, is in
violation of any provision of the village code except for a violation of the
provisions of Title 6 (Police and Public Safety) or Title 7 (Motor Vehicles and
Traffic) at the time the application is filed, or has any outstanding fine,
penalty, tax, or other debt due and owing to the village at the time the
application is filed, the building official shall reject such application in
writing stating the reasons therefor.
      Section R108.2. Replace “as established by the applicable governing
authority”: The schedule of permit fees as set forth in section
9-2-2  of the village code is adopted as a part of this Section R113.4. Replace
“prescribed by law”: provided in section
1-4-1  of the village code plus costs. Each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
      Section R114.2. Replace “be subject to penalties as prescribed by law”:
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1  of the village code plus costs. Each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
      Section R301.2(1). Delete.
      Section R313. Delete.
      Section P2603.5.1. Replace: “Building sewers that connect to private
sewage disposal systems shall be installed as required by the appropriate
authority having jurisdiction.
   B.   International Building Code: The following sections of the
international building code, 2018 edition, are hereby revised as follows:
      Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Peoria Heights.
      Section 105.3.1. Insert: If the applicant, or any of its officers,
directors, members, or partners in the case of a business applicant, is in
violation of any provision of the village code except for a violation of the
provisions of Title 6 (Police and Public Safety) or Title 7 (Motor Vehicles and
Traffic) at the time the application is filed, or has any outstanding fine,
penalty, tax, or other debt due and owing to the village at the time the
application is filed, the building official shall reject such application in
writing stating the reasons therefor.
      Section 114.4. Replace “prescribed by law”: Section
1-4-1  of the village code plus costs.
      Section 1612.3. Insert: Village of Peoria Heights.
      Section 1612.3. Insert: November 19, 2004.
   C.   National Electrical Code: The following sections of the national
electrical code, 2014 edition, are hereby revised as follows:
      Section 80.19(C). Insert: If the applicant, or any of its officers,
directors, members, or partners in the case of a business applicant, is in
violation of any provision of the village code except for a violation of the
provisions of Title 6 (Police and Public Safety) or Title 7 (Motor Vehicles and
Traffic) at the time the application is filed, or has any outstanding fine,
penalty, tax, or other debt due and owing to the village at the time the
application is filed, the authority having jurisdiction shall reject such
application in writing stating the reasons therefor.
      Section 80.19(E). Replace: The schedule of fees as set out in section
9-2-2  of the village code is adopted as a part of this article.
      Section 80.23(B)(3). Replace: Any person who shall violate any of the
applicable provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1  of the village code for each offense, together with applicable costs.
Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   D.   International mechanical code: The following sections of the
international mechanical code, 2018 edition, are hereby revised as follows:
      Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Peoria Heights.
      Section 106.5.2. Delete.
      Section 106.5.3. Insert: 50% and 25%.
      Section 108.4. Replace: Persons who violate a provision of this code or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be punished by a
fine as provided in section
1-4-1  of the village code for each offense, together with applicable costs.
Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
      Section 108.5. Insert: $100.00 and $750.00.
   E.   International property maintenance code: The following sections of the
international property maintenance code, 2018 edition, are hereby revised as
follows:
      Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Peoria Heights.
      Section 103.5. Delete.
      Section 112.4. Insert: $100.00 and $750.00.
      Section 302.4. Insert: ten (10) inches in height.
      Section 304.14. Insert: March 1 and December 1.
      Section 602.3. Insert: October 15 and April 15.
      Section 602.4. Insert: October 15 and April 15. (Ord. 2011-1359, 12-20-
2011; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2019-1605, 9-17-2019)
9-2-2: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Building Permit Fees:
Valuation Permit Fee
Valuation                       Permit Fee
$0.00 to $140.00                $ 0.00
$140.01 to $5,000.00            25.00
$5,000.01 to $7,500.00          28.00
$7,500.01 to $10,000.00         31.00
$10,000.01 to $15,000.00        34.00
$15,000.01 to $20,000.00        38.00
$20,000.01 to $50,000.00        $38.00 plus $2.50 per $1,000.00 over $20,000.00
$50,000.01 to $75,000.00        $131.00 plus $2.00 per $1,000.00 over
                                $50,000.00
$75,000.01 to $100,000.00       $194.00 plus $1.50 per $1,000.00 over
                                $75,000.00
$100,000.01 to $500,000.00      $241.00 plus $1.00 per $1,000.00 over
                                $100,000.00
$500,000.01 and up              $740.00 plus $0.75 per $1,000.00 over
                                $500,000.00
Additional fees are as follows:  
Sign permits                    $31.00
Fence permits                   25.00
Demolition permits              25.00
Certificate of occupancy        6.00
 
(Ord. 2005-1249, 11-15-2005)
   B.   Residential Fees:
      1.   Electrical Fees: The electrical inspector shall charge for
residential electrical permits and services the amounts provided in the
following schedule: (Ord. 2005-1249, 11-15-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
Service Fee
Service                                  Fee
Residential electrical permit            $10.00
Residential inspections:                  
 Single-family dwellings:                
 Up to 20 amp service                   41.00
 200 to 400 amp service                 50.00
 Each additional 100 amps               13.00
  over 400 amps
 Apartment buildings                    The same fees shall apply for the same
                                         size service as stated above
Residential room additions without       $29.00
service change
Pools and garages                        23.00
Temporary service included in building    
fee
Furnaces and air conditioners up to 4    13.00
tons
Air conditioners more than 4 tons        23.00
Dwelling owner inspections               94.00
Temporary pole service (if permit is for 25.00
temporary service only)
 
      2.   Notice Of Changes After Inspection; Reinspections:
         a.   After inspection, the inspections department shall leave the
owner or tenant a written notice of any changes or alterations as may be
required, and such changes or alterations shall be made within thirty (30) days
after receipt of such written notice unless, in the opinion of the inspector,
such changes should be made at once, and the inspections department shall
reinspect such changes as given in the written notice. A fee shall be charged
for this service according to the fees listed herein.
         b.   For each reinspection for noncompliance to the building/
electrical code or premature inspection request, the following will be charged:
 
First reinspection or premature inspection request  Free
Second reinspection or premature inspection request $19.00
Third reinspection or premature inspection request  38.00
Fourth reinspection or premature inspection request 63.00
 
      3.   Payment Of Fees: All fees are to be paid before a permit is issued.
All fees for any classification hereinabove set forth shall be doubled if work
is started without a permit unless prior arrangements have been made with the
village inspections department. (Ord. 2005-1249, 11-15-2005)
   C.   Commercial Fees:
      1.   Electrical Fees:
   ServiFee
   Service                               Fee
Commercial electrical permit                $10.00
Commercial inspections:
 Up to $2,001.00                            41.00
 Every additional $1,000.00 or part thereof 8.00
 Semiannual inspection                      38.00
Temporary pole service                      23.00
Wiring for signs                            20.00
 First $1,000.00                            20.00
 Each addition $1,000.00 to $20,000.00      6.00
 Each $1,000.00 over $20,000.00             3.00
 
(Ord. 2005-1249, 11-15-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Reinspection Fees: Each reinspection for noncompliance to the
building/electrical code or premature inspection request:
 
First reinspection or premature inspection request  Free
Second reinspection or premature inspection request $19.00
Third reinspection or premature inspection request  38.00
Fourth reinspection or premature inspection request 63.00
 
      3.   Payment Of Fees: All fees are to be paid before permit is issued.
All fees for any classification hereinabove set forth shall be doubled if work
is started without a permit unless prior arrangements have been made with the
village inspections department. (Ord. 2005-1249, 11-15-2005)
9-2-3: RAPID ENTRY KEY LOCKBOX SYSTEM:
   A.   Key Lockbox Required; Exceptions:
      1.   The following structures shall be equipped with a rapid entry key
lockbox approved by the fire chief:
         a.   All buildings within the village having an automatic alarm system
or equipped with an automatic fire suppression system, except one- and two-
family owner occupied dwellings.
         b.   Multi-family residential structures, including senior citizen
apartments/condo complexes, that have restricted accesses through locked doors
and have a common corridor for access to living quarters.
         c.   All high rise buildings, i.e., structures having floors at or
above fifty feet (50') above ground level.
         d.   Commercial or industrial buildings identified by the fire chief
as difficult to access during emergencies.
         e.   Businesses sharing a common wall.
         f.   All new construction, subject to this section, shall have the
rapid entry key lockbox installed and operational prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
      2.   Any building or structure having on site twenty four (24) hour
security personnel, or businesses open for business twenty four (24) hours may
be exempt from the requirements of this section at the discretion of the fire
chief.
   B.   Installation:
      1.   The building or business owner shall have sole responsibility for
installation of the rapid entry key lockbox.
      2.   The rapid entry key lockbox shall be installed on the front of the
building, near the main entry door to the right side at a height not to exceed
seven feet (7') aboveground, unless approved by the fire chief. Each box comes
with a red sticker that will be applied to the front door.
      3.   The rapid entry key lockbox shall contain keys for the exterior
doors clearly marked and any interior doors where alarm panels, electrical
panels, sprinkler controls or hazardous materials are stored.
      4.   The rapid entry key lockbox shall contain elevator keys, if
applicable.
      5.   No steps, displays, signs, other fixtures or structure protrusions
shall be located under the box which would allow intruders to access the box
without assistance.
   C.   Hazardous Materials: Commercial structures storing, using or
manufacturing large quantities of materials considered hazardous must have a
rapid entry key lockbox which will contain the following:
      1.   Keys to entry doors.
      2.   Keys to hazardous materials storage areas and documentation on what
materials are stored and approximate quantities stored or used on site.
      3.   Keys will be labeled for easy identification in the field.
   D.   Administration:
      1.   New Structures:
         a.   The building inspector shall notify the fire chief or designee
with contact information of new businesses that would fall under this section.
         b.   Contractors may obtain applications for rapid entry key lockbox
from the village fire chief or designee.
         c.   Only licensed contractors may obtain rapid entry key lockboxes.
      2.   Existing Structures:
         a.   The village fire department shall be responsible for
administration of this section. The fire chief shall notify the owner/operator
by proper notice of compliance.
         b.   Owners/managers must obtain applications for rapid entry key
lockboxes from the village fire chief or designee.
         c.   A copy of a completed application must be returned to the
building inspector.
   E.   Time For Compliance:
      1.   All existing buildings shall comply with the provisions of this
section within twelve (12) months of the effective date hereof.
      2.   All newly constructed buildings not yet occupied or buildings
currently under construction shall comply with the terms hereof prior to
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 2005-1252, 11-1-2005)
   F.   Penalty: All structures listed in subsection A of this section that are
not in compliance with this section within twelve (12) months from date of
approval or any person who shall violate any provision of this section, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a penalty violation as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code per month until compliance has been met. (Ord. 2005-1252,
11-1-2005; amd. 2016 Code)
9-2-4: LOCATION AND SPECIFICATIONS OF NUMBERS:
   A.   Height Of Numbers: All structures will be numbered and the figures on
each building shall not be of less dimension than two and one-half inches (21/
2") in height; although a four inch (4") figure is the recommended size for all
commercial, residential, and business use properties.
   B.   Legibility And Placement On Building: Each figure shall be legible and
placed in a conspicuous position on the front side or above the front door of
every structure thereof.
   C.   Placement On Stationary Structure And On Building: If the numbers are
visibly positioned on a stationary structure, without possible obstructions due
to parked cars, it will still be necessary for the second posting of the
numbers on the house. These stationary structures may include, but shall not be
limited to, mailboxes, pillars, or planters located in the front portion of the
property. It is essential that all numbers should be visibly located on the
structure.
   D.   Words May Be Used; Numbers Preferred: Numbers may be spelled out in
accordance to the height dimensions previously mentioned, but preference is
given to actual numbers. (Ord. 1154, 9-21-1999)
   E.   Violations; Penalties:
      1.   Any person, being the owner or occupant of any building now erected
or which may hereafter be erected and being upon and fronting on any of the
streets of the village, who shall fail to number the building in conformity
with the provisions of this section for more than thirty (30) days after
notification by the village, shall be in violation of this section and shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      2.   At any time this section is prohibited or made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this section the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision
shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day any violation of any provision of
this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1154, 9-
21-1999; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 3
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Code Adopted
9-3-2: Amendments To Code
9-3-3: Storage Of Explosive, Flammable And Hazardous Materials
9-3-1: CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   The international fire code, 2018 edition, including appendices B
through N, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as
the fire code of the village, a municipal corporation, in the state of
Illinois, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from
fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of
hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to
life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided
and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said fire
code on file in the office of the village, a municipal corporation, are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in section
9-3-2  of this chapter. A copy of the international fire code, 2018 edition,
shall be filed with the village clerk.
   B.   The NFPA 101 life safety code, 2018 edition, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the life safety code
of the village, a municipal corporation, in the state of Illinois, for
regulating and governing building construction, protection, and occupancy
features to minimize the effects of fire and related hazards in new and
existing buildings, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions
and terms of said life safety code on file in the office of the village, a
municipal corporation, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in section
9-3-2  of this chapter. A copy of the life safety code, 2018 edition, shall be
filed with the village clerk. (Ord. 2009-1309, 3-17-2009; amd. 2016 Code; Ord.
2019-1605, 9-17-2019)
9-3-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
   A.   International Fire Code: The following sections of the international
fire code, 2018 edition, are hereby revised as follows:
      Section 101.1. Replace: These regulations shall be known as fire code of
the village of Peoria Heights, a municipal corporation, hereinafter referred to
as "this code".
      Section 110.4. Insert: Persons who violate a provision of this code or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
install, alter or repair do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be punished by a fine as
provided in section
1-4-1  of the village code for each offense, together with applicable costs.
Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
      Section 112.4. Insert: $100.00 and $750.00.
      Section 1103.5.3. Replace “as established by the adopting ordinance”:
January 1, 2020.
      Section 5704.2.9.6.1. Replace “within the limits established by law as
the limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited”: in all zoning
districts within the corporate limits of the Village of Peoria Heights except
the I-1 industrial district.
      Section 5706.2.4.4. Replace “within the limits established by law as the
limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited”: in all zoning
districts within the corporate limits of the Village of Peoria Heights except
the I-1 industrial district.
      Section 5806.2. Replace “within the limits established by law as the
limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited”: in all zoning
districts within the corporate limits of the Village of Peoria Heights except
in the I-1 industrial district.
      Section 6104.2. Replace “within the limits established by law as the
limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited”: in all zoning
districts within the corporate limits of the Village of Peoria Heights except
the I-1 industrial district.
   B.   Life safety code: The following sections of the NFPA 101 life safety
code, 2018 edition, are hereby revised as follows:
      Section 24.3.5.1. of the LSC pertaining to automatic sprinkler systems in
new one- and two-family dwellings is hereby deleted. (Ord. 2009-1309, 3-17-
2009; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2019-1605, 9-17-2019)
9-3-3: STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVE, FLAMMABLE AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2006 international
fire code are hereby established as follows:
   A.   Location Limits:
      1.   Cryogenic Fluids:
         a.   Stationary containers shall be located in accordance with section
2303.6. Containers of cryogenic fluids shall not be located within diked areas
containing other hazardous materials.
         b.   Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers
outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits established by law as the
limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited.
         c.   Any storage and stationary containers are strictly prohibited
unless storage is approved by the Illinois office of the state fire marshal and
the village fire chief or his designated agent.
      2.   Aboveground Tanks:
         a.   Permitted Locations: Storage of class I and II liquids in
aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits
established by law as the limits of districts in which such storage is
prohibited, except upon appropriate approval by the village fire chief or his
designated agent and the Illinois office of the state fire marshal.
         b.   Prohibited Locations: The storage of class I and II liquids in
aboveground tanks is prohibited within the limits established by law as the
limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited, except upon written
approval by the Illinois office of the state fire marshal and the village fire
chief or his designated agent.
   B.   Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits:
      1.   Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of
liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested
areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water
capacity of two thousand (2,000) gallons.
      2.   Any placement of such tanks is conditioned upon and subject to
written approval by the Illinois office of the state fire marshal and the
village fire chief or his designated agent.
      3.   In particular installations, this capacity limit shall be determined
by the fire code official, after consideration of special features such as
topographical conditions, nature of occupancy, proximity to buildings, capacity
of proposed containers, degree of fire protection to be provided and
capabilities of the local fire department. (Ord. 2009-1309, 3-17-2009)
CHAPTER 4
SIGN CODE
SECTION:
9-4-1: Purpose
9-4-2: Definitions
9-4-3: Permit Requirements
9-4-4: Exempt Signs
9-4-4.1: Murals
9-4-5: Temporary Signs
9-4-6: Prohibited Signs
9-4-7: Nonconforming Signs
9-4-8: Illuminated Signs
9-4-9: Structural And Maintenance Requirements
9-4-10: On Premises Sign Standards By Zone
9-4-11: Off Premises Sign Standards
9-4-12: Noncompliant, Abandoned Signs
9-4-13: Inspections
9-4-14: Special Uses And Variances
9-4-15: Enforcement Of Provisions
9-4-16: Appeals
9-4-17: Violation; Penalty
9-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate signs intended to be viewed from the
public right of way by coordinating the type, placement, and physical
dimensions of signs within the different zoning districts in the village. (Ord.
2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter unless the use or context
clearly indicates that another meaning is intended:
   AREA OR SURFACE AREA OF SIGN: That area enclosed by one rectangle, the sides
of which make contact with the extreme points or edges of the sign, excluding
the supporting structure which does not form part of the sign proper or of the
display. The area of a freestanding or projecting sign shall have only one face
(its largest) of any double faced or multifaced sign counted in calculating its
area.
   BILLBOARD: An off premises sign, allowed by special use, located adjacent to
a roadway with a speed limit of forty five (45) miles per hour or more
containing a commercial or noncommercial message directing attention to a
business, commodity, service, political candidate or cause, public service,
social cause, charity, community affair or entertainment, not related to the
premises at which the sign is located, or directing attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than
on the premises where the sign is located.
   BUILDING FRONTAGE: The length of an outside building wall on a public right
of way.
   BUILDING LINE: A line beyond which no building may extend, as established by
ordinance. A building line in some instances may coincide with the property
line.
   BUSINESS ZONES: The B-1 central business, B-2 general retail business and B-
3 service business districts as defined and designated by the zoning ordinance.
   INDUSTRIAL ZONES: The B-4 low impact industrial and I-1 industrial districts
as defined and designated by the zoning ordinance.
   LOCATION: A lot, premises, building, wall or any place whatsoever upon which
a sign is located.
   LOT FRONTAGE: The length of the property line of any one premises along each
public right of way on which it borders.
   MARQUEE: A canopy or covering structure projecting from and attached to a
building.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: Any building housing more than two (2) families,
unless otherwise defined by the zoning ordinance.
   MURAL: A painting or work of graphic art or combination thereof on or
attached to an exterior structure, which is visible from the public right-of-
way, and which does not contain advertising symbols, slogans, or trademarks and
does not directly or indirectly advertise or call attention to a product or
service that is available for sale.
   OFF PREMISES SIGN EXTENSION: A temporary addition to an off premises sign
for a specific advertising message.
   PERSON: Any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership and the
like, singular or plural.
   PREMISES: A parcel of land, either vacant or with its appurtenances, and
buildings which, because of their unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest
conveyable unit of real estate.
   PROJECTION: The distance by which a sign extends over public property or
beyond the building line.
   RESIDENTIAL ZONE: The C conservation, R-1 low density residential, R-
2 medium density residential, R-3 multiple- family residential and R-P planned
residential districts as defined and designated by the zoning ordinance.
   ROOFLINE: Either the edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever
forms the top line of the building silhouette, and where a building has several
roof levels, the roof or parapet shall be the one belonging to that portion of
the building on which wall the sign is located.
   SIGN: Any letter, figure, design, symbol, trademark or illuminating device
intended to attract attention to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation,
public performance, article, machine or merchandise whatsoever and painted,
printed or constructed and displayed in any manner whatsoever, out of doors for
recognized advertising purposes. However, the term shall not include any
official court or public notices nor the flag, emblem or insignia of a
government, school or religious group when displayed for official purposes.
      Digital Electronic Multiple Message: Any sign containing electric wiring.
The term does not include signs illuminated by an exterior floodlight source.
      Off Premises: A sign which advertises, for the most part, an
establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment which is not sold,
produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which said sign is
located.
      On Premises: Any sign which carries only the name of the firm, the major
enterprise or the product(s) offered for sale on the premises, or a combination
of these.
      Projecting: A sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from and is
supported by a wall of a building or structure.
      Roof: A sign located on or above the roof of any building.
      Temporary: A banner, pennant, poster or advertising display constructed
of cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard or other like materials
and intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.
      Wall, Flat: One affixed directly to or painted on or otherwise inscribed
on an exterior wall and confined within the limits thereof of any building
which projects from that surface less than twelve inches (12") at all points.
   VEHICLES: Automobiles, trucks, trailers, railroad cars, construction
equipment and other such mobile equipment whose major purpose is other than the
display of advertising.
   VILLAGE: The village of Peoria Heights, Illinois.
   ZONING ORDINANCE: The Peoria Heights zoning ordinance, as from time to time
amended, and the official zoning map of the village. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015;
amd. Ord. 2019-1612, 11-19-2019)
9-4-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No sign shall be erected, altered or relocated without
a permit issued by the village building inspector, except as otherwise provided
herein.
   B.   Application For Permit: The permit application shall contain the
location of the sign structure, the name and address of the sign owner, the
sign erector, engineered/stamped drawings showing the design and location of
the sign and such other pertinent information (including materials of the sign,
method of attachment, distance from sign to property lines/structures/other
signs, speed limit of street(s) adjoining property (mph)/width, electrical
wiring and components [if applicable]) as the building inspector may require to
ensure compliance with the ordinances of the village. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-
2015)
   C.   Permit Fees: Fees for sign permits shall be established and may be
adjusted from time to time by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2015-1450,
8-4-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
   D.   Expiration Of Permit: A sign permit shall become null and void if the
work for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of
six (6) months after the date of issuance of the permit.
   E.   Exemptions From Permit: The following operations shall not be
considered as creating a sign and, therefore, shall not require a sign permit:
      1.   Replacing Copy: The changing of the advertising copy or message on
an approved, painted or printed sign or billboard or on a theater marquee and
similar approved signs which are specifically designed for the use of
replaceable copy.
      2.   Maintenance: Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal
maintenance and repair of a sign or a sign structure, unless a structural
change is made.
      3.   Exempt And Temporary Signs: See sections
 9-4-4 and
9-4-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-4: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs, except for digital electronic multiple message signs which
shall require a special use permit, are exempted from all the provisions of
this chapter except for construction and safety regulations and the following
requirements:
   A.   Public Signs: Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of
his public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic
signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest and the like.
   B.   Institutional Signs: Signs setting forth the name or any simple
announcement for any public, charitable, educational or religious institution,
located entirely within the premises of that institution, up to an area of
twenty four (24) square feet. Such signs may be illuminated in accordance with
the regulations contained in this chapter. If building mounted, these signs
shall be flat wall signs and shall not project above the roofline. If ground
mounted, the top shall be no more than six feet (6') above ground level.
   C.   Integral Signs: Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental
citations, commemorative tables and the like when carved into stone, concrete
or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type
construction and made an integral part of the structure.
   D.   Private Traffic Direction Signs: Signs directing traffic movement onto
a premises or within a premises, not exceeding three (3) square feet in area
for each sign. Illumination of these signs shall be permitted in accordance
with section
9-4-8 of this chapter. Horizontal directional signs on and flush with paved
areas are exempt from these standards.
   E.   Small Signs: Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, attached
flat against the building, stationary and not illuminated, announcing only the
name and occupation of building tenant.
   F.   Rental Signs: Signs on the premises announcing rooms for rent,
apartment or house for rent and not exceeding four (4) square feet in area.
   G.   Signs On Vehicles: Signs on vehicles of any kind, provided the sign is
painted or attached directly to the body of the original vehicle and does not
project or extend beyond the original manufactured body of the vehicle. (Ord.
2015-1450, 8-4-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
9-4-4.1: MURALS:
   A.   Regulations On Permitted Murals: No mural shall be permitted except in
compliance with the following requirements:
      1.   Murals shall be permitted only in the B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4 zones.
      2.   All murals shall comply with the following:
         a.   Shall be limited to one (1) exterior surface per building site
and shall cover no more than seventy five percent (75%) of the space on that
surface;
         b.   Shall not be displayed on any fence, nor any building, or any
portion of a building, which is used for residential purposes;
         c.   Shall only be permitted on the side or rear walls of buildings;
         d.   Lighting, if any, shall be designed and installed so as to
minimize the effect on neighboring properties;
         e.   Shall not extend more than six (6) inches from the plane of the
wall upon which it is installed or affixed and shall not extend above the roof
line; and
         f.   Shall be in compliance with section
9-4-6 ,
9-4-8 , and
9-4-9  of this chapter.
   B.   Mural Permit Requirements:
      1.   No mural shall be installed or affixed without a permit issued by
the village building inspector in accordance with section
9-4-3  of this code.
      2.   No permit shall be issued unless the permit application is signed by
the owner of the structure on which the mural will appear.
      3.   The village building inspector shall grant a permit to all
applicants whose application is in compliance with this section
9-4-4.1  of this chapter.
   C.   Other Provisions:
      1.   Section
9-4-7 ,
9-4-9 ,
9-4-12 ,
9-4-13 ,
9-4-15 ,
9-4-16 , and
9-4-17  of this chapter shall apply to murals. (Ord. 2019-1612, 11-19-2019)
9-4-5: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
The following signs shall be permitted anywhere within the Village and shall
not require a permit:
   A.   Construction Signs:
      1.   Construction signs which identify the architects, engineers,
contractors and other individuals or firms involved with the construction, but
not including any advertisement of any product, and signs announcing the
character of the building enterprise or the purpose for which the building is
intended, during the construction period, to a maximum area of sixteen (16)
square feet for each firm.
      2.   The signs shall be confined to the site of the construction and
shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the beginning of the intended use
of the project.
   B.   Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs advertising the sale, rental or
lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the signs are displayed,
up to a total area of twelve (12) square feet. Such signs shall be removed
within fourteen (14) days after the sale, rental or lease of the property.
   C.   Political Campaign Signs: Political campaign signs shall comply with
any applicable State and Federal standards.
   D.   Street Banners: Street banners advertising a public entertainment or
event, if specifically approved by the Board of Trustees, and only for
locations designated by the Board of Trustees, during and for fourteen (14)
days before and seven (7) days after the event. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-6: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
Prohibited signs are signs which:
   A.   Contain statements, works or pictures of an obscene, indecent or
immoral character, such as will offend public morals or decency.
   B.   Contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal or
use the words "stop", "go slow", "caution", "danger", "warning", or similar
words, in imitation of an official traffic sign or signal.
   C.   Are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of
illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control
device or which hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal.
   D.   Are on premises signs that advertise an activity, business, product or
service no longer conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located.
   E.   Move in any manner or have a major moving part. Only minor decorative
parts may move. This prohibition does not apply to digital electronic multiple
message signs. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
   F.   Contain or consist of banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers,
strings of light bulbs, spinners or other similarly moving devices. These
devices, when not part of any sign, are similarly prohibited unless they are
permitted specifically by other legislation; provided, however, that such
devices shall be permitted solely in the B-3 Zoning District.
   G.   May swing or otherwise noticeably move as a result of wind pressure
because of the manner of their suspension or attachment; provided, however,
that such signs shall be permitted solely in the B-3 Zoning District. (Ord.
2018-1558, 6-19-2018)
9-4-7: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Signs existing at the effective date hereof and not conforming hereto,
but which were constructed in compliance with previous regulations shall be
regarded as nonconforming signs which may be continued if properly repaired and
maintained as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Any sign existing in violation of section
9-4-6 of this chapter shall be removed, altered or repaired in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter within six (6) months after the effective date
hereof.
   C.   Nonconforming signs may be maintained, repaired or relocated upon the
same property. They may not be relocated to a different property or altered in
a manner that would add to their nonconformity. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-8: ILLUMINATED SIGNS:
   A.   Regulations:
      1.   The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shaded, shielded or
directed that the light intensity or brightness will not unreasonably interfere
with the use or enjoyment of adjacent premises.
      2.   No sign shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or other
illuminating device which has a changing light intensity, brightness or color.
Beacon lights are not permitted.
      3.   No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner so
as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices.
      4.   Neither the direct nor reflected light from primary light sources
shall create a traffic hazard to operators of motor vehicles on public
thoroughfares.
   B.   Interpretation: Nothing in this section shall be construed or
interpreted as a prohibition against LED signs or digital electronic multiple
message signs. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-9: STRUCTURAL AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All signs shall comply with the pertinent requirements of the village
building code.
   B.   All signs and components thereof shall be kept in good repair and in a
safe, neat, clean and attractive condition. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-10: ON PREMISES SIGN STANDARDS BY ZONE:
   A.   Scope And Interpretation:
      1.   The following on premises sign standards apply to zones as defined
by the zoning ordinance. Only signs as described in this section and as may be
described under section
9-4-4 of this chapter pertaining to exempt signs, section
9-4-5 of this chapter pertaining to temporary signs and section
9-4-11 of this chapter pertaining to off premises signs will be permitted in
each particular classification.
      2.   If any zone is omitted from this chapter, or if a new zone is
created after the enactment of this chapter, no signs shall be permitted
therein until this chapter shall be amended to include the newly created zone.
   B.   Residential Zones:
      1.   Scope: This subsection B shall apply to all residential zones.
      2.   Size: One sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area shall be
permitted per dwelling unit which shall indicate only the name of the occupant
and may include the address. For multiple-family dwellings, one or more
additional signs totaling twelve (12) square feet in area shall be permitted
for each individual dwelling. The additional sign area permitted for multiple-
family dwellings shall only identify the building and/or the occupant.
      3.   Location: Permitted signs may be anywhere on the premises, except as
restricted by the zoning ordinance and subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Signs may not project beyond any property line;
         b.   If ground mounted, the top of a sign shall not be over five feet
(5') above the average ground level at the base of the sign; and
         c.   If building mounted, a sign shall be flush mounted, shall not be
mounted on any roof of the building and shall not project above the roofline.
      4.   Illumination: Illumination, if used, shall be white and not colored
light and shall not be blinking, fluctuating or moving. Light rays shall shine
directly only upon the sign within the premises and shall not spill over the
property lines in any direction except by indirect reflection.
   C.   Business Zones:
      1.   Scope: This subsection C shall apply to all commercial zones.
      2.   Size:
         a.   A total area of two (2) square feet for each linear foot of
building frontage or one-half (1/2) square foot for each linear foot of lot
frontage, whichever results in the larger sign area, but the maximum total area
of all permitted on premises signs for any establishment shall not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet.
         b.   Where frontage is on more than one street, only the signs
computed with the building or lot frontage of that street shall face that
street.
      3.   Location:
         a.   Signs may be flat wall signs and located anywhere on the surface
of the building. Signs may be projecting signs only where, in compliance with
the zoning ordinance, there is no building setback and then, may project no
more than six feet (6') beyond the street property line, but no closer than two
feet (2') to a curb line and must have minimum clearance of eight feet (8')
above a public sidewalk and fifteen feet (15') above public driveways or
alleys. When a projecting sign is closer than twelve feet (12') to a corner of
the property, its projection shall be no more than a distance equal to one-half
(1/2) the horizontal distance from the sign to that corner.
         b.   Where a building does not cover the full area of the premises, a
sign may be freestanding or ground supported and may be located anywhere back
of the street setback lines, except as may be further limited by the zoning
ordinance. Such a sign may extend up to twenty feet (20') above the average
ground level at the base of the sign, except as may be required by the zoning
ordinance.
         c.   Signs may be on the vertical faces of marquees and may project
below the lower edge of the marquee not more than twelve inches (12"). The
bottom of marquee signs shall be no less than eight feet (8') above the
sidewalk or grade at any point. No part of the sign shall project above the
vertical marquee face.
         d.   Signs shall not project above the roofline.
      4.   Illumination: Illumination of signs is permitted but in accordance
with the restrictions set forth in section
9-4-8 of this chapter.
   D.   Industrial Zones:
      1.   Scope: This subsection D shall apply to industrial zones.
      2.   Size: There is permitted in industrial zones, for each industrial
establishment, one on premises sign for each street frontage, each with a
maximum area of one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage or
one-half (1/2) square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage, whichever is
greater.
      3.   Location: Requirements shall be the same as for business zones in
subsection C3 of this section.
      4.   Illumination: Illumination of signs is permitted, but in accordance
with the restrictions set forth in section
9-4-8 of this chapter.
   E.   Digital Electronic Multiple Message On Premises Signs:
      1.   Special Use: Digital electronic multiple message on premises signs
are allowed by special use in business zones except for the B-1 Central
Business District. They are also allowed by special use in the industrial
zones. The area of a digital electronic multiple message sign shall be included
in any sign area calculation, but only as a single sign face. No additional
square footage shall be attributed to the sign's ability to change messages.
      2.   Static Images: The messages displayed shall not contain moving
images. Images shall remain static except during message transition.
      3.   Length Of Display (Dwell Time): Digital electronic multiple message
signs are permitted to change their message no more than once every ten (10)
seconds.
      4.   Automatic Dimming: All such signs shall have installed ambient light
monitors and shall at all times allow such monitors to automatically adjust the
brightness level of the sign based on ambient light conditions.
   F.   Nonconforming Uses: Any building or land use not conforming to the
zoning ordinance for the zone in which it is located shall, nevertheless,
comply with all provisions of this chapter applicable within the zoning
district in which the nonconforming building or use is located. (Ord. 2015-
1450, 8-4-2015)
   G.   B-3 Zones: Those signs and devices identified in subsections
9-4-6F and G of this chapter shall be permitted in the B-3 "Service Business"
Zoning District. (Ord. 2018-1558, 6-19-2018)
9-4-11: OFF PREMISES SIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Classification: Off premises signs are not considered accessory
structures or buildings, especially with regard to the application of the
zoning ordinance.
   B.   Use Restrictions: Off premises signs are allowed by special use in
business zones except for the B-1 Central Business District. They are also
allowed by special use in industrial zones. They are not permitted in
residential zones.
   C.   Size: Off premises signs shall be limited to a maximum surface area,
facing in the same direction, of three hundred (300) square feet except for
billboards which may have a maximum surface area of six hundred seventy two
(672) square feet. Such signs shall have a maximum of two (2) sign faces, with
no more than one sign face per side or direction. Computation of sign face
surface area shall not include extensions.
   D.   Location: Off premises signs may not be roof mounted and, if flush wall
mounted, may not project above the roofline. Freestanding off premises signs
are required to have a single support structure, commonly known as monopole
construction. Off premises signs may not project beyond any property lines.
   E.   Height: The maximum total height of any off premises sign shall be
fifty feet (50') from ground level or the centerline of the road grade from
which the sign is intended to be viewed, whichever is greater.
   F.   Separation: All billboards shall be separated by a minimum of three
hundred feet (300') along the same side of the roadway, with no more than three
(3) off premises sign structures allowed within any one-fourth (1/4) mile of
the same side of any roadway.
   G.   Illumination: Off premises signs shall not contain any flashing or
running lights or lights creating the illusion of movement. This restriction
shall not be interpreted as a prohibition or restriction of electronic multiple
message signs.
   H.   Extension: An extension may increase the area of a sign face by no more
than twenty percent (20%) and may extend no more than five feet (5') above the
topmost edge of the sign face and three feet (3') from any other side. An
extension shall remain installed only for the duration of the advertising.
   I.   Digital Electronic Multiple Message Off Premises Signs: Digital
electronic multiple message off premises signs are allowed by special use in
business zones except for the B-1 central business district. They are also
allowed by special use in the industrial zones. The area of a digital
electronic multiple message sign shall be included in any sign area calculation
but only as a single sign face. No additional square footage shall be
attributed to the sign's ability to change messages.
      1.   Static Images: The messages displayed shall not contain moving
images. Images shall remain static except during message transition.
      2.   Length Of Display (Dwell Time): Digital electronic multiple message
signs are permitted to change their message no more than once every ten (10)
seconds.
      3.   Automatic Dimming: All such signs shall have installed ambient light
monitors and shall at all times allow such monitors to automatically adjust the
brightness level of the sign based on ambient light conditions. (Ord. 2015-
1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-12: NONCOMPLIANT, ABANDONED SIGNS:
   A.   Noncompliant Signs: The building inspector may order the removal of any
sign erected or maintained in violation of this chapter. He shall give thirty
(30) days' notice in writing to the owner of such sign, or of the building,
structure or premises on which such sign is located, to remove the sign or to
bring it into compliance. The building inspector may remove a sign immediately
and without notice if, in his opinion, the condition of the sign is such as to
present an immediate threat to the safety of the public.
   B.   Abandoned On Premises Signs:
      1.   A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon
which the sign is located when the business it advertises is no longer
conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the
building inspector shall give the owner fifteen (15) days' written notice to
remove it. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the building inspector or
his duly authorized representative may remove the sign at cost to the owner.
      2.   Where a successor to a defunct business agrees to maintain the signs
as provided in this chapter, this removal requirement shall not apply. (Ord.
2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-13: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Signs for which a permit is required may be inspected periodically by
the building inspector for compliance with this chapter and other codes of the
village.
   B.   All signs requiring permits shall display, in a place conspicuous to
inspectors, a tag supplied by the building inspector and containing such data
as he may designate. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-14: SPECIAL USES AND VARIANCES:
   A.   Special Uses: When any section of this chapter provides that an action
requires a special use, the person seeking a special use shall submit an
application for the special use in accordance with the procedures for special
uses approved under section
10-3-4 of this Code. Such applications shall be considered in accordance with
the procedures established by section
10-3-4 of this Code. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Variances: The Village Board may grant variances to this chapter where
it finds that a strict application of its provisions would result in practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-15: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all
of the provisions of this chapter. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the
building inspector or his duly authorized representative may enter, at
reasonable times, any building, structure or premises in the Village to perform
any duty imposed upon him by this chapter.
   B.   Where there is any ambiguity or dispute concerning the interpretation
of this chapter, the decision of the building inspector shall prevail, subject
to appeal as provided herein. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-16: APPEALS:
   A.   Right Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the
building inspector may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals by serving written
notice to the building inspector who, in turn, shall immediately transmit the
notice to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall meet to hear it within
thirty (30) days thereafter. The building inspector shall take no further
action on the matter pending the Board's decision except for unsafe signs which
present an immediate and serious danger to the public, as provided in this
chapter.
   B.   Duties Of Zoning Board Of Appeals: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
hold public hearings on all appeals and shall permit all interested persons to
offer oral or written testimony. The Board shall serve written notices of the
appeals and public hearings to all interested persons at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the hearing. After the close of the hearing, the Board, by
majority vote, may affirm, annul or modify the order or action of the building
inspector and hereby has the authority so to do.
   C.   Appeal From Decision Of Zoning Board Of Appeals To Village Board:
Anyone may appeal the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals directly to the
Village Board of Trustees upon written notice of appeal to the Village Clerk.
This appeal shall be heard at the next convenient meeting of the Village Board
of Trustees. The Village Board of Trustees may accept, reject or modify the
action of the Zoning Board of Appeals. Any modification of the ruling of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall require a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the
Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015)
9-4-17: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2015-1450, 8-4-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 5
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Purpose And Goals
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Application Of Provisions
9-5-4: General Requirements
9-5-5: Permitted Uses
9-5-6: Administratively Approved Uses
9-5-7: Special Use Permit Requirements
9-5-8: Buildings Or Other Equipment Storage
9-5-9: Abandoned Antennas And Towers
9-5-10: Nonconforming Towers And Antennas
9-5-11: Violation; Penalty
9-5-1: PURPOSE AND GOALS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines
for the siting of wireless communications towers and antennas.
   B.   Goals: The goals of this chapter are to: 1) protect residential areas
and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 2)
encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas; 3) minimize the total
number of towers throughout the community; 4) strongly encourage the joint use
of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single use towers; 5) encourage users of towers and antennas to
locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal; 6) encourage users of towers and antennas to configure
them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative
camouflaging techniques; 7) enhance the ability of the providers of
telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly,
effectively, and efficiently; 8) consider the public health and safety of
communication towers; and 9) avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from
tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. (Ord.
1143, 3-16-1999)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
in this section:
   ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples,
light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage
or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
   ANTENNA: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signal), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
   BACKHAUL NETWORK: The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to
one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance
providers, or the publicly switched telephone network.
   FAA: The federal aviation administration.
   FCC: The federal communications commission.
   HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured
from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or
other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
   PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS: Any tower or antenna for which
a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date hereof, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet
been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.
   TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purposes of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar
communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers,
or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support
thereto. (Ord. 1143, 3-16-1999)
9-5-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   New Towers And Antennas: All new towers or antennas in the village
shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in subsections B, C
and D, inclusive, of this section.
   B.   Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas: This chapter
shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is under
seventy feet (70') in height and is owned or is used exclusively for receive
only antennas.
   C.   Preexisting Towers Or Antennas: Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter, other
than the requirements of subsections
9-5-4F and G of this chapter.
   D.   AM Array: For purposes of implementing this chapter, and AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the
outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units
may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right. (Ord. 1143, 3-16-
1999)
9-5-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Principal Or Accessory Use: Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or
tower on such lot.
   B.   Lot Size: For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with the village zoning regulations including, but
not limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the
antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
   C.   Inventory Of Existing Sites: Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the village an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or
sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction
of the village or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific
information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The village
may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative
approvals or special use permits under this chapter or other organizations
seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the village; provided,
however, that the village is not, by sharing such information, in any way
representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
   D.   Aesthetics: Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject
to any applicable standard of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
      2.   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
      3.   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of neutral
color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
   E.   Lighting: Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
   F.   Compliance With State Or Federal Requirements: All towers must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other
agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of
the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standard and regulations within six
(6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a
different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower
or antenna at the owner's expense.
   G.   Compliance With Building Codes And Safety Standards: To ensure the
structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is
maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by
the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon
inspection, the village concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes
and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon
notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty
(30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to
bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days shall constitute
grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
   H.   Measurement Of Setbacks And Distances: For purposes of measurement,
tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to
facilities located in the village irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.
   I.   Not Regulated As Nonessential Services: Towers and antennas shall be
regulated and permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
   J.   Franchises Required: Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas
shall certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or
operation of a wireless communications system in the village have been obtained
and shall file with the village a copy of all required franchises.
   K.   Public Notices Required: For purposes of this chapter, any special use
request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use or
special use shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and all
property owners of properties that are located within the corresponding
separation distance listed in subsection
9-5-7B5b of this chapter in addition to any notice otherwise required by the
village.
   L.   Signs Prohibited: No signs shall be allowed on any antenna or tower.
   M.   Buildings And Support Equipment: Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of
section
9-5-8 of this chapter.
   N.   Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan: The village encourages the users of towers
and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers
and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be
given priority in the review process. (Ord. 1143, 3-16-1999)
9-5-5: PERMITTED USES:
The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not
require administrative approval or a special use permit. The following uses are
specifically permitted:
Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled
by the village provided, a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower
has been approved by the village. (Ord. 1143, 3-16-1999)
9-5-6: ADMINISTRATIVELY APPROVED USES:
   A.   General Provisions: The following provisions shall govern the issuance
of administrative approvals for towers and antennas:
      1.   The village may administratively approve the uses listed in this
section.
      2.   Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the
village providing the information set forth in subsection
9-5-7B of this chapter and a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of
village board of trustees to reimburse the village for the costs of reviewing
the application.
      3.   The village shall review the application for administrative approval
and determine if the proposed use complies with section
9-5-4 and subsections
 9-5-7B4 and B5 of this chapter.
      4.   The village shall respond to each such application within sixty (60)
days after receipt thereof by either approving or denying the application. If
the village fails to respond to the applicant within said sixty (60) days, the
application shall be deemed to be approved.
      5.   In connection with any such administrative approval, the village
may, in order to encourage shared use, administratively waive any setback
requirements in subsection
9-5-7B4 of this chapter or separation distances between towers in subsection
 9-5-7B5 of this chapter by up to fifty percent (50%).
      6.   In connection with any such administrative approval, the village
may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively allow
reconstruction of an existing tower to monopole construction.
      7.   If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an
application for a special use permit pursuant to section
9-5-7 of this chapter prior to filing any appeal that may otherwise be
available.
   B.   Administratively Approved Uses Enumerated: The following uses may be
approved by the village after conducting an administrative review:
      1.   Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or
antenna, in any I-1 industrial district as designated by the village's current
zoning ordinance.
      2.   Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the following terms: (Ord. 1143, 3-16-1999)
         a.   Antennas On Existing Structures: Any antenna on an existing
structure which is not attached to a tower may be approved by the village as an
accessory use to any commercial, industrial, professional, institutional, or
multi-family structure of eight (8) or more dwelling units, provided: (Ord.
1143, 3-16-1999; amd. 2016 Code)
            (1)   The antenna does not extend more than thirty feet (30') above
the highest point of the structure;
            (2)   The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
            (3)   The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
         b.   Antennas On Existing Towers: An antenna which is attached to an
existing tower may be approved by the village and, to minimize adverse visual
impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers, collocation
of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take precedence
over the construction of new towers, provided such collocation is accomplished
in a manner consistent with the following:
            (1)   Towers Modified For Collocation: A tower which is modified or
reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna shall be
of the same tower type as the existing tower, unless the village allows
reconstruction as a monopole.
            (2)   Height:
               (A)   An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller
height, not to exceed thirty feet (30') over the tower's existing height, to
accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna.
               (B)   The height change referred to in subsection B2b(2)(A) of
this section may only occur one time per communication tower.
               (C)   The additional height referred to in subsection B2b(2)(A)
of this section shall not require an additional distance separation as set
forth in section
9-5-7 of this chapter. The tower's premodification height shall be used to
calculate such distance separation.
            (3)   On Site Location:
               (A)   A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna may be moved on site within fifty feet
(50') of its existing location.
               (B)   After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation,
only one tower may remain on site.
               (C)   A relocated on site tower shall continue to be measured
from the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation
distances between towers pursuant to subsection
9-5-7B5 of this chapter. The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way be
deemed to cause a violation of subsection
9-5-7B5 of this chapter.
               (D)   The on site relocation of a tower which comes within the
separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as
established in subsection
9-5-7B5 of this chapter shall only be permitted when approved by the village.
      3.   Locating any new tower in a nonresidential zoning district other
than an I-1 industrial district, provided a licensed professional engineer
certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users
proposed by the applicant; the village concludes the tower is in conformity
with the goals set forth in subsection
9-5-1B of this chapter and the requirements of section
9-5-4 of this chapter; the tower meets the setback requirements in subsection
9-5-7B5 of this chapter; and the tower meets the following height and usage
criteria:
         a.   For a single user, up to ninety feet (90') in height;
         b.   For two (2) users, up to one hundred twenty feet (120') in
height; and
         c.   For three (3) or more users, up to one hundred fifty feet (150')
in height.
      4.   Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district other
than an I-1 industrial district that, in the judgment of the village, is in
conformity with the goals set forth in subsection
9-5-1B of this chapter.
      5.   Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low
powered transmitter/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as
conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not
require the use of towers. (Ord. 1143, 3-16-1999)
9-5-7: SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements: The following provisions shall govern the village
issuance of special use permits for towers or antennas:
      1.   Permit Required: If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use
under section
9-5-5 of this chapter or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to
section
9-5-6 of this chapter, then a special use permit shall be required for the
construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.
      2.   Application For Permit:
         a.   Applications for special use permits under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements that may from time to time be
established by the village board of trustees, except as modified in this
section.
         b.   An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the
information described in this section and a nonrefundable fee as established by
resolution of the village board of trustees to reimburse the village for the
costs of reviewing the application.
      3.   Engineering Certification: Any information of an engineering nature
that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer.
      4.   Conditions May Be Imposed: In granting a special use permit, the
village board of trustees may impose conditions to the extent that said board
of trustees concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse
effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
   B.   Towers:
      1.   Information Required: In addition to any information required for
applications for special use permits pursuant to this chapter, applicants for a
special use permit for a tower shall submit the following information:
         a.   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses
and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), classification of
the site and all properties within the applicable separation distances set
forth in subsection B5 of this section, adjacent roadways, proposed means of
access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower
and any other structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed by
the village to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter.
         b.   Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
         c.   The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted
residentially zoned properties.
         d.   The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to subsection
9-5-4C of this chapter shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The
applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s)
and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
         e.   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
         f.   Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
         g.   A description of compliance with subsections
 9-5-4C, D, E, G, J, L, and M of this chapter and subsection B5 of this section
and all applicable federal, state or local laws.
         h.   A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction
of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future
uses.
         i.   Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for
the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or
operated by the applicant in the village.
         j.   A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or
structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower.
         k.   A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the village based upon existing physical, engineering,
technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is
erected.
      2.   Factors Considered In Granting Permit: In addition to any standards
for consideration of special use permit applications pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, the village board of trustees shall consider the following
factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit, although said
board of trustees may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or
more of these criteria if said board of trustees concludes that the goals of
this chapter are better served thereby:
         a.   Height of the proposed tower;
         b.   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
         c.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
         d.   Surrounding topography;
         e.   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
         f.   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
         g.   Proposed ingress and egress; and
         h.   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in subsection B3 of this section.
      3.   Availability Of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures Or
Alternative Technology: No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the village board of trustees
that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not
require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by the
village board of trustees related to the availability of suitable existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to
demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the
following:
         a.   No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
         b.   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
         c.   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
         d.   The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna.
         e.   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower
or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower
development are presumed to be unreasonable.
         f.   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
         g.   The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell
network using multiple low powered transmitters/receivers attached to a
wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new
tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
      4.   Setbacks: The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the
village board of trustees may reduce the standard setback requirements if the
goals of this chapter would be better served thereby:
         a.   Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least seventy five
percent (75%) of the heights of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
         b.   Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
      5.   Separation: The following separation requirements shall apply to all
towers and antennas for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, that the village board of trustees may reduce the standard separation
requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby.
         a.   Separation from off site uses/designated areas:
            (1)   Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the lot line of the off site uses and/or designated areas as specified in
table 1 of this section, except as otherwise provided in table 1 of this
section.
            (2)   Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in table 1 of this section.
    Table 1
 
Single-family or duplex residential units1 200 feet or 300% height of tower,
                                           whichever is greater
Vacant single-family or duplex
residentially zoned land which is either   200 feet or 300% height of tower2,
platted or has preliminary subdivision     whichever is greater
plan approval which is not expired
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned       100 feet or 100% height of tower,
lands3                                     whichever is greater
Existing multi-family residential units    100 feet or 100% height of tower,
greater than duplex units                  whichever is greater
Nonresidentially zoned lands or            None; only setbacks apply
nonresidential uses
      
      Notes:
         1.    Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for living
purposes.
         2.    Separation measured from base of tower to closest building
setback line.
         3.    Includes any unplatted residential use properties without a
valid preliminary subdivision plan or valid development plan approval and any
multi-family residentially zoned land greater than duplex.
         b.   Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for and
measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the
base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of
the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be
as shown in table 2 of this section.
   Table 2
 
                      Lattice Guyed Monopole 75 Feet In Monopole Less Than 75
                                    Height Or Greater   Feet In Height
Lattice               5,000   5,000 1,500               750
Guyed                 5,000   5,000 1,500               750
Monopole 75 Feet In   1,500   1,500 1,500               750
Height Or Greater
Monopole Less Than 75 750     750   750                 750
Feet In Height
 
      6.   Security Fencing: Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing of
six feet (6') in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate
anticlimbing device; provided, however, the village board of trustees may waive
such requirements as it deems appropriate.
      7.   Landscaping: The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, the village board of trustees may waive such requirements if the goals
of this chapter would be better served thereby:
         a.   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property
used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at
least four feet (4') wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
         b.   In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.
         c.   Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as
towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be sufficient buffer. (Ord. 1143, 3-16-1999)
9-5-8: BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE:
   A.   Antennas Mounted On Structures Or Rooftops: For antennas mounted on
structures or rooftops, the equipment cabinet or structure used in association
with antennas shall comply with the following:
      1.   The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than one hundred
(100) square feet of gross floor area or be more than four feet (4') in height.
In addition, for buildings and structures which are less than sixty five feet
(65') in height, the related unmanned equipment structure, if over fifty (50)
square feet of gross floor area or three feet (3') in height, shall be located
on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
      2.   If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall not
occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the roof area.
      3.   Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
   B.   Antennas Mounted On Utility Poles Or Light Poles: For antennas mounted
on utility poles or light poles, the equipment cabinet or structure used in
association with antennas shall be located in accordance with the following:
      1.   In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be
located:
         a.   In a front or side yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no
greater than two feet (2') in height or twenty five (25) square feet of gross
floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of ten feet (10')
from all lot lines. The cabinet structure shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of at least forty two (42) to forty eight inches
(48") and a planted height of at least thirty six inches (36").
         b.   In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater
than three feet (3') in height or fifty (50) square feet in gross floor area.
The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate
height of eight feet (8') and a planted height of at least thirty inches (30").
      2.   In commercial or industrial districts, the equipment cabinet/
structure shall be no greater than eight feet (8') in height or three hundred
thirty six (336) square feet in gross floor area. The structure or cabinet
shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet
(8') and a planted height of at least thirty six inches (36"). In all other
instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from view of all
residential properties which abut or are directly across the street from the
structure or cabinet by a solid fence six feet (6') in height or an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet (8') and a planted height of at
least thirty six inches (36").
   C.   Antennas Located On Towers: For antennas located on towers, the related
unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more than three hundred thirty
six (336) square feet of gross floor area or be more than eight feet (8') in
height, and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard requirements
of the zoning district in which located.
   D.   Modification Of Building Size Requirements: The requirements of
subsections A, B and C of this section may be modified by the village in the
case of administratively approved uses or by the village board of trustees in
the case of uses permitted by special use to encourage collocation. (Ord. 1143,
3-16-1999)
9-5-9: ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve
(12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or
tower shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from
the village notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an
abandoned antenna or tower within said ninety (90) days shall be grounds to
remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or
more users of a single tower, this section shall not become effective until all
users cease using the tower. (Ord. 1143, 3-16-1999)
9-5-10: NONCONFORMING TOWERS AND ANTENNAS:
   A.   Not An Expansion Of Nonconforming Use: Towers that are constructed and
antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or
structure.
   B.   Preexisting Towers: The use of preexisting towers shall be allowed to
continue as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement
with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such
preexisting towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a
preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Damaged Or Destroyed Nonconforming Towers Or Antennas: Notwithstanding
section
9-5-9 of this chapter, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are
damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain
administrative approval or a special use permit and without having to meet the
separation requirements specified in subsections
 9-5-7B4 and B5 of this chapter. The type, height, and location of the tower on
site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval.
Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable
building codes and shall be obtained within one hundred eighty (180) days from
the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if
said permit expired, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as
specified in section
9-5-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 1143, 3-16-1999)
9-5-11: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, individual, operator, licensee,
partnership, limited partnership or corporation, or any manager, agent or
employee of any firm, partnership, limited partnership or corporation, or any
owner, lessor, licensee or permittee of any antenna or tower located in the
village to violate any provisions of this chapter and shall, upon any violation
or conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, plus costs, for each offense. Each day any such violation
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2011-1361, 1-3-2011;
amd. 2016 Code)
ARTICLE A. SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
SECTION:
9-5A-1: Purpose And Scope
9-5A-2: Definitions
9-5A-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
9-5A-4: Dispute Resolution
9-5A-5: Indemnification
9-5A-6: Insurance
9-5A-7: Severability
9-5A-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this article is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities in the rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside
the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial
or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act.
   B.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This article supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
   C.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
article, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
article to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws
or regulations. (Ord. 2018-1565, 7-17-2018)
9-5A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those
codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522
(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153
(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51),
as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE: A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section
VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked
building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the
Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the
Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation
Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois
State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in
public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action
or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE: A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
   UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
2018-1565, 7-17-2018)
9-5A-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection C9 of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not
subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-of-
way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned
exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
   B.   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the
Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small
Cellular Facilities' Permit Application, as a condition of any permit
application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or
wireless support structure:
         a.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         c.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
         d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         f.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         g.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      2.   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving
an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the
applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      3.   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
         a.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         b.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75)
days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this article.
         c.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission
of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five
(105) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this article.
         d.   The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this article.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that
concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained
herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced
before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the wireless provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific Code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an
application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit
the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is
sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village
shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application, or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit a revised application within thirty (30) days of the denial shall
require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the Village's review period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted
with the resubmitted application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited
in the denial. However, this revised application to cure defects, does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
      4.   Tolling: Any time period involving an application may be further
tolled by:
         a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
         b.   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may
remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations
unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facility or the new
or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village codes or any
provision, condition or requirement contained in this article.
If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits
shall be subject to the applicable Village Code provisions or regulations in
effect at the time of renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at 4901 North Prospect Road, Peoria Heights, Illinois, 61616, by
regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means,
including electronic mail.
   C.   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
article. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with
industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a
public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the
interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such
interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   Location Of Collocation: The wireless provider shall not collocate
small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric
distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone
of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may
be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on the
top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   Complying With Codes Or Regulations: The wireless provider shall
comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that
concern public safety.
      6.   Complying With Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply
with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative
utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements
that are set forth in any Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the
Village, comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other
occupiers of the rights-of-way, including location on a historic landmark or in
a historic district.
      7.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems
on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred
feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure do not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
      8.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a special use permit in conformance with procedures, terms and
conditions set forth in title 10, chapter 3 of this Code.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground- mounted equipment located in the rights-of-way.
      11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses a
wireless provider's request for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   D.   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      4.   The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights- of-way, for:
         a.   Routine maintenance;
         b.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with subsection B1d of this section; or
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   E.   Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this article authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this article do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to
that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this article
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to obtain a
franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or
operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject
to this article.
   F.   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the rights-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this article.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village
makes available under this article for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
(2) or more years after the effective date of the Act, by notifying the Village
that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement
remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before the
wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this
paragraph.
   G.   Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village
utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the
wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs,
the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after
the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent
to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   H.   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village within thirty
(30) days of the sale or transfer of a small wireless facility within the
jurisdiction of the Village. Such notice shall include the name and contact
information of the new wireless provider. (Ord. 2018-1565, 7-17-2018)
9-5A-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Peoria County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 2018-1565, 7-17-2018)
9-5A-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
Village improvements or right- of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this article and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability. (Ord. 2018-1565, 7-17-2018)
9-5A-6: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
   A.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   B.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
   C.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection
limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements
or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to
the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirements required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the Village.
As used in this section, "financial ability to self-insure" shall mean having
and maintaining net unrestricted assets of at least one hundred million dollars
($100,000,000.00), as determined in accordance with generally accepted
accounting methods consistently applied, while maintaining appropriate loss
reserves for the amount of self-insurance obligations established in this
section and otherwise which are actuarially derived in accordance with accepted
standards of insurance industry and accrued or otherwise funded. (Ord. 2018-
1565, 7-17-2018)
9-5A-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held or ruled to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this
article that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision,
and each invalid provision or invalid application of this article is severable.
(Ord. 2018-1565, 7-17-2018)
CHAPTER 6
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
9-6-1: Statute Authority; Purpose
9-6-2: Definitions
9-6-3: Base Flood Elevation
9-6-4: Duties Of The Code Enforcement Officer
9-6-5: Development Permit
9-6-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
9-6-7: Protecting Buildings
9-6-8: Subdivision Requirements
9-6-9: Public Health And Other Standards
9-6-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
9-6-11: Variances
9-6-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
9-6-13: Violation; Penalty
9-6-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
9-6-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this village
of Peoria Heights by the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the
following purposes:
   A.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   B.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   E.   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   F.   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
9-6-3 of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure that is principally above ground
including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage
tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers
installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT: A. Any manmade change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:
      1.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
      2.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
      3.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
      4.   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts
or similar projects;
      5.   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
      6.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
      7.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
   B.   "Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
   FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the village of Peoria
Heights, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village, or that may be
annexed into the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The
floodplains of the village are generally identified on the flood insurance rate
map for Peoria Heights prepared by the federal emergency management agency and
dated November 1, 1979, panels 143 and 281 of the countywide flood insurance
rate map of Woodford County prepared by the federal emergency management agency
and dated September 17, 2010, and panel number 35 of the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Tazewell County prepared by the federal emergency
management agency and dated February 17, 2017. Floodplain also includes those
areas of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Peoria, Tazewell, and Woodford
Counties that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village of
Peoria Heights or that may be annexed into the village of Peoria Heights are
generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate maps prepared by the
federal emergency management agency for Peoria, Tazewell, and Woodford Counties
and dated November 1, 1979, September 17, 2010, and February 17, 2017,
respectively.
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency
management agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Illinois River shall be as
delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Woodford County and
the community based map of the village of Peoria Heights prepared by FEMA and
dated February 17, 2017, September 17, 2010, and November 1, 1979. The
floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the village shall be
according to the best data available from federal, state, or other sources.
   FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   D.   Individually listed on the local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
   IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water
resources.
   IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM: Illinois department of natural resources/
office of water resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary
area of six hundred forty (640) acres or more in an urban area, or in the
floodway of any stream serving a tributary area of six thousand four hundred
(6,400) acres or more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a
permit from the department (Ill. adm. code title 17, pt. 3700.30). The
department may grant approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a
statewide permit which meets the standards defined in section
9-6-6 of this chapter.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
9-6-7 of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
   NFIP: National flood insurance program.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other
improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss buildings" as defined in this section.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter, in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
      1.   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
      2.   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
   B.   "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. The term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
   C.   The term does not include:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
      2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
9-6-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   A.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Illinois River
shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide flood
insurance study of Woodford County prepared by the federal emergency management
agency and dated September 17, 2010, the Tazewell County study dated February
17, 2017, and the community flood insurance study for the village of Peoria
Heights dated May 1, 1979.
   B.   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH zone"
or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the countywide
flood insurance rate map of Peoria, Woodford, and Tazewell Counties.
   C.   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of
Woodford, Tazewell, and Peoria Counties and the village of Peoria Heights shall
be according to the best data available from federal, state or other sources.
Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the
applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   D.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Peoria, Tazewell, and Woodford Counties that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village of Peoria Heights, or that may be
annexed into the village, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles
in the flood insurance study of Peoria Heights, Peoria, Tazewell, and Woodford
Counties prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated May 1,
1979, February 1, 1980, September 17, 2010, and February 17, 2017,
respectively. (Ord. 2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
9-6-4: DUTIES OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The code enforcement officer shall be responsible for the general
administration of this chapter and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the village of Peoria Heights
meet the requirements of this chapter. Specifically, the code enforcement
officer shall:
   A.   Process development permits in accordance with section
9-6-5 of this chapter;
   B.   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
9-6-6 of this chapter;
   C.   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
9-6-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built" elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   D.   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
9-6-8 of this chapter;
   E.   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
9-6-9 of this chapter;
   F.   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
9-6-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   G.   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
9-6-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   H.   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   I.   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse;
   J.   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   K.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   L.   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies
of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development
activities subject to this chapter;
   M.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   N.   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
9-6-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement
officer shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does
not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   A.   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
9-6-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the code
enforcement officer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that is shown by survey elevation to
be below the current base flood elevation is subject to the provisions of this
chapter. In addition, any development located on land shown to be below the
base flood elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not
identified as floodplain on the current flood insurance rate map, is subject to
the provisions of this chapter. Any development located on land that can be
shown by survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and
which has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance
rate map is not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
The code enforcement officer shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate
map identification.
The code enforcement officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
code enforcement officer shall not issue a permit unless all other federal,
state, and local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
9-6-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources/office of water
resources statewide permit number 2;
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 3;
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 4;
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit
number 5;
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities such as underground utility lines,
light poles, signposts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet and
raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any
other activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6;
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7;
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8;
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9;
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10;
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11;
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12;
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 13;
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   B.   Other development activities not listed in subsection A of this section
may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
9-6-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   In addition to the state permit and damage prevention requirements of
section
 9-6-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within twenty four (24) months of the date the damage
occurred.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage).
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
9-6-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         a.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
         b.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
         c.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
         d.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material; and
         e.   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         a.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters;
         b.   All components located below the flood protection elevation shall
be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
         c.   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation;
         d.   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation; and
         e.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (2)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (3)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         a.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         b.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade;
         c.   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade;
         d.   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet
(4') at any point;
         e.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event;
         f.   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
         g.   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
      4.   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
         a.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
         b.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
         c.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
         d.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   C.   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection B of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tiedown act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   D.   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection C of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck;
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet;
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain;
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect;
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model; and
      10.   Must either:
         a.   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         b.   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   E.   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost, whichever is greater, or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet (24 feet x 24 feet).
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
9-6-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The board of trustees shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they
are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   A.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
9-6-6 and
9-6-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain; where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
   B.   Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds. (Ord. 2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
9-6-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   A.   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
9-6-6 and
9-6-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section 9-6-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permitted within the floodplain only if no
feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within
the SFHA shall be elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year
flood frequency elevation. In situations where a 500-year flood elevation has
not been determined the flood protection elevation shall be three feet (3')
above the 100-year flood frequency elevation. Floodproofing and sealing
measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by
or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of
the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities.
   B.   All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 2017-1495,
1-17-2017)
9-6-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the village of Peoria Heights shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
9-6-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Peoria Heights zoning
board of appeals for a variance. The Peoria Heights zoning board of appeals
shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the Peoria Heights board of trustees. The Peoria Heights
board of trustees may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it
deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   A.   Standards For Variance Request: No variance shall be granted unless the
applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   B.   Variances From Provisions: The Peoria Heights zoning board of appeals
shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of
the building protections standards of section 9-6-7 of this chapter that would
lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   C.   Historic Structures:
      1.   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
 9-6-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
9-6-6 and
9-6-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
         a.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
         b.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure
being removed as a certified historic structure.
   D.   Agriculture: Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall
be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as
well as those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter.
In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to
public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any
variance issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at grade and
wet floodproofed:
      1.   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farmhouses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      2.   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
      3.   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation, must be built with flood resistant materials in accordance with
section
9-6-7 of this chapter.
      4.   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with
section
9-6-7 of this chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      5.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section
9-6-7 of this chapter.
      6.   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters in accordance with subsection
9-6-7B of this chapter.
      7.   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of section
9-6-6 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
      8.   Wet floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the floodplain administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction. (Ord. 2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
9-6-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the village of Peoria Heights or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
9-6-13: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the code enforcement officer
or village attorney may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of
this chapter exists. The code enforcement officer or village attorney shall
notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   A.   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The village of Peoria Heights shall make application to the circuit
court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such
other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this
chapter;
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense;
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues; and
      4.   The village of Peoria Heights shall record a notice of violation on
the title of the property.
   B.   The code enforcement officer or village attorney shall inform the owner
that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages
and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
The code enforcement officer or village attorney is authorized to issue an
order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop work order
shall be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the
action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work
order. The stop work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the Peoria Heights zoning board of appeals. Written notice
of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Peoria Heights zoning
board of appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or
revoked.
   C.   Nothing herein shall prevent the village of Peoria Heights from taking
such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
2017-1495, 1-17-2017)
9-6-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the village of
Peoria Heights to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance
program including ordinance 2010-1329. However, this chapter does not repeal
the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the
program, nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2017-
1495, 1-17-2017)
CHAPTER 7
CONTROL OF EROSION, SEDIMENT AND STORMWATER
SECTION:
9-7-1: Definitions
9-7-2: Permit Required
9-7-3: Stormwater Retention Required
9-7-4: Enforcement And Stop Work Order Fee
9-7-5: Appeals To Village Board
9-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
   DISTURBED AREA: Any area of land on which the ground surface will be
affected or altered by any land disturbing activity.
   EROSION CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR: The duly appointed or acting director of
public works of the village shall serve ex officio as erosion control
administrator charged with administration of this chapter.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any change in land, which may result in soil
erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into village waters or
onto lands in the village, or a change in the amount and/or intensity of
stormwater runoff, including, but not limited to, the covering with an
impervious surface, stockpiling, clearing, grading, excavating, rehabilitating,
transporting, depositing or filling of land including the construction or
rehabilitation of any structure.
   VILLAGE: The village of Peoria Heights, Illinois. (Ord. 2017-1503, 4-4-2017)
9-7-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall engage in any land disturbing activity resulting in a
disturbed area of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet or undertake any
new building construction regardless of the size of the disturbed area without
first obtaining a permit as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Applications for permits shall be submitted on a form approved by
resolution of the village board as modified from time to time by the erosion
control administrator. The erosion control administrator is hereby delegated
the authority to modify the application and standards approved by resolution of
the village board in order to facilitate or improve compliance with this
chapter.
   C.   No permit is required for agricultural activities occurring on
agriculturally zoned land or for the routine maintenance of roads, accessways
and utility lines.
   D.   All persons engaged in any land disturbing activities shall in addition
comply with any and all applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations and where necessary shall obtain a national pollutant discharge
elimination system ("NPDES") permit. (Ord. 2017-1503, 4-4-2017)
9-7-3: STORMWATER RETENTION REQUIRED:
   A.   All persons engaged in any land disturbing activity shall provide
stormwater retention in accordance with the following standards unless
otherwise approved by the erosion control administrator:
      1.   Retention for any property/project that will result in a total
impervious area between five thousand (5,000) square feet and one acre may at
the discretion of the erosion control administrator be based on the rational
method for the calculations included as part of the application for a permit.
The erosion control administrator shall determine the suitability of the
rational method based on location of property/project, history of drainage in
the affected area, and topography.
      2.   Retention for any property/project that will result in a total
impervious area over one acre shall be based on the soil conservation service
(SCS) method for calculations or an alternative method approved by the erosion
control administrator.
      3.   Retention for the addition of impervious area shall be calculated as
the cumulative impervious area. For example, in year one, a commercial site
increases the parking lot by twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. In year two,
the same commercial site adds a building with an area of thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet. In year one, if approved by the erosion control
administrator, the rational method may be used for stormwater detention
calculations required by this chapter. In year two, stormwater calculations
shall be submitted and shall be based on the total increase of fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet of impervious area and the SCS method for calculation or
an approved alternate method. (Ord. 2017-1503, 4-4-2017)
9-7-4: ENFORCEMENT AND STOP WORK ORDER FEE:
   A.   The erosion control administrator shall make or cause to be made
periodic inspections of all work authorized by permits issued in accordance
with this chapter to ensure that said work is in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and the permit; shall make or cause to be made, investigations
of violations of this chapter and shall cause any violations to be corrected.
   B.   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be suspended or
revoked by a stop work order issued by the erosion control administrator when
he finds from personal inspection or from competent evidence that the rules,
regulations or standards under which said permit was issued are being violated.
(Ord. 2017-1503, 4-4-2017)
9-7-5: APPEALS TO VILLAGE BOARD:
   A.   Any person directly aggrieved by any decision, order, requirement or
determination of the erosion control administrator made pursuant to this
chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the village board. Such
appeal shall be made within thirty five (35) days from the date of the action
appealed from, shall be filed in writing, and shall include a short, concise
statement of why the action is being appealed. The fee for such an appeal shall
be nonrefundable and in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) payable to
the village and is due with the appeal. In addition, the person filing the
appeal shall pay all required publication costs associated with the appeal.
   B.   Upon receipt of an appeal, the village board shall within a reasonable
time consider the appeal. The president may in his discretion, appoint a
hearing officer to conduct a hearing on the appeal and to make a recommendation
to the village board regarding disposition of the appeal. The village board may
affirm, modify or reverse any appealed action. (Ord. 2017-1503, 4-4-2017)
CHAPTER 8
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
ARTICLE A. RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRATION CODE
SECTION:
9-8A-1: Purpose
9-8A-2: Definitions
9-8A-3: Registration Required
9-8A-4: Inspection
9-8A-5: Inspection Notice Requirements
9-8A-6: Owner's Responsibilities Related To Inspection
9-8A-7: Enforcement
9-8A-8: Adoption Of Division 31.1
9-8A-9: Other Remedies
9-8A-10: Fees
9-8A-11: Penalties For Violation
9-8A-1: PURPOSE:
This article is intended to promote the maintenance of rental housing stock in
the Village by enforcement of Property Maintenance, Life Safety, and Health
Codes through periodic building inspections and annual registration. (Ord.
2018-1561, 6-19-2018)
9-8A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms when used in this article shall have the indicated meanings
unless the use or context clearly indicates another meaning is intended:
   ACCEPTABLE UNIT: A residential rental unit that is free of violations of the
Housing Codes that pose a threat to tenants or the public, and free of
substantial violations that do not pose an immediate threat to tenants or the
public.
   DIVISION 31.1: 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., of the
Illinois Municipal Code.
   HOUSING CODES: The adopted codes as set forth in section
9-2-1 of this title.
   HOUSING INSPECTOR: The employee of the Village and the subordinates or
designees of such employee responsible for the administration of this
Residential Rental Registration Code. The housing inspector shall be under the
direct supervision of the Village Administrator.
   MANAGER: Any person or entity exercising managerial authority over rental
property with or without the consent of the owner of such property, including,
without limitation, the maintenance of the property or the collection of rent.
Managers are subject to the same obligations under this chapter as owners.
   OWNER: Any person, partnership, firm, limited liability company, corporation
or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in rental property;
whether or not evidence of such interest is recorded in the official records of
the State of Illinois, County of Peoria, or Village of Peoria Heights.
   REGISTRATION PERIOD: The one year period beginning on January 1 of each
calendar year and ending on December 31 of that year.
   RENT: The consideration, including any payment, deposit, benefit, service,
bonus or gratuity, bargained for, demanded, accepted or received by an owner
for or in exchange for the use or occupancy of a residential rental unit.
   RENTAL PROPERTY: Any property containing one or more residential rental
units located within the Village.
   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT: Any individual dwelling unit in rental property
such as an apartment, duplex unit, condominium unit or a single-family home. An
owner occupied single family residence or a vacant single family residence not
intended to be rented does not qualify as a residential rental unit.
   TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY RENTAL UNIT: Any dwelling unit or habitable unit that is
offered, in whole or in part, for rent, lease or hire that is rented, leased or
hired for which a Lessor receives consideration from a person for a period of
thirty (30) days or less and that person has the right to use, occupy or
possess all or part of the dwelling unit or habitable unit for said period.
   UNACCEPTABLE UNIT: A residential rental unit having one or more violations
of the Housing Code that pose a threat to the life, health, or safety of
tenants or the public, or having multiple violations of the Housing Codes that
do pose an immediate threat to tenants or the public. (Ord. 2018-1561, 6-19-
2018; amd. Ord. 2021-1656, 7-6-2021)
9-8A-3: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Registration Statement Required: Except as otherwise provided in this
section, every owner of rental property whether vacant or occupied, shall
annually file a registration statement with the housing inspector on forms
provided by the housing inspector. Registration statements must be filed prior
to the commencement of each registration period, unless ownership or control of
a given rental property is transferred, in which case the new owner shall
register within thirty (30) days of said transfer as provided in subsection D
of this section. The registration period for the calendar year during which
this article is adopted shall commence on the effective date of this article
and end on December 31 of that year.
   B.   Registration Exemptions: An owner of an owner occupied single- family
residential unit or a vacant single family residential unit not intended to be
rented is exempt from the registration of the residential unit. However, such
an owner shall at the request of the housing inspector file a sworn statement
with such inspector attesting to the status of the residential unit as an
owner-occupied residence or as a vacant residential unit that is not intended
to be rented.
   C.   Structures Not Required To Register: Registration of the following
structures is not required:
      1.   Owner occupied single-family homes and that portion of a duplex or
multifamily structure occupied by the owner.
      2.   Owner occupied condominiums.
      3.   Hotels and motels.
      4.   Nursing homes.
      5.   Rooming houses (excluding structures with transient occupancy rental
units-all structures with transient occupancy rental units must be registered).
      6.   Bed and breakfast establishments.
   D.   Transfer Of Ownership: The new owner of a rental property shall file a
registration statement within thirty (30) days of transfer of ownership. Any
fee paid by the prior owner shall apply for the new owner until the end of the
year during which the sale occurred.
   E.   Registration Information: The registration statement shall include:
      1.   The address of the rental property.
      2.   The type of building, number of units in the rental property, and
the address of each residential rental unit.
      3.   The name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of
the owner of the rental property.
      4.   If the owner of the rental property is a partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, land trust or other legal entity, the registration
statement shall contain the name, street address, mailing address and telephone
number of each person or entity having more than a five percent (5%) interest
in such entity and of the manager or other person responsible for maintenance
of the property.
      5.   The name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of
the person designated to receive notices prescribed by this article. The
identity and contact information for the person designated to receive notices
is presumed to be correct in the absence of a revised registration statement
providing alternate information.
   F.   Additional Information: The housing inspector may, at any time, require
additional relevant information from the owner to clarify or verify information
in the registration statement.
   G.   Fee Required: Upon the filing of a registration statement, the owner
shall pay a fee as provided in section
9-8A-10 of this article. Registration statements are not completed or filed
unless accompanied by the required fee. Registrations filed after January 1 of
the registration period shall be assessed a late fee in the amount provided in
section
9-8A-10 of this article in addition to any other fines or penalties provided in
this article.
   H.   Signing The Registration Statement: All registration statements must be
signed by either the owner or the manager. The person signing the registration
statement shall be deemed to have certified that he/she has personal knowledge
that the statements contained in the form are true and correct.
   I.   Registration Required To Rent: It is unlawful to rent any residential
rental unit unless a current registration statement for that unit has been
filed as required by this section. (Ord. 2018-1561, 6-19-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-
1656, 7-6-2021)
9-8A-4: INSPECTION:
   A.   All residential rental units shall be periodically inspected to
determine if they comply with the Housing Codes. Based upon the inspection,
each residential rental unit shall be rated as an acceptable unit or an
unacceptable unit.
   B.   Residential rental units shall be inspected on a rotating basis,
prioritizing for inspection those units judged by the housing inspector to be
most likely to have serious violations of Housing Codes. In no instance shall a
residential rental unit go for more than three (3) years without an inspection.
Notwithstanding the rotating nature of the inspection a residential rental unit
may be inspected at any time if the housing inspector determines, based upon
the number and/or nature of complaints pertaining to the unit, that inspection
is necessary to protect the life, health or safety of tenants or the public.
(Ord. 2018-1561, 6-19-2018)
9-8A-5: INSPECTION NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Except in the case of an emergency as determined by the housing
inspector, such inspector shall send notice of the date and time that the
inspection of a rental property or residential rental unit is to take place at
least ten (10) days prior to the date of the scheduled inspection. Notices
shall be mailed to the address of the person designated in the registration
statement as the recipient of notices. The owner or owner's agent shall within
two (2) days thereafter notify the tenant occupying any affected residential
rental unit of the pending inspection by providing a copy of such notice to the
tenant.
   B.   Upon receipt of the notice of inspection, the owner shall have five (5)
business days to ask the housing inspector to reschedule the inspection.
Extensions shall be allowed for good cause, as determined by the housing
inspector. The maximum extension allowed shall be five (5) business days from
the date specified in the original inspection notice.
   C.   Notices of inspection shall advise the owner and the owner's tenant of
his or her right to refuse inspection of the rental property or residential
rental unit and the Village's right to seek the issuance of an administrative
search warrant in the event of any such refusal. No inspection of an occupied
residential rental unit shall occur without the consent of the tenant/occupant
unless an administrative search warrant is first obtained.
   D.   Within thirty (30) business days after the inspection, the housing
inspector shall notify the owner of inspection results and whether the
residential dwelling unit has been classified as acceptable or unacceptable.
Inspection results shall be mailed to the address of the person designated in
the registration statement as the recipient of notices pertaining to the rental
property.
   E.   If a residential rental unit or rental property fails to meet the
requirements set forth in the Housing Codes, the housing inspector shall issue
to the owner, manager, if applicable, and tenant a written notice of the
violations containing the following information and directives:
      1.   A description of each alleged violation of the Housing Codes in
substantially the language of the applicable code section with such additional
detail as the housing inspector deems necessary to fully advise the owner or
manager of the nature of the violation.
      2.   A description of the residential rental unit where the violations
are alleged to exist by street address or legal description.
      3.   A reasonable time depending upon the nature and extent of each
violation but not exceed sixty (60) days for the correction of each violation.
Times for correcting multiple violations shall be computed concurrently. (Ord.
2018-1561, 6-19-2018)
9-8A-6: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES RELATED TO INSPECTION:
   A.   The owner, the manager or the occupant of the unit shall be present at
the time of an inspection in order to provide access for the inspection.
   B.   Except when the tenant occupying a residential rental unit refuses to
allow access, the owner shall allow access to all residential rental units in a
rental property at the time scheduled in the notice of inspection.
   C.   If the housing inspector reasonably determines that the person
designated in the registration statement is not receiving notices prescribed by
this article, such inspector may post at the property any and all notices
concerning the property which is the subject of the notice. Notices posted
under such circumstances shall be deemed to have been properly served.
   D.   Owners or their agents shall contact the Village at least five (5) days
prior to a scheduled inspection if they are unable to obtain their tenants'
consent to the inspection. (Ord. 2018-1561, 6-19-2018)
9-8A-7: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The housing inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article.
   B.   The building inspector may refuse to issue any permit required under
this Code for any construction, alteration, installation, demolition or other
work done in or on any rental property, unless the owner or other applicant for
such permit has a current registration statement on file with the housing
inspector.
   C.   The building inspector may refuse to issue any permit required under
this Code for construction, alteration, installation, demolition or other work
done in or on any rental property for which fines pertaining to violations of
the code remain unpaid, until the total amount of such fines, court costs, and
any unpaid accounts or bills for water service or other Village services to
said rental property are paid in full. (Ord. 2018-1561, 6-19-2018)
9-8A-8: ADOPTION OF DIVISION 31.1:
Division 31.1 which allows for the adoption of said division 31.1 and the
establishment of a Code Hearing Department is hereby adopted in its entirety;
provided, however, that despite the provisions of paragraph 11-31.1-1(b) to the
contrary notwithstanding, the building inspector as defined in division 31.1
may within the Village be either a part time or full time employee of the
Village. The housing inspector as defined in section
9-8A-2 of this article shall serve as the building inspector as defined in
division 31.1. The President of the Village may appoint a Hearing Officer to
perform the functions assigned to such Hearing Officer under the provisions of
division 31.1 as deemed necessary by the President to perform the duties
assigned to such Hearing Officer under the provisions of division 31.1 or this
title. The adoption of division 31.1 does not preclude the Village acting
through the housing inspector or otherwise from using other methods to enforce
the provisions of the Housing Codes or any other applicable code of the Village
through any other means including, without limitation, filing complaints
alleging violations of such codes in Peoria County Circuit Court. (Ord. 2018-
1561, 6-19-2018)
9-8A-9: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in this article shall prevent the Village from taking action under the
Housing Codes or any other applicable Village code or ordinance for any
violation thereof or limit the right or authority of the Village to seek
injunctive relief or other appropriate legal remedy for any violation of such
code or ordinance. (Ord. 2018-1561, 6-19-2018)
9-8A-10: FEES:
   A.   The Village shall assess the following fees for registrations and
inspections required by this article:
      1.   Registration Fee: A registration fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per residential rental unit; provided that the registration fee for
multi-unit apartment buildings with more than four (4) residential units in a
single building shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per residential unit.
      2.   Inspection Fee: An inspection fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00)
per residential rental unit.
      3.   Second Re-Inspection Appointment Fee: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per
residential rental unit.
      4.   Penalties And Late Fees For Delinquent Registration Statements And
Inspection Fees: A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount due shall be
imposed for such amount due under the provisions of this article which is not
paid by the due date plus two percent (2%) interest per month thereafter on the
amount of any delinquent payment of any amount due under this article. (Ord.
2018-1561, 6-19-2018)
9-8A-11: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
The general penalties established at subsection
1-4-1A of this Code shall apply to violations of this article. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense for which a separate
penalty may be assessed. (Ord. 2018-1561, 6-19-2018)
ARTICLE B. STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
9-8B-1: Intent And Purpose
9-8B-2: Scope Of Article
9-8B-3: Effect Of Article On Other Regulations
9-8B-4: Right Of Owner To Enter Buildings To Make Repairs
9-8B-5: Definitions
9-8B-6: Dwelling Units
9-8B-7: Water Line Connections
9-8B-8: Rubbish Collection
9-8B-9: Exit Requirements
9-8B-10: Gas-Fired Appliances
9-8B-11: Windows And Openable Space
9-8B-12: Lighting
9-8B-13: Heating
9-8B-14: Screens
9-8B-15: Cooking Equipment
9-8B-16: Habitable Floor Area
9-8B-17: Sleeping Rooms
9-8B-18: Calculation Of Habitable Floor Area
9-8B-19: Basements
9-8B-20: Privacy Of Access To Bathroom And Bedroom
9-8B-21: Cellar Occupancy
9-8B-22: Foundations, Exterior Walls, Roofs
9-8B-23: Floors, Interior Walls, Ceilings
9-8B-24: Windows, Exterior Doors
9-8B-25: Stairways, Porches
9-8B-26: Plumbing Fixtures
9-8B-27: Bathroom Floor Surfaces
9-8B-28: Maintenance Of Required Equipment And Utilities
9-8B-29: Sanitation
9-8B-30: Removal Of Waste Matter
9-8B-31: Extermination
9-8B-32: Utilities
9-8B-33: Transfer Of Responsibility
9-8B-34: Gas Facilities
9-8B-35: Electric Wiring, Facilities
9-8B-36: Entrance - Exit Dwelling Unit
9-8B-37: Garage Requirements, Doors
9-8B-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
Because dwellings which are substandard in one or more important features of
structure, equipment, maintenance or occupancy adversely affect public health
and safety, this article is hereby adopted to provide for the establishment and
enforcement of minimum housing standards and to promote the adequate protection
of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-2: SCOPE OF ARTICLE:
This article is applicable to occupancy for residential purposes of any
building or structure which has been built, altered or converted so as to be
occupied for residential purposes. The requirements imposed by this article
shall be in addition to the other applicable requirements for existing
buildings imposed elsewhere by this Code. No person shall occupy as owner-
occupant or shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit which does not
comply with the minimum standards for basic equipment, facilities, ventilation,
light and heating set forth in this article. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-3: EFFECT OF ARTICLE ON OTHER REGULATIONS:
In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with
any provisions of any zoning, building, fire prevention, property maintenance,
safety or health regulations of this Code, the provisions which establish the
higher standard for the promotion and protection of health and safety shall
prevail. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-4: RIGHT OF OWNER TO ENTER BUILDINGS TO MAKE REPAIRS:
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or
his agent or employee, access to any part of the premises occupied by him, at
all reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as
are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord.
2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article: Whenever the words, "dwelling", "dwelling
unit" or "premises", are used herein, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words "or any part thereof".
   APPROVED: In accordance with this article.
   BASEMENT: A portion (story or level) of a building or structure partly
underground but having less than one-half (1/2) of its clear floor-to-ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
   BUILDING CODE: The Building and Property Maintenance Codes of the Village,
as set forth in title 9 of the Building Code and the health, sanitation and
environmental regulations set forth at title 5 of the Building Code.
   CELLAR: A portion of any dwelling located partly underground but having more
than one-half (1/2) of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
   DWELLING: Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used
for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided, that temporary housing as
hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
   DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places by removing or making inaccessible
materials they may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods
approved by the housing inspector.
   GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   HABITABLE ROOM: An enclosed floor space used or to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes and utility
rooms of less than fifty (50) square feet of floor space, foyers or connecting
corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces and workshops, lobby and
recreation area in unheated or uninsulated parts of structures below ground
level or in attics.
   HOUSING INSPECTOR: The representative of the Village appointed pursuant to
article A of this chapter.
   INFESTATION: The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
   OCCUPANT: Any person including an owner or operator living and sleeping in a
dwelling unit.
   OPENABLE AREA: The part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   OPERATOR: Any person having charge, care, management or control of any
dwelling or part of it in which dwelling units are let.
   OWNER: Includes the owner, his agent for the purpose of managing,
controlling or collecting rents, any other person managing or controlling a
building or premises, and any person entitled to the control or direction of
the management or disposition of a building or premises.
   PLUMBING: Water-heating facilities, water pipes, garbage disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs,
shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents
and other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water or
sewer lines.
   RUBBISH: Any combustible and noncombustible waste material, except garbage;
and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass crockery and dust. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-6: DWELLING UNITS:
Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls:
   A.   Lavatory Facilities: A room, separate from the habitable rooms, which
affords privacy and which is equipped with a flush water closet.
   B.   Basin: A lavatory basin located in the same room as the required flush
water closet.
   C.   Bathtub Or Shower: A room, separate from the habitable rooms, which
affords privacy to a person in the room and which is equipped with a bathtub or
shower.
   D.   Kitchen Sink: A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly
connected to an approved water supply system which provides at all times heated
and unheated running water under pressure and which is connected to an approved
plumbing and sewerage system.
   E.   Cabinets And Shelves: Cabinets and shelves, or both, for the storage of
eating, drinking and cooking equipment and utensils and of food that does not
under ordinary maximum summer temperature require refrigeration for safe
keeping; and a counter or table for food preparation. Cabinets, shelves,
counters and tables shall be adequate for the occupants of the dwelling or
dwelling unit and shall be of sound construction with surfaces that are easily
cleaned and do not impart any toxic or deleterious effect to food.
   F.   Cooking Stove (Range) And Refrigerator: A cooking stove or range for
cooking food, and a refrigerator for the safe storage of food at temperatures
less than forty five degrees Fahrenheit (45°F) but more than thirty two degrees
Fahrenheit (32°F) under ordinary maximum temperatures, installed with all
necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation. A stove or
range and refrigerator need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not
occupied and when the tenant has agreed to provide his own, on occupancy. In
any event, sufficient space and adequate connections for the safe installation
and operation of the stove or range and refrigerator shall be provided by the
owner.
   G.   Exterior Door Locks: Each exterior door of the dwelling or dwelling
unit shall be of approved construction and material and equipped with an
effective locking device. At least one exterior door must be able to be locked
and unlocked from the outside of the dwelling or dwelling unit. (Ord. 2018-
1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-7: WATER LINE CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Every kitchen sink, lavatory, basin and bathtub or shower required
shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines. The hot water
lines shall be connected with supplied water-heating facilities which are
capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount
of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory, basin, and
bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty degrees
Fahrenheit (120°F) even when the heating facilities required are not in
operation.
   B.   All plumbing fixtures required by this section shall be properly
connected to an approved water system and to an approved sewerage system. (Ord.
2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-8: RUBBISH COLLECTION:
Every multi-family dwelling shall have approved common garbage and rubbish
storage and disposal facilities. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-9: EXIT REQUIREMENTS:
Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall have safe unobstructed means of
egress leading to safe and open space at ground level. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-
2018)
9-8B-10: GAS-FIRED APPLIANCES:
All gas-fired heating, cooking and other appliances and gas-fired water heaters
shall conform to the requirements of the Building Code concerning installation,
vents and flues. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-11: WINDOWS AND OPENABLE SPACE:
   A.   Habitable Rooms: Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight which can easily be opened and which faces directly to the outdoors.
The minimum area for such room shall be ten percent (10%) of the floor area.
Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such
room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least fifteen
percent (15%) of total floor area of such room.
   B.   Adequate Ventilation: Every habitable room shall have at least one
window or skylight which can be easily opened, or such other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least forty percent (40%) of the minimum
window area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as required in the
preceding subparagraph, except where there is supplied some other device
affording adequate ventilation and approved by the housing inspector.
   C.   Bathrooms: Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall have at
least one window facing to the outdoors and having a minimum openable area of
ten percent (10%) of the floor area of such room except where there is supplied
some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the housing
inspector.
   D.   Insufficient Air Space: Whenever a window of a room faces a wall or
other portion of any abutting structure which is located less than three feet
(3') from the window and extends to a level above that of the ceiling of the
room, the window shall not be counted in calculating window area or openable
area.
   E.   Gas Burning Water Heater: Every gas burning water heater shall be
vented to a chimney or other venting device leading to outdoor space. No gas
burning water heater shall be located in any bathroom, bedroom or any occupied
room normally kept closed. There shall be installed on all water heaters an
approved combination temperature and pressure relief valve. All water heating
appliances shall be properly installed and maintained according to this Code.
(Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-12: LIGHTING:
   A.   Habitable Room: Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2)
separate floor or wall-type electric convenience outlets or one such
convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling-type electric light fixture. Every
kitchen or kitchen area shall contain at least three (3) separate floor or
wall-type electric convenience outlets, or two (2) such convenience outlets and
one supplied ceiling-type electric light fixture.
   B.   Bathrooms, Utility Rooms: Every water closet compartment, bathroom,
laundry room and furnace room, shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or
wall-type electric light fixture and at least one separate wall-type electric
convenience outlet.
   C.   Hallways: Every hallway in a dwelling shall contain at least one
supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture.
   D.   Hallways And Stairways: Every hallway and stairway in every multi-
family dwelling shall be adequately lighted at all times, except that in a two-
family dwelling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed
by conveniently located light switches shall be permitted instead of a full
time lighting system.
   E.   Standards For Installation: Every outlet and fixture shall be properly
installed and maintained in good and safe working condition. (Ord. 2018-1562,
6-19-2018)
9-8B-13: HEATING:
   A.   Heating Requirements: Every dwelling shall have heating facilities
under the common control of the occupant of such dwelling unit that are capable
of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water
closet compartments within its walls to a temperature of at least seventy
degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) at a distance of eighteen inches (18") above floor
level when the outside temperature is minus eleven degrees Fahrenheit (-11°F).
Such heating facilities must comply with all applicable provisions of the
Building Code.
   B.   Gas Heaters: Portable heating equipment employing a flame and heating
equipment using gasoline or kerosene do not meet the standards of this article
and are prohibited. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-14: SCREENS:
   A.   Every basement or cellar window which is openable shall be supplied
with a heavy wire screen or hardware cloth of not less than four (4) mesh per
inch which fits tightly and is securely fastened to the frame, or with any
other material affording equivalent protection against the entry of rodents.
   B.   From April 15 to November 15 of each year, every door opening directly
from any dwelling unit to the outdoors, and every window or other outside
opening used for ventilation purposes, shall be supplied with a screen of not
less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch and every screen shall have a spring or
other self-closing devise in good working condition. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-
2018)
9-8B-15: COOKING EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Every piece of cooking equipment shall be so constructed and installed
that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in sound
working condition.
   B.   Portable cooking equipment employing flame and cooking equipment using
gasoline or kerosene as fuel for cooking are prohibited. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-
2018)
9-8B-16: HABITABLE FLOOR AREA:
Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet
of habitable floor area for the first occupant, and at least one hundred (100)
square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant.
(Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-17: SLEEPING ROOMS:
In every dwelling unit and in every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one
occupant, the room shall contain at least one hundred ten (110) square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space for each
occupant in addition thereto. Each unit shall also contain at least four (4)
square feet of closet space per occupant of an unobstructed height of at least
five feet (5'). (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-18: CALCULATION OF HABITABLE FLOOR AREA:
Habitable floor area is that area within the perimeter of the space of a
habitable room. The ceiling heights of any habitable room shall be at least
seven feet six inches (7'6"), except that in any habitable room under a sloping
ceiling at least one-half (1/2) of the floor area shall have a ceiling height
of at least seven feet (7'), and floor area of that part of such room where the
ceiling height is less than five feet (5') shall not be considered as part of
the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of
determining the maximum permissible occupancy. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-19: BASEMENTS:
No basement shall be used for living purposes unless:
   A.   The floor and walls are of waterproof construction.
   B.   The total window area, total openable area and ceiling height are in
accordance with sections
9-8B-11 and
9-8B-18 of this article, except when some other devices as approved by the
housing inspector affording adequate ventilation and humidity control are
supplied and which are capable of supplying outside air at a rate of not less
than ten (10) cubic feet per minute per occupant.
   C.   The required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely
above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area, not including
stairwells or access ways. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-20: PRIVACY OF ACCESS TO BATHROOM AND BEDROOM:
No dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have such a
room arrangement that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended
for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by going
through another sleeping room; nor shall a room arrangement be such that access
to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room. A
bathroom or water closet compartment shall not be used as a passageway. (Ord.
2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-21: CELLAR OCCUPANCY:
No space within a dwelling unit which has more than one-half (1/2) of its clear
floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground shall
be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-22: FOUNDATIONS, EXTERIOR WALLS, ROOFS:
Every foundation, exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially
weather tight, watertight and rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition
and repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which
normal use may cause to be placed thereon. (All exterior walls of residentially
zoned buildings not including accessory buildings, shall contain at least 31/
2 inches of insulation. Such insulation shall be made from fiberglass, mineral
wool, plastic foam or cellulose fiber or other suitable material and shall have
a total R [resistance] rating factor of at least 11.) (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-
2018)
9-8B-23: FLOORS, INTERIOR WALLS, CEILINGS:
Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof;
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
(The uppermost interior ceilings of residentially zoned buildings not including
accessory buildings, shall contain at least 6 inches of insulation. Such
insulation shall be made from fiberglass, mineral wool, plastic foam or
cellulose fiber or other suitable material and shall have a total R
[resistance] rating factor of at least 19.) (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-24: WINDOWS, EXTERIOR DOORS:
Every window, exterior door and basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be
substantially watertight and rodent proof; and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-25: STAIRWAYS, PORCHES:
Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be
safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be
placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. (Ord.
2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-26: PLUMBING FIXTURES:
Every plumbing fixture shall be properly installed and maintained in sound
mechanical condition free from defects, leaks and obstructions and in
accordance with the Building Code. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-27: BATHROOM FLOOR SURFACES:
Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall
be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and
so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-28: MAINTENANCE OF REQUIRED EQUIPMENT AND UTILITIES:
Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility, which is required, and
every chimney and smokepipe shall be so constructed and installed that it will
function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in sound working
condition. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-29: SANITATION:
   A.   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean
and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling or dwelling unit and yard
which he occupies and controls; and shall be responsible for his own misuse of
areas and facilities available in common.
   B.   Every owner or operator of a two-family dwelling, multi-family dwelling
or rooming house shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and yard.
   C.   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied facilities,
including plumbing fixtures and cooking equipment, in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their
proper use and operation.
   D.   Every floor and floor covering shall be kept reasonably clean and not
littered or covered with dirt, dust, garbage, human or animal fecal matter or
any other unsanitary thing.
   E.   Every wall and ceiling shall be reasonably clean and not littered or
covered with dust, dirt, cobwebs or greasy film.
   F.   No stagnant water shall be allowed to accumulate or stand anywhere
about the premises. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-30: REMOVAL OF WASTE MATTER:
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all rubbish, ashes, garbage
and other organic waste in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
approved storage or disposal facilities which are safe and sanitary. Every
occupant shall provide such facilities for and within his dwelling unit and
shall maintain them in a clean and sanitary manner. The owner or operator of a
multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for the clean and sanitary
maintenance of common storage or disposal facilities. He shall be responsible
further for placing out for collection all common garbage and rubbish
containers except where such facilities are for the sole use of an occupant,
under which circumstances it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to
place these containers out for collection. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner to supply such facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a
dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units for all dwelling units
located on premises where more than two (2) dwelling units share the same
premises. In all other cases it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to
furnish such facilities or containers. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-31: EXTERMINATION:
   A.   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests in it. In a two-family
dwelling or a multi-family dwelling the occupant shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. When,
however, infestation is caused by failure of the owner or operator to maintain
a dwelling in a rodent-proof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner or operator.
   B.   Every owner or operator shall be responsible for extermination of any
insects, rodents or other pests whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more
of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public areas of any
two-family dwelling or any multi-family dwelling. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-32: UTILITIES:
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service equipment or utility
which is required by this article to be removed, shut off or discontinued for
any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him, except for such temporary
interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in
process, or during temporary emergencies. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-33: TRANSFER OF RESPONSIBILITY:
A contract effective as between owner or operator, operator and occupant or
owner and occupant, with regard to compliance hereunder shall not relieve any
part of their respective responsibilities under this article. (Ord. 2018-1562,
6-19-2018)
9-8B-34: GAS FACILITIES:
   A.   All gas-burning hot water heaters and space heaters shall be properly
vented to a chimney or gas vent leading to outdoor space as provided in the
Building Code.
   B.   Every gas pipe shall be sound and tightly put together, with no leaks.
   C.   No gas pipe shall be corroded or obstructed so as to reduce gas
pressure or volume.
   D.   Every gas appliance shall be connected to a gas line with solid metal
piping.
   E.   Gas pressure shall be adequate to permit a proper flow of gas from all
open gas valves at all times. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-35: ELECTRIC WIRING, FACILITIES:
All electrical wiring and facilities shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the Building Code. (Ord. 2018-1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-36: ENTRANCE - EXIT DWELLING UNIT:
Entrance to and exit from each dwelling unit shall be provided without
necessity of passing through any other dwelling or dwelling unit. (Ord. 2018-
1562, 6-19-2018)
9-8B-37: GARAGE REQUIREMENTS, DOORS:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this section, a garage is defined as an
accessory structure primarily used for storage or parking of motor vehicles,
consisting of four walls and a roof and built on a permanent foundation.
   B.   Door Required: All garages, whether attached or detached to a
residential dwelling, shall have a retractable, overhead door. (Ord. 2021-1646,
2-16-2021)
CHAPTER 9
TRI-COUNTY MULTI-JURISDICTIONAL NATURAL HAZARDS MITIGATION PLAN
SECTION:
9-9-1: Adoption
9-9-1: ADOPTION:
   A.   The village adopts the updated Tri-County Multi-Jurisdictional Natural
Hazards Mitigation Plan as the official hazard mitigation plan of the village;
and
   B.   Agrees to participate in the annual and five (5)-year updates to this
updated plan. (Res. 2019-11, 12-17-2019)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
Title; Purpose; Interpretation   1
Rules And Definitions   2
Administration And Enforcement   3
Zoning Board Of Appeals   3A
General Zoning Regulations   4
Zoning Districts And Map   5
C Conservation District   6
Residential Districts   7
R-1 Low Density Residential District   7A
R-2 Medium Density Residential District   7B
R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District   7C
R-P Planned Residential District   7D
Business And Industrial Districts   8
B-1 Central Business District   8A
B-2 General Retail Business District   8B
B-3 Service Business District   8C
B-4 Low Impact Industrial District   8D
I-1 Industrial District   8E
Off Street Parking And Loading   9
Nonconformities   10
Overlay Zoning Districts   11
Downtown Overlay District   11A
Solar Energy Systems   12
Recreational Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments   13
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Application And Interpretation Of Provisions
10-1-4: Compliance With Provisions
10-1-5: Exemptions From Provisions
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the PEORIA HEIGHTS ZONING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
The zoning regulations and standards herein adopted and established have been
made for the purpose of:
   A.   Securing adequate light, pure air and safety from fire and other
dangers;
   B.   Conserving the value of land, buildings and structures throughout the
village;
   C.   Lessening and avoiding congestion in the public streets;
   D.   Lessening and avoiding hazards to persons and damage to property
resulting from the accumulation or runoff of stormwater or floodwater;
   E.   Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general
welfare;
   F.   Regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings and structures
hereafter to be erected;
   G.   Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines on
or along any street, trafficway, drive, parkway or stormwater or floodwater
runoff channel or basin;
   H.   Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas, and
regulating and determining the area of open spaces within and surrounding
buildings and structures;
   I.   Classifying, regulating, and restricting the location of trades and
industries and the location of buildings, structures, and land designed for
specified industrial, commercial, residential and other uses;
   J.   Dividing the entire village into districts of such number, shape, area
and such different classes according to the use of land, buildings and
structures, intensity of the use of lot area, areas of open space and other
classifications as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this
title;
   K.   Fixing regulations and standards to which buildings, structures, or
uses therein shall conform;
   L.   Prohibiting uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the
character of such districts; and
   M.   Preventing additions to the alteration or remodeling of existing
buildings, structures or uses in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed under this title. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970; amd. 2016
Code)
10-1-3: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall
be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety,
health, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare.
   B.   It is not intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul
any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided,
however, that where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon height of buildings, or requires larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, or regulations
or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall
govern.
   C.   The performance standards, regulations and standards, rules,
requirements, provisions, and restrictions set by this title shall apply to all
structures, uses, lots, and tracts of land created or established after the
effective date hereof and shall not be deemed to require any change in the
structures, uses, lots and/or tracts of land lawfully existing on said
effective date except as expressly specified in this title. (Ord. 740, 4-7-
1970)
   D.   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date
hereof and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried
on. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to include the placing of
construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner
or demolition, elimination, or removal of an existing structure in connection
with such construction; provided, that actual construction work shall be
diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. (Ord. 2013-
1393, 10-8-2013)
   E.   Should any section, clause or provision of this title be declared by
the court to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this title
as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
(Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-1-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   No structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered,
remodeled, extended, or moved unless in conformity with all the regulations and
standards herein specified for the district in which it shall be located.
   B.   No structure shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered,
remodeled, extended, or moved:
      1.   To exceed the height;
      2.   To occupy or house a greater number of families;
      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of the lot area;
      4.   To exceed the floor area ratio;
      5.   To have smaller or less habitable floor area per dwelling unit or
lodging unit; or
      6.   To exceed the maximum floor area;
than herein required or in any manner contrary to regulations and standards of
the district in which it is located. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-1-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The following structures and uses are exempted from the application of the
district regulations and standards and are permitted in any district: poles,
towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves, or any
similar distributing equipment for telephone or other communications, and
electric power, gas, water and sewer lines; provided, that the installation
shall conform, where applicable, with the rules and regulations of the Illinois
commerce commission, the civil aeronautics administration, and other public
authorities having jurisdiction. A zoning permit shall be obtained for any
aboveground electric substation or switching station, gas regulator station,
water pump station, telephone exchange or similar utility structure. (Ord. 740,
4-7-1970)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: General Definitions
10-2-1: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose
of this title, have the meanings herein indicated. Any pertinent word or term
not a part of this listing but vital to the interpretation of this title shall
be construed to have its usual legal definition.
The present tense includes the future tense.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and vice versa.
The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is always permissive.
The word "person" includes a partnership, association, firm, trust, club,
company or corporation, as well as the individual.
The word "used" or "occupied" or "located", as applied to any land, building,
use, structure or premises, shall be construed to include the words "intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied or located".
The word "lot" shall include the words "plot" and "parcel".
The word "village" shall mean the village of Peoria Heights, Illinois.
The word "board" shall mean the zoning board of appeals of the village.
The words "planning commission" shall mean the planning commission of the
village.
The word "engineer" shall mean the person or firm retained as engineer by the
village.
The words "governing body" shall mean the board of trustees of the village.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure, the size of which exceeds twenty five (25)
square feet, on the same lot with the main or principal structure or the main
or principal use and subordinate to and used for purposes customarily
incidental to the main or principal use. The accessory structure may or may not
be permanently affixed to the surface of the ground and shall include other
things, gazebos, buildings, walls, fences, billboards, swimming pools and
signs.
   ACCESSORY USE: A use on the same lot with, incidental and subordinate to the
main or principal use or the main or principal structure.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A. A commercial
establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade, or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues, or
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space
to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the
following:
      1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or
marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use by or abuse of persons.
   B.   The term adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store
shall also include a commercial establishment which regularly maintains one or
more adult arcades. "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin operated or slug operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image producing devices are regularly maintained to show
images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
matter exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, dance hall, bar, restaurant, or similar
commercial establishment that regularly features:
   A.   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
   B.   Live performances that are characterized by the display of specified
sexual activities; or
   C.   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by the display of specified sexual
activities or nudity or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building, with a capacity for
less than fifty (50) persons, used regularly and routinely for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter displaying
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by
patrons therein.
   ADULT MODEL STUDIO: A place where persons who regularly appear in a state of
nudity or seminudity are provided for money or any form of consideration to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons. It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of
this title that a person appearing in a state of nudity or seminudity did so in
a modeling class operated:
   A.   By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
   B.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
   C.   In a structure:
      1.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a seminude person is available for viewing;
and
      2.   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three (3) days in advance of the class.
   ADULT MOTEL: A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which:
   A.   Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and which
regularly provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which regularly
advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from
the public right of way or by means of any off premises advertising including,
but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or
television; and
   B.   Regularly offers sleeping rooms for rent for a period of time less than
ten (10) hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building, with a capacity of fifty
(50) or more persons, used regularly and routinely for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter displaying specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as a dominant theme for
observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT USE: The following shall be considered sexually oriented adult uses
for the purpose of this title: a) adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or
adult video store; b) adult cabaret; c) adult motel; d) adult mini-motion
picture theater; e) adult motion picture theater; and f) adult model studio.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: An adult-use cannabis cultivation
center, adult-use cannabis craft grower, adult-use cannabis processing
organization, adult-use cannabis infuser organization, adult-use cannabis
dispensing organization, or adult-use cannabis transporting organization.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure, and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport, and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-
1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia, or related
supplies to purchases or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et
seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION or INFUSER: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis- infused product pursuant to the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION or PROCESSOR: A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product pursuant to the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be amended from
time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION or TRANSPORTER: An organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410
ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   ALLEY: A permanent service right of way which affords only a secondary means
of access to property abutting such right of way and is not intended for
general traffic circulation.
   AREA, BUILDING: The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the largest
floor level of the main or principal building and all accessory buildings on
the same lot exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, steps, awnings, marquees
and nonpermanent canopies and planters.
   AREA, FLOOR: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several stories of
a building excluding cellar and basement floor areas not devoted to residential
use, but including the area of walled in and roofed porches and terraces. All
dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
   AREA, FLOOR, HABITABLE: The sum of the horizontal areas of all rooms in a
building used for habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen,
bedroom, bathroom or closet, but not including hallways, stairways, service
rooms or utility rooms, not unheated rooms such as enclosed porches, and not
rooms without at least one window or skylight opening onto a yard or court,
measured between the interior faces of walls.
   AREA, LOT: The total area within the lot lines.
   AUTOMOTIVE PARTS RECYCLER: A person who is in the business of acquiring
previously owned vehicles and vehicle parts for the primary purpose of
disposing of parts of vehicles in a manner other than that described in the
definition of a “scrap processor” in this Code or disposing of previously owned
vehicles in the manner described in the definition of a “scrap processor” in
this Code.
   AUTOMOTIVE USES: All uses involving the maintenance, repair, sale or
processing of vehicles including, without limitation, junkyards and the
activities of automotive parts recyclers, rebuilders, scrap processors and
vehicle dealers.
   BASEMENT: A story having part, but not more than one-half (1/2), its height
below grade.
   BLOCK FACE: Property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the
two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or between the nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right of way, waterway,
unsubdivided area or other definite boundary.
   BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling containing at least three (3) dwelling units or
lodging units in whatever combination. Meals are provided within such boarding
house to the residents of the lodging units.
   BUILDING: An enclosed structure having a roof supported by columns, walls,
arches, or other devices and used for the housing, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or chattels.
   BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL: The building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which it is located.
   CELLAR: A story having less than one-half (1/2) of its height above grade.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A drug, substance, or immediate precursor listed in
schedule II of the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 570/206.
   COURT: An open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building,
which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by, but is not enclosed by, the walls
of such building.
   COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.
   CRTA: The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CURB LEVEL: The average elevation of the established curb of a street taken
along the curb line between the points of intersection of the curb line and the
lot lines. Where no curb has been established, the "curb level" shall be the
average elevation of the land surface taken along the street right-of- way line
between the points of intersection of the right-of- way line and the lot lines.
   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON: The dominant or
principal theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the
phrase refers to materials "which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas", the materials so described are those whose
dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or description of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
   DRUG TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION FACILITY: A building designed for medical
treatment of the abuse of, or the psychological or physiological dependence on,
alcohol or controlled substances during normal business hours and with no
overnight services or care. Drug treatment and rehabilitation facilities shall
not be considered professional offices, business offices, laboratories for
research and testing, offices, health centers, medical clinics, retail
businesses, offices of doctors or practitioners in healing arts or medical
offices for purposes of this title.
   DWELLING: A building designed for residential living purposes and containing
one or more dwelling units and/or lodging units.
   DWELLING, GROUP: A group of two (2) or more single-family, two-family, or
multi-family dwellings in whatever combination, occupying a lot or lots in one
ownership.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling
units.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units with one
dwelling unit arranged on the story or stories above the other dwelling unit.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling
which are used exclusively as living quarters for one family and not more than
two (2) roomers or boarders, and which contain a stove, sink and other kitchen
facilities.
   EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE AND EMPLOYMENT: Describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of an adult use, on a full time, part
time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. "Employee" does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or
for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   FAMILY:
   A.   An individual; or
   B.   Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; or
   C.   A maximum of five (5) persons not so related, together with their
domestic servants and gratuitous guests maintaining common household in a
dwelling unit or lodging unit.
   FIREARMS RELATED FACILITY: Any commercial facility involving the purchase,
sale, repair or discharge of firearms. Examples of such facilities include,
without limitation, a business which includes as part of its operation the
purchase or sale of firearms at wholesale or retail, a facility engaged in the
business of repairing firearms and any shooting gallery or gun range, whether
indoors or outdoors, where firearms are discharged.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building in which, for compensation, one or more vehicles
are parked.
   GRADE: The average of the elevation of the surface of the ground measured at
all corners of a building.
   HEIGHT: The vertical measurement from grade to a point midway between the
highest and lowest points of the roof of a building or the vertical measurement
from the average level of the surface of the ground immediately surrounding a
structure to the uppermost portion of such structure.
   HOME OCCUPATION:
   A.   An accessory use of a service character, customarily conducted within a
dwelling, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for living purposes and does not change the character thereof or have any
exterior evidence of such secondary use other than a sign.
   B.   The occupation must conform to the following additional conditions:
      1.   It must be carried on solely by the members of the family who are
residing on the premises.
      2.   The total floor area devoted to such use shall not exceed twenty
five percent (25%) of the area of one floor of the dwelling, shall be located
only in the dwelling and shall not be located in any structure accessory
thereto nor in the open.
      3.   No article shall be sold or offered for sale except such as may be
produced on the premises.
      4.   No mechanical equipment shall be used except of a type that is
similar in character to that normally used for purely domestic or household
purposes.
   C.   The term home occupation shall not include dancing instruction, group
musical instruction, tearooms, tourist homes, beauty shops, real estate
offices, insurance offices, investment offices, the repair or servicing of
automotive vehicles or the conduct of any other trade or business not herein
excepted.
   HOTEL: A building containing separate accommodations for use by primarily
transient persons. A hotel may contain restaurants, barbershops and other
accessory services for serving primarily its residents and only incidentally
the public.
   JUNKYARD: A lot, land, building or structure, or part thereof, used
primarily for the collecting, storage and/or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap
metal or discarded materials or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and
salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of
parts therefrom.
   KENNEL: The keeping or housing of three (3) or more dogs six (6) months old
or older, either as an accessory use or a principal use. Any kennel shall be
within a completely enclosed building, or if outdoor runs are provided, they
shall be completely enclosed by a woven wire fencing, solid fence or wall. A
kennel or any part thereof shall not be located in any front or side yard and
not within five feet (5') of any side or rear lot line in a rear yard.
   LODGING HOUSE: A dwelling containing at least three (3) dwelling units or
lodging units in whatever combination. Meals are not provided within such
lodging house to the residents of the lodging units.
   LODGING UNIT: One or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling which
are used exclusively as living quarters for one family and do not contain
cooking facilities.
   LOT: When used alone, shall mean a zoning lot unless the context of this
title clearly indicates otherwise.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot located:
   A.   At the junction of and abutting two (2) or more intersecting streets;
or
   B.   At the junction of and abutting a street and the nearest shoreline or
high water line of a stormwater or floodwater runoff channel or basin; or
   C.   At the junction of an abutting two (2) or more stormwater or floodwater
runoff channels or basins; or
   D.   At and abutting the point of abrupt change of a single street where the
interior angle is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°) and the
radius of the street is less than one hundred feet (100').
   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot.
   MASSAGE OR MASSAGE THERAPY: The structured palpation or movement of the soft
tissue of the body. The system may include, but is not limited to, techniques
such as effleurage or stroking and gliding, petrissage or kneading, tapotement
or percussion, friction, vibration, compression, and stretching activities as
they pertain to massage therapy. These techniques may be applied with or
without the aid of lubricants, salt or herbal preparations, hydromassage,
thermal massage, or a massage device that mimics or enhances the actions
possible by human hands. Massage or massage therapy includes Asian bodywork as
practiced by members of the American Organization of Bodywork Therapies of Asia
or any other similar organization approving the practice of Asian bodywork.
Massage or massage therapy does not include the aforementioned practices when
engaged in by persons licensed by the State of Illinois as physicians,
podiatric physicians, physical therapists, nurses, occupational therapists,
massage therapists, cosmetologists or estheticians when performed in a manner
consistent with the training and code of ethics of the licensed professionals.
   MASTER PLAN: The complete plan or any of its parts for the development of
the Village and adopted by the Governing Body as the official plan.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is registered by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
perform necessary activities to provide only medical cannabis dispensing
organizations with usable medical cannabis.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a
cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients.
   MOTEL: A building or group of buildings, whether detached, semidetached or
attached, containing accommodations for primarily transient automobile
travelers. Except as otherwise provided in chapter 8, article E of this title
regarding adult motels, the term motel includes such buildings designated as
tourist courts, tourist cabins, motor lodges and other similar terms.
   NONCONFORMING LOT, STRUCTURE OR USE: A lot, sign, structure or use which
does not conform to the regulations and standards of the district in which it
is located. An existing use which under current provisions of this Title would
constitute a special use, which existing use was established without approval
as a special use by the Village Board, is a nonconforming use.
   NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque
covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any part of the nipple and areola.
   NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: A building containing sleeping rooms where
persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals and nursing care for
hire, but not including drug treatment and rehabilitation facilities as defined
herein.
   OPEN SPACE: That area within the boundaries of a lot that is intended to
provide light and air, and is designed for either scenic or recreational
purposes. Open space may include, but need not be limited to, lawns, decorative
plantings, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, children's
playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, wooded areas, water bodies and those
areas where landscaping and screening are required by the provisions of this
title.
   OPERATE OR CAUSE TO BE OPERATED; OPERATOR: To cause to function or to put or
keep in a state of doing business. "Operator" means any persons on the premises
of an adult use who is authorized to exercise overall operational control of
the business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the
business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated an
adult use whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of
the business.
   PARKING LOT: A lot, court, yard or portion thereof used for the parking of
vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE: A space accessory to a use or structure for the parking of
one vehicle, the size of which shall be determined as herein specified.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land which is developed as a unit under
single ownership or control, which includes two (2) or more main or principal
structures and is identified to its main or principal use by its functional
definition prefix, as dwelling group.
   REBUILDER: A person who is in the business of returning a vehicle for which
a salvage certificate has been previously issued back to its original or
operating condition.
   REGULARLY FEATURES OR REGULARLY SHOWN OR REGULARLY PRESENTED: A consistent
or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part
of the ongoing business of the adult use.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The entire dedicated tract or strip of land that is to be used
by the public for circulation and service.
   RINGELMANN CHART: A smoke chart giving shades of gray to which the density
of columns of smoke rising from stacks may be compared. Each such shade of gray
is categorized according to a Ringelmann number.
   SCRAP PROCESSOR: A person who purchases a vehicle, junk vehicle, or vehicle
cowl for processing into a form other than a vehicle, junk vehicle, or vehicle
cowl for remelting purposes only, who from a fixed location utilizes machinery
and equipment for processing or manufacturing ferrous or nonferrous metallic
scrap into prepared grades, and whose principal product is metallic scrap and
who records the purchases on a weight ticket.
   SCREEN PLANTING: A vegetative material of sufficient height and density to
filter adequately from view, in adjoining districts, structures and uses on the
premises upon which the screen planting is located.
   SEMINUDE OR STATE OF SEMINUDITY: The exposure of a bare male or female
buttocks or the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the
areola at its highest point with less than a complete and opaque covering.
   SETBACK LINE: The building restriction line nearest the front of and across
a lot establishing the minimum distance to be provided between the line of a
structure located on said lot and the nearest street right of way line or
centerline or the nearest shoreline or high water line of a stormwater or
floodwater runoff channel or basin.
   SMOKE UNIT: The emission of smoke of a density of Ringelmann number 1 for a
period of one minute.
   SPECIAL USE: A use permitted in a district pursuant to, and in compliance
with, procedures specified herein.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following conditions:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
      1.   Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;
      2.   Buttock;
      3.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following conditions:
   A.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   B.   Acts or representations of acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation.
   C.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set
forth in subsections A and B of this definition.
   STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above, then
the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
   STREET: A thoroughfare within the right of way which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property. A street may be designated as an avenue
or a boulevard, drive, highway, lane, parkway, place, road, thoroughfare or
other appropriate name.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
surface of the ground or affixed to something having a fixed location on the
surface of the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, walls,
fences, billboards, swimming pools and signs. For purposes of calculating
placement of fences under this title, the front wall or front line of the
principal structure shall be used as the starting point to measure, and the
structure shall not include the area attributable to a deck, porch or other
abutment regardless of whether the extension is finished or used as living
space.
   STRUCTURE, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL: The structure in or upon which is conducted
the main or principal use of the lot on which it is located.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or addition of or to a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds ten percent (10%) of the market
value of the structure before the improvement is started. The term should not,
however, include such actions taken to comply with existing state or local
codes or ordinances or alterations to a structure listed on the national
register of historic places or the state inventory of historic places.
   TOURIST HOME: A dwelling containing the dwelling unit of the owner or
operator and containing separate accommodations primarily for transient
automobile travelers.
   TRAILER CAMP OR MOBILE HOME PARK: A tract of land meeting the standards
established by the county health authorities and by the Illinois state
department of public health:
   A.   Where two (2) or more inhabited trailer coaches are parked; or
   B.   Which is used by the public as parking space for two (2) or more
inhabited trailer coaches.
   TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME: Any portable or mobile vehicle used for
residential living purposes by a family. For the purpose of this title, such
vehicle shall be classified as a trailer coach whether or not its wheels,
rollers, skids or other rolling equipment have been removed, or whether or not
any addition thereto has been built on the ground.
   USE: The specific purpose for which land, a structure or premises is
designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
   VEHICLE: Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway or requiring a certificate of title
under the Illinois Vehicle Code, except devices moved by human power, devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and snowmobiles as defined in
the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act.
   VEHICLE DEALER: Every person engaged in the business of acquiring or
disposing of vehicles or their essential parts and who has an established place
of business for such purposes.
   VIEWING ROOM BOOTH OR CUBICLE: An area designed for the viewing of videos,
books or other visual materials characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, which area is less than eighty
(80) square feet of floor area. Video room booth or cubicle does not include
the theater area of an adult motion picture theater or an adult mini-motion
picture theater that has a capacity of at least ten (10) people.
   YARD: An open space, other than a court, of uniform width or depth on the
same lot with a structure lying between the structure and the nearest lot line
and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the surface of the ground upward,
except as may be specifically provided by the regulations and standards of this
title. For purposes of calculating placement of fences in front, rear and side
yards under this title, the nearest line of a structure located on a lot shall
be the front wall or front line of the main dwelling structure where the
enclosed living space begins, and shall not include the area attributable to a
deck, porch or other abutment regardless of whether the extension is finished
or used as living space.
   YARD, FRONT: A yard extending the full width of a lot and situated between
the front lot line and the nearest line of a structure located on said lot.
Where a lot is located such that its rear and front lot lines each abut a
street right of way line or the nearest shoreline or high water line of a
stormwater or floodwater runoff channel or basin, both such yards shall be
classified as front yards. Each yard of a corner lot facing a street right-of-
way line or the shoreline or high water line of a stormwater or floodwater
runoff channel or basin shall be classified as a front yard.
   YARD, REAR: A yard extending the full width of a lot and situated between
the rear lot line and the nearest line of a structure located on said lot.
   YARD, SIDE: A yard situated between the side lot line and the nearest line
of a structure located on said lot and extending from the rear line of the
required front yard to the front line of the required rear yard.
   ZONING LOT: A single property, parcel, unit, tract, plot or otherwise
designated portion of land, having metes and bounds, which is designated by its
owner or developer as a property, parcel, unit, tract, plot or otherwise
designated portion of land which has been sold, or is offered, or will be
offered for sale, and is to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under
single ownership or control, and which is occupied or capable of being occupied
by one or more structures and the accessory structures or uses customarily
incidental thereto, including such open spaces as are arranged and designed to
be used in connection with such structure. A zoning lot may or may not coincide
with a lot of record. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970; amd. Ord. 1010, 12-3-1985; Ord.
2008-1301, 9-2-2008; Ord. 2008-1302, 9-2-2008; Ord. 2013-1397, 12-17-2013; Ord.
2014-1410, 9-16-2014; 2016 Code; Ord. 2017-1516, 9-5-2017; Ord. 2018-1549, 3-
20-2018; Ord. 2019-1608, 12-17-2019; Ord. 2022-1679, 6-7-2022; Ord. 2022-1688,
11-1-2022)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-3-1: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-3-2: Plat Required
10-3-3: Amendments
10-3-4: Special Use And Site Plan Procedures
10-3-5: Penalties
10-3-1: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   No vacant land shall be occupied or used, and no building hereafter
erected or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, nor shall any home
occupation be established until a certificate of occupancy shall have been
issued by the building inspector.
   B.   A certificate of occupancy for a new building or the alteration of an
existing building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
building permit, and said certificate shall be issued within three (3) days
after the requests for same shall have been made, in writing, to the building
inspector after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof
shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this title.
   C.   Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate
of occupancy may be issued by the building inspector for a period not exceeding
six (6) months, during the completion of alterations or during partial
occupancy of a building, pending its completion. Such temporary certificate
shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties and
obligations of the owners or of the Village relating to the use or occupancy of
the premises or any other matter covered by this title, and such temporary
certificate shall not be issued, except under such restrictions and provisions
as will adequately ensure the safety of the occupants.
   D.   A certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land or the change in
the character of the use of land as herein provided shall be applied for before
any such land shall be occupied or used, and a certificate of occupancy shall
be issued within three (3) days after the application has been made; provided,
that such use is in conformity with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 740, 4-
7-1970)
   E.   A certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed
use of a building or land complies with all building and health laws and
ordinances and with the provisions of this title. A record of all certificates
shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector, and copies shall
be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest
in the building affected. No fee shall be charged for a certificate of
occupancy, except, that a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged in the
case of a home occupation certificate. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970; amd. 2016 Code)
   F.   No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before
application has been made for certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-3-2: PLAT REQUIRED:
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a drawing or
plat, in duplicate, showing the lot plan, the location of the building and lot
and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement
of this title. The plat shall be prepared after the lot has been staked by a
competent surveyor, and the plat shall show the date of staking and the name of
the engineer or surveyor. A careful record of the original copy of such
applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the building inspector,
and a duplicate copy shall be kept at the building at all times during the
construction. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-3-3: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Generally: The Village President and Board of Trustees may, from time
to time on its own motion, or on petition or on recommendation of the Village
Zoning Board of Appeals, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations and
provisions of this title, but no such amendments or changes shall be made
without a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided by law. In
case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or
districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of
the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the
owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage
proposed to be altered, as to such regulations or district, filed with the
Village Clerk, such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote
of two-thirds (2/3) of all the Village Board.
   B.   Rezones:
      1.   Every petition initiated by interested property owners, or
authorized agents of such property owners, for the rezoning of any property to
a more restricted or less restricted classification shall be directed to the
Village Zoning Board of Appeals in the first instance. In such cases, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be required to take action for the conduct of
a hearing on such petition. If the Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine not
to take action for the conduct of a hearing on such petition, the said Board of
Appeals shall report such action to the Village Board of Trustees at the next
regular meeting of said Board of Trustees held after the time that the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall determine not to conduct a hearing on said petition. The
Village Board of Trustees, upon receiving such report, may direct said Zoning
Board of Appeals to conduct a hearing on said petition, and in such event, such
hearing shall be held by said Board of Appeals.
      2.   Whenever the owners of three hundred feet (300') or more of the
street frontage in any block shall present to the Village Zoning Board of
Appeals a petition requesting the rezoning of any property to a more restricted
or less restricted classification, it shall be the duty of the Village Board of
Appeals to conduct a hearing on such petition.
      3.   Before the Village Zoning Board of Appeals shall take any action for
the conduct of a hearing on any petition for rezoning any property, the party
or parties petitioning for such change shall deposit the sum of thirty five
dollars ($35.00) to cover the approximate cost of this procedure, and under no
condition shall said sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of said
amendment to be enacted into law. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-3-4: SPECIAL USE AND SITE PLAN PROCEDURES:
   A.   Initiation Of Special Use And/Or Request For Site Plan Approval: Any
person, firm, corporation, office, department or other legal entity having an
interest in land, or a possessory interest, option to purchase or a contractual
interest which may become a freehold interest or an exclusive possessory
interest, and which is specifically enforceable, may file an application, with
the consent of the property owner, to use such land for one or more of the
special uses as required and/or authorized by this Code, as amended. Any person
seeking approval of a site plan where such approval is required by this title
shall file an application for such approval in the manner set forth in this
section.
   B.   Application For Special Use And/Or Site Plan:
      1.   Duplicate applications for a special use or site plan approval shall
be filed with the Village Administrator. The applications shall be accompanied
by such plans and/or data prescribed by the Zoning Board of Appeals, including,
but not limited to, a detailed site plan, conceptual rendering and elevations.
A site plan shall contain as a minimum, the following:
         a.   Points of ingress and egress for the proposed development.
         b.   Parking plan illustrating internal circulation for the proposed
development.
         c.   Sign plan for all activity.
         d.   Landscaping, screening and buffering plans illustrating specific
treatment for screening adjacent residential areas from undesirable impacts
from the activity on the proposed site.
         e.   Exterior lighting plan illustrating the location of all
illuminating fixtures except when waived by the Village Administrator.
         f.   Estimated traffic generation of the proposed development except
when waived by the Village Administrator.
         g.   Illustration of any special treatment of the proposed site that
enhances the quality of design except when waived by the Village Administrator.
         h.   Boundary lines - bearings, distances and acreage.
         i.   Easements - locations, width and purpose.
         j.   Streets on or adjacent to the tract - street name, right- of-way
width, existing or proposed centerline elevations, pavement types, walks,
curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
         k.   Open space. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for
public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose
indicated except when waived by the Village Administrator.
         l.   Map data - name or development, north point, scale and date of
preparation.
         m.   An accurate legal description of the subject property.
         n.   Designation of proposed use of the property, the location of all
buildings to be constructed, and a designation or the specific internal uses to
which each building shall be put.
         o.   Elevations including a rendering of street facing facades. The
applicant shall provide a description of the color scheme and materials
proposed to be incorporated into street facing facades.
      2.   After the Village Administrator certifies the duplicate applications
to be complete, one copy of the application shall be forwarded to the Chair of
the Zoning Board of Appeals for public hearing and their written recommendation
to the Village Board of Trustees.
   C.   Hearing On Application For Special Use Or Site Plan: The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on each application for a special use or
site plan at such time and place as shall be established by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Such hearing shall be scheduled within a reasonable time after
submission of a complete application for a special use or site plan to the
Village Administrator. The public hearing shall be conducted and a written
record of the proceedings shall be preserved.
   D.   Hearing Notice For Special Use Or Site Plan: Not less than fifteen (15)
days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to a public hearing for special use
or site plan, notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be
advertised by:
      1.   Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation
within the Village;
      2.   If required, mailing notices of the hearing by the Village to
assessees, per department procedures, of the subject property and all property
within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property line of the subject
property; and
      3.   The posting of the official notice of public hearing sign by the
petitioner, per department procedures, on the subject property. The
unauthorized removal of the official notice of public hearing sign shall be
deemed a violation of this section.
   E.   Standards For Special Use Or Site Plan Hearing:
      1.   No special use or site plan shall be recommended by the Zoning Board
of Appeals unless it shall find that:
         a.   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use
or site plan will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, or general welfare;
         b.   The special use or site plan will not be injurious to the uses
and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within
the neighborhood in which it is to be located;
         c.   The establishment of the special use or site plan will not impede
the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property
for uses permitted in the district;
         d.   Adequate facilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or will be provided;
         e.   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
         f.   If a public use or a use providing public utility service, that
such use of service shall meet a demonstrable public need and provide a public
benefit; and
         g.   The special use or site plan shall, in all other respects,
conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located,
except as such regulations may, in each instance, be modified pursuant to the
recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      2.   The Zoning Board of Appeals may, in addition to recommending denial
or approval, make recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees of such
conditions and restrictions on the establishment, location, construction,
maintenance and operations of any requested special use or site plan as it
deems necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure
compliance with the standards specified in this subsection and as provided in
this section.
      3.   In all cases in which the recommendations of the Zoning Board of
Appeals are to grant a requested special use or site plan, or deny the special
use request or site plan, or make the site plan or special use subject to
conditions imposed, the Village Board of Trustees may require additional data
and guarantees from the applicant that the Village Board of Trustees deems
necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection with the
special use or site plan being approved will be fully complied with by the
applicant.
   F.   Zoning Board Of Appeals Findings Regarding Special Use And Site Plan
Applications: For each application for a special use or site plan, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall, within ten (10) days of the conclusion of the public
hearing on the application, render its written recommendation and shall file
its recommendation with the Village Administrator and mail a copy to the
applicant, together with findings of fact relating to the standards. In making
its recommendation, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep a written record of
findings relative to the standards for considering special use and site plan
applications as listed in subsection E of this section.
   G.   Objections To Zoning Board Of Appeals Recommendations:
      1.   Any applicant or Village resident may file an objection to the
recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals with the Village Administrator
within ten (10) days of the filing of the Zoning Board of Appeals'
recommendations with the Village Administrator. Three (3) copies of the
objections must be filed with the Village Administrator.
      2.   The objections will be reviewed by the President and Board of
Trustees at a public review meeting to be held one hour before the next duly
scheduled Board of Trustees meeting at the Village Hall. At that time and
place, the objecting party may present objections before the President and the
Board of Trustees. After the hearing on the objections, the Village Board of
Trustees may take the appropriate action to accept or deny the objections and
to ratify or deny the site plan and/or special use permit.
   H.   Granting Of A Special Use Permit Or Site Plan Approval: A special use
permit or site plan approval shall only be authorized and issued after
compliance with the procedures set forth in this section and the final approval
by a majority vote of the Village Board of Trustees.
   I.   Revocation Of A Special Use Permit Or Approval Of Site Plan: If the
special use, as authorized by the special use permit or development represented
by a site plan, is not implemented or completed within twelve (12) months of
the date of issuance of the special use permit or approval of the site plan,
the special use permit or authority to complete the development represented by
the site plan shall automatically expire unless the permit is extended or
reissued by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
   J.   Effect Of Denial Of A Special Use: No application for a special use
which has been denied wholly or in part by the Village Board of Trustees shall
be resubmitted for a period of two (2) years from the date of said denial or
revocation, except on the grounds of new evidence or if proof of change of
conditions is found to be valid by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   K.   Nonassignability Of Special Use Permit: A special use permit shall not
be assignable by the grantee of a special use permit without express
permission, by resolution, of the Village Board of Trustees.
   L.   Approval Of Site Plan: Any site plan, of which approval is required by
this title, as amended, but not as a part of a request for a special use permit
or special use project, shall be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals and
reviewed by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The written recommendation of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be forwarded to the Village Board of Trustees.
The final approval, denial, or modifications of the site plan shall be made by
a vote of the Village Board of Trustees as provided in this title, as amended.
(Ord. 2017-1527, 10-17-2017)
10-3-5: PENALTIES 1 :
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this title shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this title, the proper authorities of
the Village, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, maintenance or use, to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said
building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or
use in or about such premises. (Ord. 2013-1393, 10-8-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-4-1E of this Code for optional settlement fine.
ARTICLE A. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
10-3A-1: Board Of Appeals
10-3A-2: Appeals
10-3A-3: Jurisdiction
10-3A-1: BOARD OF APPEALS:
   A.   Board Established: A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established and
reconstituted effective as of October 1, 2017.
      1.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of nine (9) regular
members who are citizens of the Village. Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be appointed by the President, subject to the approval of the Village
Board of Trustees.
      2.   Of the nine (9) regular members of the Zoning Board of Appeals as
reconstituted in 2017, three (3) shall serve for a period of three (3) years,
three (3) for a period of two (2) years, and three (3) for a period of one
year. Thereafter, such members shall serve for a period of five (5) years.
Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only. All members
of the Board shall serve without compensation.
      3.   The members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall meet and elect a
Chair and Vice Chair from its members. In the absence of the Chair or Vice
Chair, the members shall select a Temporary Chair. The Chair and Vice Chair
shall serve a term of one year or until their successors are elected or their
terms of appointment expire.
      4.   The Chair shall appoint a Secretary to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Secretary may be appointed either from the membership of the Board or
outside the membership of the Board.
   B.   Meetings:
      1.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the Board shall be held at
such time and place within the Village as the Board may determine.
      2.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be held at the call of the
Chair, or as determined by three (3) members of the Board.
      3.   Chair: The Chair, or in his absence the Acting Chair, may administer
oaths and compel attendance of witnesses.
      4.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
open to the public.
   C.   Records Kept: The Secretary of the Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member on every question. If any member
is absent or fails to vote, the minutes shall indicate such fact.
   D.   Rules Of Procedure: The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure
not in conflict with applicable statutes or this title.
   E.   Electronic Participation: Subject to the provisions of this section,
any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may electronically attend any open or
closed meeting of the Board via telephone, video, internet connection or other
technology which allows effective audio interaction with the member at a remote
location. A member may electronically attend a meeting of the Board only under
the following conditions:
      1.   The member must notify the Village Clerk or the Chairman of the
Board as soon as practicable before the meeting of the member's request to
electronically attend the meeting so that necessary communications equipment
can be made available.
      2.   The member must assert one or more of the following reasons why he
or she is unable to physically attend the meeting and explain the factual basis
for that assertion:
         a.   The member cannot attend because of the member's illness or
disability; or
         b.   The member cannot attend because of conflicting obligations to
his or her employer; or
         c.   The member cannot attend because he or she is otherwise engaged
in business on behalf of the Village; or
         d.   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
      3.   If a motion objecting to the member's participation is made and
approved by a majority of the members of the Board physically present at the
meeting, the member making the request may not electronically attend the
meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded or if any such motion is made
and seconded but not approved by a majority of the members of the Board
physically present at the meeting, then the request by the member to
electronically attend the meeting shall be deemed approved by the Board and the
presiding officer shall declare the requesting member present. (Ord. 2017-1527,
10-17-2017)
10-3A-2: APPEALS:
   A.   Time For And Filing Appeal: Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may
be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau
of the Village related to the administration of the Zoning Code. Such appeal
shall be taken within twenty (20) days from the date of the action appealed
from by filing with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the
grounds thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
   B.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the building inspector certifies to the Board
that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
   C.   Hearing And Determination: The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable
time for hearing of the appeal and give due written notice thereof to the
parties and decide the same within a reasonable time. The Board may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the use, requirement, decision or
determination as, in its opinion, ought to be made in the premises, but any
decision to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of an
administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon
which it is required to pass under this title or to effect any variation in
this title, or to recommend any variation or modification to this title to the
Village Board shall require a concurring vote of not less than four (4) members
of the Board.
   D.   Final Determination Filed; Appeals To Board Of Trustees: A final
determination shall be submitted to the Village Administrator, in writing, not
less than fourteen (14) days after the determination has been reached. If the
applicant is denied a permit by the Board of Appeals or if the applicant
objects to modifications, if any, the applicant may file an appeal with the
Board of Trustees. The Village Administrator shall present the appeal to the
Village Board for consideration within fourteen (14) working days of the next
Village Board meeting. The applicant shall have a reasonable opportunity to
explain to the Board of Trustees his/her objections to the determination of the
Board of Appeals. The Village Board may authorize the issuance of a permit,
modify the permit or confirm the recommendation of the Board of Appeals. The
vote of the Village Board shall be final. (Ord. 2017-1520, 9-5-2017)
10-3A-3: JURISDICTION:
   A.   General Requirements: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide
appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
building inspector. It shall also hear and decide all matters referred thereto
or upon which it is required to pass under this title. The Board may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or amend the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from to the extent and in the manner that
the Board may decide to be fitting and proper in the premises, and to that end,
the Board shall also have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is
taken.
   B.   Variances:
      1.   When a property owner shows that a strict application of the terms
of this title relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or
structures or to the use of land imposes upon him practical difficulties or
particular hardship, then the Board may make such variations of the strict
application of the terms of this title as are in harmony with its general
purpose and intent, when the Board is satisfied, under the evidence heard
before it, that a granting of such variation will not merely serve as a
convenience to the applicant, but is necessary to alleviate some demonstrable
hardship so great as to warrant a variation in the following instances:
         a.   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary of a
district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record.
         b.   To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which
has been destroyed or damaged to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of
its value by fire or act of God or the public enemy, where the Board shall find
some compelling public necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming
use, and in no case shall such a permit be issued if its primary function is to
continue a monopoly.
         c.   To make a variance, by reason of an exceptional situation,
surroundings or condition of a specific piece of property or by the reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property of
record or by reason of exception topographical conditions, where the strict
application of any provision of this title would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties or particular hardship upon the owner of
such property and amount to a particular confiscation of property, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience to such owner, provided such relief can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive
Plan, as established by the regulations and provisions contained in this title.
         d.   To interpret the provisions of this title where the street layout
actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the district
map fixing the several districts.
         e.   To waive the parking requirements in the Neighborhood Commercial,
Commercial Business or Industrial Districts whenever the character or use of
the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provisions of parking
facilities or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon
the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or
convenience.
         f.   To permit a building to be erected, reconstructed, altered or
enlarged so that the building lines will extend beyond the distances specified
in this title into side yards or into front yards; provided, that such
variances may not be granted: 1) unless there is a building in the block which
extends beyond the distance from the front street line specified in this title,
in which case, the building line may be permitted to extend as near to the
front street line as such nonconforming building; or 2) unless the lot is
irregular in shape, topography or size; or 3) unless the street line of the lot
is directly opposite the street line of a lot which is irregular in shape,
topography or size.
         g.   To permit in any district such modifications of the requirements
or the regulations of this title as the Board may deem necessary to secure an
appropriate development of a lot where, adjacent to such lot on two (2) or more
sides, there are buildings that do not conform to the regulations of the
district.
         h.   To allow the following variances in the standards applicable to
fences constructed pursuant to subsection
10-4-7D of this title:
            (1)   The construction of front yard fences.
            (2)   Front yard fences higher than four feet (4') but not greater
than six feet (6').
            (3)   Front yard fences with less than forty percent (40%) open
design.
            (4)   Front yard fences situated between the front lot line and the
nearest line of a structure located on the lot.
            (5)   A reduction in the minimum setback or an increase in height
not to exceed six feet (6') for fences located on corner lots.
            (6)   When considering applications for the foregoing variances
regarding fences, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the standards set
forth at subsections
10-4-7D2c(2) through D2c(5) of this title.
      2.   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the
Board the power or authority to alter or change the zoning ordinance or the
district map, such power and authority being reserved to the Village Board of
Trustees. The Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon
the use of the premises benefited by a variance as it may deem necessary. The
Board shall make no such variation, except in a specified case, after an
application for a permit has been made and after duly advertised public hearing
held by the Board as prescribed by statute. The notice of hearing shall contain
the address or location of the property for which the variation or other ruling
by the Board is sought, as well as a brief description of the nature of the
appeal. In order to partially defray the expenses of the public hearing
involving variance, the applicant shall pay the sum of thirty five dollars
($35.00) at the time of the filing of the application for the variance.
 
3. Any applicant for a variation who is dissatisfied with the decision of the
Board of Appeals on his or her application may appeal the decision of the Board
of Appeals to the Village Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may at any
time within sixty (60) days after receipt of such appeal affirm, reverse or
partially affirm or reverse any decision of the Board of Appeals. Should the
Board of Trustees fail to act on any such appeal within sixty (60) days after
filing of the appeal, the decision of the Board of Appeals shall be deemed to
have been affirmed in its entirety.
 
C. Special Uses: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear applications for
special uses in accordance with section
10-3-4 of this chapter.
 
D. Planning Commission: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall function as the
Planning Commission of the Village. Any duties assigned under this Code or
other ordinances of the Village to the Planning Commission shall be performed
by the Zoning Board of Appeals. (Ord. 2017-1520, 9-5-2017)
 
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: One Principal Structure Or Use Per Lot
10-4-2: Accessory Uses
10-4-3: Access To Public Street Or Permanent Easement Required
10-4-4: Application Of Permitted Uses To Districts
10-4-5: Open Space
10-4-6: Building Height And Location
10-4-7: Yards
10-4-8: Swimming Pools
10-4-1: ONE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE PER LOT:
In no case other than in planned developments shall there be more than one main
or principal structure or main or principal use on one lot or tract of land.
(Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-4-2: ACCESSORY USES:
No accessory use shall be established prior to the establishment of the main or
principal use, and no accessory structure shall be constructed, erected,
altered, remodeled, extended, or moved prior to the establishment or
construction of the main or principal structure except those accessory uses and
structures of a temporary nature required for the establishment of the main or
principal use or for the construction of the main or principal structure. (Ord.
740, 4-7-1970)
10-4-3: ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREET OR PERMANENT EASEMENT REQUIRED:
No structure shall be constructed or erected on a lot or tract of land or moved
to a lot or tract of land which does not abut a public street or permanent
easement of access to a public street. Such easement shall have a minimum width
of twenty feet (20') unless an easement of less width was on record prior to
the effective date hereof. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-4-4: APPLICATION OF PERMITTED USES TO DISTRICTS:
The uses permitted in one district shall not be permitted in any other district
unless specifically stated. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-4-5: OPEN SPACE:
   A.   No part of a yard, buffer strip, or other open space, off street
parking space or loading berth, or lot area required about or in connection
with any structure or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations and
standards of this title shall be included as part of a yard, buffer strip or
other open space, off street parking or loading berth or lot area similarly
required for any other structure or use.
   B.   No yard, buffer strip, or other open space, off street parking space or
loading berth, or lot shall be reduced in dimension or area below the
requirements set forth in this title. Yards, buffer strips, or other open
spaces, off street parking spaces or loading berths, or lots created or
established after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum
requirements established by this title. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-4-6: BUILDING HEIGHT AND LOCATION:
   A.   The height of any main or principal structure or accessory building may
exceed the maximum permitted height by one foot (1') for each additional foot
by which the width of each yard exceeds the minimum yard dimension for the
district in which such structure is located.
   B.   Height regulations and standards shall not apply to spires, belfries,
penthouses or domes not used for human occupancy nor to chimneys, ventilators,
skylights, water tanks, bulkheads, utility poles and power silos, and other
necessary mechanical appurtenances, provided their location shall conform,
where applicable, to the regulations and standards of the federal
communications commission, the civil aeronautics administration, and other
public authorities having jurisdiction.
   C.   In no event shall any structure exceed fifty four feet (54') in height.
   D.   All buildings and all main or principal structures shall be positioned
in conformation with the setback line regulations and standards specified in
this title for the district in which they are located. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-4-7: YARDS:
   A.   Reduction Of Yard Dimensions: Notwithstanding any other provision of
this title, the minimum yard dimensions specified in this title shall not be
reduced except through action by the board.
   B.   Unobstructed Yards: Yards shall be kept unobstructed for their entire
depth except as specified in this title.
   C.   Authorized Features Permitted: Private driveways, service drives,
easements, sidewalks, flagpoles, arbors, trellises, fences, walls, columns,
light poles, hydrants, patios, accessory signs, and other decorative
recreational items, and utility devices and equipment may be placed in any
yard.
   D.   Fences, Walls And Hedges:
      1.   Restrictions On Placement: Fences, walls and/or hedges may be placed
in any yard or along the edge of any yard subject to the following
restrictions:
         a.   Front Yard Fences:
            (1)   No fences shall be erected in a front yard without first
obtaining a variance from the zoning board of appeals. A fence constructed in a
front yard shall not exceed four feet (4') without first obtaining a variance
from the zoning board of appeals. A fence constructed in a front yard shall not
have less than forty percent (40%) open in design without first obtaining a
variance from the zoning board of appeals.
            (2)   No variance is required to repair an authorized existing
front yard fence. The repair must utilize like kind and quality of materials.
            (3)   When placing a front yard fence, no fence shall be situated
between the front lot line and the nearest line of a structure located on said
lot without first obtaining a variance from the zoning board of appeals. "The
nearest line of the structure" shall not include the space attributed to an
extension of the structure (such as a deck, a porch [whether enclosed or not],
a 3 season room or any other extension to the front of the dwelling space) even
if said space is finished and/or used as living space.
         b.   Corner Lot Fences: Fences on corner lots, as defined in section
10-2-1 of this title, shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the
property line abutting the street and shall not exceed four feet (4') in height
unless the zoning board of appeals approves a variance authorizing a lesser
setback and/or a greater height not to exceed six feet (6').
         c.   Interior Lot And Rear Yard Fences: Interior lot fences and rear
yard fences shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. An interior lot is
defined in section
10-2-1 of this title.
      2.   Administrative Approval Procedure: The procedure to obtain a permit
to construct a fence shall be as follows:
         a.   Application For Permit; Plan And Compliance Required: Any person
owning or having an interest in the subject property may file an application
for a fence permit. Such application shall be submitted to the village
administrator along with a site plan for the fence and proof that the fence
complies with this subsection and the requirements herein set forth.
         b.   Approval Procedure: Upon receiving such application, the village
administrator or his designee shall give notice to property owners within two
hundred (200) linear feet on the same street or affected area of the request
for a fence permit. When acting on an application, the village administrator or
his designee shall verify conformity of the fence with the standards set out in
subsection D2c of this section.
         c.   Permit Standards: When determining whether or not to issue a
permit for a fence the village administrator or his designee shall consider the
following:
            (1)   The approval of variances by the board of appeals; and
            (2)   The input of surrounding property owners and residents
regarding compliance with the standards set forth in this section; and
            (3)   The compatibility of the proposed fence, considering its
placement, height and construction, with the surrounding neighborhood and its
impact on the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties; and
            (4)   Whether or not the proposed fence will impair the safety,
welfare, light, or air, or substantially diminish or impair property values
within the neighborhood, or impair natural drainage or create drainage problems
on adjacent properties; and
            (5)   The proposed fence shall not alter the established character
of the neighborhood; and
            (6)   These standards are applicable to all fence applications as
herein set forth.
   E.   Corner Lot Visibility: On a corner lot, nothing shall be constructed,
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to
impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet
(10') above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in an area
bounded by the street right of way lines of such corner lot and a straight line
joining points along said street right of way lines fifty feet (50') from the
nearest point of intersection. Beyond such fifty foot (50') limits, subsection
D of this section shall apply. (Ord. 2016-1476, 6-21-2016)
10-4-8: SWIMMING POOLS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: All swimming pools with a depth of more than thirty
six inches (36") require a village swimming pool permit.
      2.   Application For Permit: Any person owning or having an interest in
the subject property may file an application for a required swimming pool
permit. Such application shall be submitted to the village building inspector
with a plan of the swimming pool and proof that the swimming pool complies with
the requirements herein set forth and indicating all dimensions including lot
size, setbacks and length, width and depth of the pool.
      3.   Permit Fee: The permit fee is twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      4.   Review Of Application; Issuance Of Permit: Upon receiving the
application, the village building inspector shall determine if the application
is in conformity with required standards. If all the standards are met, the
village building inspector shall issue a swimming pool permit. The village
building inspector or his designee will make a final decision within five (5)
business days of receipt of a complete application for a required swimming pool
permit.
      5.   Appeals: If the permit is denied or if the applicant objects to
modifications, the applicant may appeal to the zoning board of appeals. The
zoning board of appeals may approve, modify or disapprove the application. The
decision of zoning board of appeals shall be in writing, with copies to the
applicant and the village board.
   B.   Requirements: All swimming pools with a depth of more than thirty six
inches (36") shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Inground Pools:
         a.   Location: Inground pools must be located at least five feet (5')
or ten percent (10%) of the lot's width from any side or rear property line.
Pools may not be located in the required front yard or between the principal
structure and the right of way line.
         b.   Fence: All inground pools require the installation of a fence
which has a minimum height of five feet (5') and completely encloses the pool.
The framing and bracing must be on the inside of the pool enclosure. Lockable
gates are required and must be locked when the pool is not in use. The fence
must be nonclimbable. Open horizontal board fencing is not allowed.
         c.   Walkway: A thirty six inch (36") unobstructed walkway is required
around the entire perimeter of the inground pool.
         d.   Ingress And Egress: The inground swimming pool plans shall
include at least one means of ingress and egress, such as steps or ladder,
equipped with a handrail.
      2.   Aboveground Pools:
         a.   Location: No portion of the pool or filtration system shall be
located within five feet (5') of any side or rear property line or ten percent
(10%) of the lot's width, or abut any structure as to create a safety hazard.
No pool shall be located in the required front yard or between the principal
structure and right of way line.
         b.   Fence Or Safety Cover: All aboveground pools requiring a permit
must be fenced by a nonclimbable pool-yard enclosure at least five feet (5') in
height with self-locking gates or be equipped with a removable or safety type
pool cover supporting at least one hundred fifty (150) pounds.
         c.   Ingress And Egress: All aboveground pools must have a safety
ladder, portable or otherwise, for ingress and egress to and from the pool.
         d.   Filtration System: The filtering system for aboveground pools
must sit at least three feet (3') away from the pool, or the filtering system
must sit under a nonclimbable pool patio that sits flush with the top of the
pool.
      3.   Lighting And Electrical Wires For All Pools:
         a.   Lighting: Lights used to illuminate any pool must be arranged to
reflect away from adjoining properties.
         b.   Wires: No overhead wires may be within twelve (12) lateral feet
of any pool.
   C.   Inspections: An inspection is required upon completion of the
construction of the pool. (Ord. 2014-1411, 9-16-2014; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
10-5-1: Districts Established
10-5-2: Zoning Map
10-5-3: Interpretation Of District Boundaries
10-5-4: Zoning Of Public Ways And Railroad Rights-Of-Way
10-5-5: Zoning Of New Or Annexed Land
10-5-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this title, the Village is
hereby divided into the following districts:
C   Conservation District
R-1 Low Density Residential District
R-2 Medium Density Residential District
R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District
R-P Planned Residential District
B-1 Central Business District
B-2 General Retail Business District
B-3 Service Business District
B-4 Low Impact Industrial District
I-1 Industrial District
    Downtown Overlay District
 
(Ord. 740, 4-7-1970; amd. Ord. 1076, 6-15-1993; Ord. 2018-1571, 10-16-2018)
10-5-2: ZONING MAP:
The locations and boundaries of the districts herein established are shown upon
the map entitled "Village of Peoria Heights zoning map 1970" which, with all
notations thereon, is hereby made a part of this title. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-5-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   B.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following recorded lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
   C.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following Village limits shall be
construed as following such Village limits.
   D.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks.
   E.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such centerlines.
   F.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in subsections A through E of this section shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the
scale of the map.
   G.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the official zoning map or in other circumstances
not covered by subsections A through F of this section, the Board shall
interpret the district boundaries. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-5-4: ZONING OF PUBLIC WAYS AND RAILROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
All streets, alleys, public ways, and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property
immediately abutting. Where the centerline of a street, alley, public way or
railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas,
when otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that
of the abutting property up to such centerline. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-5-5: ZONING OF NEW OR ANNEXED LAND:
Submerged land, any submerged land which may be reclaimed, and land which may
be annexed to the Village shall be classified as C Conservation until such time
as the Village Board changes the classification in accordance with provisions
of this title. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
CHAPTER 6
C CONSERVATION DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose
10-6-1: PURPOSE:
The conservation district is intended to regulate those land and water areas in
the village lying in or adjacent to the Illinois River, thereby:
   A.   Protecting the floodway from encroachment by filling, diking or
building structures therein and thus decreasing the flood storage or passage
capacity of the river or impeding the flow of the water.
   B.   Protecting the river from the danger of pollution by establishments in,
on or adjacent to the river without adequate, safe sewage disposal facilities.
   C.   Preserving the natural beauty of the river to protect and maintain its
function as an enhancement, in particular, of bordering properties and more
generally of the entire village and the region through which it flows.
   D.   Preserving, protecting and enhancing the flora and fauna which make the
river their habitat and thus contribute to man's enjoyment of his environment.
(Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
CHAPTER 7
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7A-1: Purpose
10-7A-2: Permitted Uses
10-7A-3: Building Height
10-7A-4: Lot Size
10-7A-5: Yards
10-7A-6: Lot Coverage
10-7A-7: Habitable Floor Area
10-7A-1: PURPOSE:
The R-1 residential district is intended to include those portions of the
village developed predominantly with one- family dwellings on individual lots
where it is deemed desirable to maintain and encourage this pattern of
development, or those undeveloped portions of the village in which it is deemed
desirable to encourage this pattern of predominant land usage and density of
population. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected or altered within any R-1 residential district, unless otherwise
provided in this title, except for the following uses:
Churches, temples, and other places of public worship.
Customary accessory uses, including private garages.
Customary home occupations, but not including the conduct of a retail or
wholesale business or manufacture.
Farming, truck gardening, horticultural nurseries, but not including the
raising, housing, pasturing or keeping of bees, fowl or livestock within three
hundred feet (300') of a lot line.
Libraries and public museums.
One-family dwellings.
Parks, recreation areas, and recreation buildings operated by a unit of
government; government buildings but not including storage yards or buildings
for the housing of trucks, contractor equipment, poles, pipe, road building
materials or similar materials.
Preschool and daycare.
Public or private schools offering general instructions between kindergarten
and twelfth grade levels; public or private colleges offering courses leading
toward associate, baccalaureate or advanced degree in arts or science or
comparable recognized degree.
Temporary buildings, structures and uses incidental to construction on the
site, for a period not to exceed one year. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970; amd. 2016 Code)
10-7A-3: BUILDING HEIGHT:
   A.   No principal building or structure shall hereafter be erected or
altered to exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
   B.   No accessory building or structure shall hereafter be erected or
altered to exceed seventeen feet (17') in height. (Ord. 1010, 12-3-1985)
10-7A-4: LOT SIZE:
Every building hereafter erected shall be on a lot having an area not less than
six thousand (6,000) square feet, a lot width measured along the front setback
line of sixty feet (60') and a lot depth of not less than one hundred feet
(100'), measured along a line midway between the side lot lines perpendicular
to the front lot line; provided, however, that where a lot is smaller than
herein required, and was of record at the effective date hereof, said lot may
be occupied by not more than one family. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7A-5: YARDS:
No principal or accessory building or structure shall hereafter be erected or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection
with such buildings or structures: (Ord. 1010, 12-3-1985)
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth,
unless forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage is improved with buildings
that have observed a greater or less depth of front yard, in which instance, no
new buildings or portions thereof shall project beyond a straight line drawn
between the point closest to the front property line of the two (2) nearest
residences, but this regulation shall not be interpreted to require a front
yard of more than fifty feet (50') nor to permit a front yard of lesser depth
than that of the nearest building. Where the street is curved, the line shall
follow the curve of the street rather than to be a straight line. (Ord. 740, 4-
7-1970)
   B.   Side Yards:
      1.   A side yard on each side not less than ten percent (10%) of the lot
for principal buildings or structures. However, a side of a principal building
or structure which occupies two (2) or more lots shall be ten percent (10%) of
the total front footage of said lots or six feet (6'), whichever is the lesser.
In the event of damage or destruction of a dwelling by fire, storm, or other
casualty, said dwelling may be restored with the side yard setback which it
originally had without reference to the requirements set forth in this
subsection.
      2.   For accessory buildings or structures located on the rear one-third
(1/3) of the lot, a side yard setback of not less than three feet (3') shall be
maintained; for accessory buildings or structures located on the front two-
thirds (2/3) of the lot, a side yard setback of not less than ten percent (10%)
of the lot's width shall be maintained.
   C.   Rear Yard:
      1.   A rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25')
for principal buildings or structures.
      2.   For accessory buildings or structures located on the rear one-third
(1/3) of the lot, a rear yard of not less than five feet (5') shall be
maintained where said rear yard abuts an existing alley; not less than three
feet (3') where said rear yard does not abut an existing alley. (Ord. 1010, 12-
3-1985)
   D.   Supplementary Regulations:
      1.   On a corner, no fence, hedge, earth terrace, parking facility or
other structure or plant which would obstruct motor vehicle visibility of
traffic approaching the corner or intersection shall be erected, placed or
maintained within the triangular patterns that are formed by the intersection
of the lot lines nearest the street intersection and a straight line joining
said lot lines at points which are fifteen feet (15') in distance from the
point of intersection.
      2.   An enclosed one-story porch, even though roofed over, may project
into a required front, side or rear yard area a distance not to exceed six feet
(6'), and shall not be considered in the determination of the size of yards;
provided, however, that such porch shall not be closer than four feet (4') at
any point to any lot line, and that no building shall have such porches
projecting into more than one required side yard; and provided further, that
porches on buildings erected prior to the effective date hereof, extending into
a required front yard, shall not be enclosed. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7A-6: LOT COVERAGE:
No building, with its accessory building, shall occupy in excess of thirty
seven percent (37%) of the area of an interior lot, nor more than forty percent
(40%) of the area of a corner lot. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7A-7: HABITABLE FLOOR AREA:
   A.   One-Story Dwellings: No one-story dwelling shall hereafter be erected
with a habitable floor area of less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
   B.   Two-Story Dwellings: No two-story dwelling shall hereafter be erected
with a habitable floor area of less than one thousand three hundred (1,300)
square feet. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
ARTICLE B. R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7B-1: Purpose
10-7B-2: Permitted Uses
10-7B-3: Building Height
10-7B-4: Lot Size
10-7B-5: Yards
10-7B-6: Lot Coverage
10-7B-7: Habitable Floor Area
10-7B-8: Additional Requirements For Two-Family Dwellings
10-7B-1: PURPOSE:
The R-2 Medium Density Residential District is intended to include those
portions of the Village developed with two- family dwellings or with a mixture
of one-family and two- family dwellings. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected or altered within an R-2 Medium Density Residential District, unless
otherwise provided in this title, except for the following uses:
Any use permitted in the R-1 Residential District.
Two-family dwellings. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7B-3: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the lesser of
thirty five feet (35') in height, or twelve feet (12') greater in height than
the principal structure on any immediately adjacent lot. (Ord. 2019-1592, 5-21-
2019)
10-7B-4: LOT SIZE:
Every one- or two-family dwelling hereafter erected, and every one-family
dwelling or other building thereafter converted to a two-family dwelling, shall
be on a lot having an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
(Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7B-5: YARDS:
No principal or accessory building or structure shall hereafter be erected or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection
therewith. (Ord. 1010, 12-3-1985)
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
(Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
   B.   Side Yards:
      1.   A side yard on each side not less than ten percent (10%) of the
width of the lot for principal buildings and structures.
      2.   For accessory buildings or structures located on the rear one-third
(1/3) of the lot, a side yard setback of not less than three feet (3') shall be
maintained. For accessory structures or buildings located on the front two-
thirds (2/3) of the lot, a side yard setback of not less than ten percent (10%)
of the width of the lot shall be maintained.
   C.   Rear Yard:
      1.   A rear yard of not less than fifteen feet (15') in depth for
principal buildings or structures.
      2.   For accessory buildings and structures located on the rear one-third
(1/3) of the lot, a rear yard of not less than five feet (5') shall be
maintained where said rear yard abuts an existing alley; not less than three
feet (3') where said rear yard does not abut an existing alley. (Ord. 1010, 12-
3-1985)
10-7B-6: LOT COVERAGE:
No building with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of forty
percent (40%) of the area of an interior lot, nor in excess of fifty percent
(50%) of the area of a corner lot. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7B-7: HABITABLE FLOOR AREA:
   A.   One-Family Dwellings: No one-family dwelling shall hereafter be erected
with a habitable floor area of less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
   B.   Two-Family Dwellings: No two-family dwelling shall hereafter be erected
and no one-family dwelling or other building shall hereafter be converted to a
two-family dwelling with a habitable floor area less than one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet, nor less than seven hundred fifty (750) square
feet in either dwelling unit. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7B-8: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
No two-family dwelling hereafter erected or created from an existing
establishment shall be permitted unless separate bathroom and kitchen
facilities and two (2) separate means of access are provided for each dwelling
unit. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
ARTICLE C. R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7C-1: Purpose
10-7C-2: Permitted Uses
10-7C-3: Standards
10-7C-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District to provide for
the continued growth of the Village in total population, since it is completely
surrounded by the City of Peoria, through intensifications of density and
vertical expansion, but limited in height so that the Tower Park Observation
Tower will continue to be the dominant feature of the landscape. (Ord. 740, 4-
7-1970; amd. 2016 Code)
10-7C-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected or altered within any R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District, unless
otherwise provided in this title, except for the following uses:
Any use permitted in the R-2 Medium Density Residential District, subject to
the restrictions of that district.
Multi-family residences; sheltered care homes; and nursing homes, subject to
the restrictions herein set forth for such users.
Upon approval by the Board, one or more of the following uses may be
established clearly incidental to a multi-family residence, sheltered care home
or nursing home: restaurant and office of doctor, dental or similar
practitioner in the healing arts. Such incidental uses shall be allowed only if
they are primarily for the use and benefit of the occupants of the principal
use. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7C-3: STANDARDS:
The following are standards to which multi-family residences, sheltered care
homes and nursing homes shall comply:
   A.   Lot Size: No multi-family residence, sheltered care home or nursing
home shall hereafter be erected, and no existing building shall be converted to
any such use, unless the lot shall have an area of at least fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet.
   B.   Floor Area Ratio: Irrespective of the number of floors in a building or
a series of buildings on the same lot, the sum of the total area of all floors
shall not exceed the area of the lot (FAR 1.0).
   C.   Density: No multi-family residence shall hereafter be erected or
altered to accommodate or make provision for more than fifty (50) families on
any acre of land, nor make provision for more than a proportional number of
families on a fractional part of any acre of land. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
   D.   Building Height: No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to
exceed the lesser of forty four feet (44') in height, or twelve feet (12')
greater in height than the principal structure on any immediately adjacent lot
(top of any buildings should be kept visually significantly below the top of
the water tower). (Ord. 2019-1592, 5-21-2019)
   E.   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: There shall be a front yard along each abutting street
having a depth of at least twenty five feet (25'), measured from the right-of-
way line.
      2.   Side Yards: On each side of the building, there shall be a side yard
having a width of not less than ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot or
one-fifth (1/5) the building height, whichever is greater.
      3.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less
than fifteen percent (15%) of the lot depth, but not less than ten feet (10')
in depth, or one-third (1/3) the building height, whichever is greater.
   F.   Off Street Parking: There shall be provided on the same or an adjacent
lot, off street parking for two (2) cars for each dwelling unit in a multi-
family residence; one car space for each employee per shift, plus one car space
for each four (4) residents' accommodation in a sheltered care home or nursing
home. In addition, if one or more incidental uses are permitted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals, off street parking shall be provided as the Zoning Board
deems adequate. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
   G.   Site Plan Approval: The Village building inspector shall not issue a
permit for new construction or substantial improvement of structures in areas
zoned R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District until such time that a site plan
for the location of an improvement to the premises in the district so zoned
shall be submitted for recommendation to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
"Substantial improvement" is defined as any repair, reconstruction, or addition
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds ten percent (10%) of the
market value of the structure before the improvement is started. The term
should not, however, include such actions taken to comply with existing State
or local codes and ordinances or alterations to a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places.
Such site plans shall include all other requirements of section
10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 2017-1520, 9-5-2017)
ARTICLE D. R-P PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7D-1: Purpose
10-7D-2: Permitted Uses
10-7D-3: Standards
10-7D-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of the R-P planned residential district to
encourage the total planning of large unsubdivided or undeveloped tracts,
rather than lot by lot development. Established uses within the district, such
as farming, golf courses, parks, large estates or institutional uses, would be
permitted to continue and to be improved and expanded, it being the intent of
these district regulations to provide a framework within which the conversion
of such land to residential uses may be accomplished. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7D-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected or altered within any R-P planned residential district, unless
otherwise provided in this title, except for the following uses:
Country clubs and golf courses not conducted as a business or for profit.
Farming, truck gardening and horticultural nurseries, but not including the
raising, housing, pasturing or keeping of bees, fowl or livestock within three
hundred feet (300') of a lot line.
Parks, recreation areas, recreation buildings or operation by a unit of
government and nature preserves.
Planned unit development which may consist of individual building sites for one
or more of the following: one- family dwellings, two-family dwellings, row
houses or townhouses, garden apartments, high rise apartments, sheltered care
facilities, nursing homes, residential hotel, together with common property,
such as a park, recreation area, recreation building or facility and off street
parking areas or facilities. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-7D-3: STANDARDS:
   A.   Lot Size: A planned unit development shall be located on a tract having
a gross area of at least ten (10) acres.
   B.   Floor Area Ratio: The total area of all floors in all buildings on the
tract shall not exceed eight-tenths (0.8) of the gross area of the tract.
   C.   Open Space: The total area of the open space, including streets,
drives, open parking areas, open recreation areas and landscaped areas, shall
be at least 0.85 times the total floor area. The total area of the open space,
exclusive of that in streets, drives, and open parking areas, shall be at least
one-half (1/2) the total floor area.
   D.   Building Height: No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to
exceed fifty four feet (54') in height.
   E.   Yards And Courts:
      1.   Yards and courts shall be provided to assure adequate privacy,
desirable outlook, adequate natural light and ventilation, convenient access to
and around the buildings and other essential uses.
      2.   Yard depth shall assure adequate distances between building walls on
the property and on abutting off site properties.
      3.   The size, number, and location of courts shall be determined in
accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in sections M307 and
M308 of FHA manual 2600 entitled "Minimum Property Standards For Multi-Family
Housing", which sections are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this title. Notwithstanding, yards along the external boundary of the planned
unit development shall be provided as specified in subsections
10-7C-3E1, E2 and E3 of this chapter.
   F.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall be provided at the rate of
two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
   G.   Site Plan Approval: The Village building inspector shall not issue a
permit for new construction or substantial improvement of structures in areas
zoned R-P Planned Residential District until such time that a site plan for the
location of an improvement to the premises in the district so zoned shall be
submitted for recommendation to the Zoning Board of Appeals. "Substantial
improvement" is defined as any repair, reconstruction, or addition of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds ten percent (10%) of the market
value of the structure before the improvement is started. The term should not,
however, include such actions taken to comply with existing State or local
codes and ordinances or alterations to a structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places. Such
site plans shall include all other requirements of section
10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 2017-1520, 9-5-2017)
CHAPTER 8
BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8A-1: Purpose
10-8A-2: Permitted Uses; Location Restrictions
10-8A-3: Special Uses
10-8A-4: Building Height
10-8A-5: Yards, Courts And Lot Coverage
10-8A-6: Site Plan Approval
10-8A-7: Conditional Uses
10-8A-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this article to provide regulations for the B-
1 Central Business District extending along Prospect Road from Glen Avenue to
the railroad to encourage its continued use and development in accordance with
the plan adopted by the Village Board. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-8A-2: PERMITTED USES; LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Permitted Uses Enumerated: No building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be hereafter erected or altered within any B-1 Central Business
District, unless otherwise provided in this title, except for the following
uses:
Any use permitted in the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District. Any such use
established in the B-1 Central Business District shall be subject to the
limitations imposed by sections
10-8A-4 and
10-8A-5 of this article. Multiple family dwellings may have not less than 1.5
parking space per dwelling unit.
Bakeries employing not more than eight (8) persons.
Banks.
Barbershops, beauty parlors.
Business and professional offices.
Catering establishments.
Comfort stations.
Dancing academies.
Dressmaking establishments employing not more than eight (8) persons.
Employment agencies.
Government offices, Post Office.
Hotels.
Laboratories.
Laundries or dry cleaning plants employing not more than eight (8) persons.
Locksmith shops.
Lodge halls.
Messenger, telegraph services.
Millinery shops.
Painting and decorating shops.
Photography studios.
Plumbing shops.
Printing shops.
Repair shops and services for home appliances employing not more than eight (8)
persons.
Restaurants, lunchrooms, cafeterias, and places for the sale and consumption of
soft drinks, juices, ice cream and beverages, but excluding drive-ins.
Roofing and plastering shops, with no open storage.
Sharpening or grinding shops.
Shoe repair shops.
Stores and shops for the conduct of retail business.
Studios.
Tailor shops employing not more than five (5) persons.
Taverns and liquor stores.
Telephone exchanges.
Undertaking establishments.
Upholstery shops.
   B.   Location Restrictions: No permit for any use listed in subsection A of
this section shall be issued wherein the proposal includes vehicular access
from Prospect Road across the sidewalk thereof, unless and until the Zoning
Board of Appeals has reviewed the proposal and finds: 1) that such vehicular
access from Prospect Road will not create undue hazards; and 2) that such
vehicular access from Prospect Road will not adversely effect the development
of a unified Central Business District as embodied in plans for the Prospect
Road Business District as adopted by the Village Board. (Ord. 2017-1517, 9-26-
2017)
10-8A-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit upon application to and
approval by the Governing Body:
Gasoline and oil stations; public garages; car washes; new or used vehicle
rental and/or sales.
   A.   All gasoline pumps or appliances for dispensing motor fuel shall be
located not less than thirteen feet (13') from the street right-of-way;
   B.   All products, appliances, and parts for sale shall be stored and
displayed only within the building or in permanent storage cabinets, the
location of which shall be shown on the site plan;
   C.   No such use shall be approved within three hundred feet (300') of any
church or public park;
   D.   The Governing Body shall find that the entrances and exits thereto will
not create any undue hazard to vehicles or pedestrians, and that the proposal,
in its location and development, will enhance and further the carrying out of
the duly adopted Village Plan for the Prospect Road Business District;
   E.   Any such establishments shall have adequate off street car waiting
space for the type of establishment involved; and
   F.   There will be adequate supervisory personnel on the premises at all
times that the establishment is open to the public.
Self-service laundries and dry cleaning establishments.
To grant such a use, the Governing Body shall find that there will be adequate
supervisory personnel on the premises at all times that the establishment is
open to the public. (Ord. 1104, 5-7-1996; amd. 2016 Code)
10-8A-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building, whether a one-family, two-family or multi-family residence,
sheltered care home or nursing home or business building shall hereafter be
erected or altered to exceed fifty four feet (54') in height. (Ord. 740, 4-7-
1970)
10-8A-5: YARDS, COURTS AND LOT COVERAGE:
   A.   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: No front yard is required.
      2.   Side Yards: No side yards are required, but if provided, a side yard
shall be not less than eight feet (8') in width.
      3.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten percent
(10%) of the depth of the lot; provided, however, it need not exceed ten feet
(10') in depth.
   B.   Courts:
      1.   Outer Court: If an outer court is provided, it shall be not less
than five feet (5') wide nor less than one-sixth (1/6) the length of such court
from the closed end.
      2.   Inner Court: If an inner court is provided, it shall be not less
than six feet (6') wide, nor shall its area be less than twice the square of
its least required dimension.
   C.   Lot Coverage: No building with its accessory buildings, to be used for
commercial purposes, shall occupy in excess of ninety percent (90%) of the lot
area.
   D.   Additional Requirements For Residential Buildings: Notwithstanding any
of the requirements in this section, buildings used in whole or in part for
residential purposes shall conform to the yard, floor area ratio and density
restrictions for such buildings in chapter 7, article B of this title for one-
or two-family dwellings and in chapter 7, article C of this title for multi-
family dwellings. (Ord. 2018-1572, 11-20-2018)
10-8A-6: SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
The Village building inspector shall not issue a permit for new construction or
substantial improvement of structures in areas zoned B-1 Central Business
District until such time that a site plan for the location of an improvement to
the premises in the district so zoned shall be submitted for recommendation to
the Zoning Board of Appeals. "Substantial improvement" is defined as any
repair, reconstruction, or addition of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds ten percent (10%) of the market value of the structure before the
improvement is started. The term should not, however, include such actions
taken to comply with existing State or local codes and ordinances or
alterations to a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places. Such site plans shall include all
other requirements of section
10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 2017-1520, 9-5-2017)
10-8A-7: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by conditional use permit upon application to
and approval by the Board of Trustees:
   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations, subject to Title 10, Chapter 13
(“Recreational Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments”) and section
10-3-1 (“Special Use and Site Plan Procedures”). (Ord. 2019-1608, 12-17-2019)
ARTICLE B. B-2 GENERAL RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8B-1: Purpose
10-8B-2: Permitted Uses
10-8B-3: Special Uses
10-8B-4: Building Height, Yards, Courts And Lot Coverage
10-8B-5: Site Plan Approval
10-8B-6: Conditional Uses
10-8B-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the B-2 general retail business district to provide
adequate and reasonable regulations for those business areas along Prospect
Road south of the railroad and other areas in the village where general retail
businesses are already established or where it may be appropriate to encourage
such use. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-8B-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises in the B-2 general retail business district shall be
hereafter erected or altered, unless otherwise provided in this title, except
for the following uses:
Uses permitted in the B-1 central business district, subject to the regulations
of that district.
Bowling alleys, indoor theaters, dance halls, gymnasiums, meeting halls, lodge
halls, clubs and other recreational or fraternal establishments, but not
including recreational uses conducted primarily in the open such as golf
driving ranges and miniature golf.
Business, trade, dancing, music or art schools.
Electric substations and telephone exchanges.
Offices.
Personal service shops.
Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail business, provided all goods or
products offered for sale are displayed and stored within a building. Eating or
drinking establishments designed for consumption in cars parked or which may be
parked on the premises, commonly known as "drive-ins", are not to be construed
as permitted hereby. They are designated a special use under section
10-8B-3 of this article.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970; amd. Ord.
817, 4-3-1973)
10-8B-3: SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Special Uses Enumerated: The following uses may be allowed by special
use permit upon application to and approved by the governing body:
Drive-in restaurants.
Gasoline filling stations.
Medical cannabis dispensing organizations but only under the following
conditions:
      1.   No such dispensing organization shall be located within one thousand
feet (1,000') of the property line of a preexisting public or private preschool
or elementary or secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group
daycare home, part day childcare facility, public park, public library,
residential substance abuse treatment facility, or place of worship.
      2.   No dispensing organization shall be located in a house, apartment,
condominium or physician's office.
      3.   No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in a
dispensing organization.
      4.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to enter a
dispensing organization unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
      5.   Drive-through services shall be prohibited.
      6.   Outdoor seating areas shall be prohibited.
      7.   Consumption of medical cannabis on the premises, including the
parking area, shall be prohibited.
      8.   Hours of operation shall be not earlier than eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and not later than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
      9.   Any such dispensing organization shall be operated in compliance
with applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations.
Roadside markets, landscape nursery sales yard, building material sales yard or
similar use where the products are primarily displayed outside of a building.
Used car sales lots.
   B.   Factors Considered: In its deliberation, the Governing Body shall give
due consideration to the following probable effects the proposed special use
would have on surrounding land uses:
      1.   The location of access drives into the site with respect to their
creating traffic hazards;
      2.   The adequacy of on site parking;
      3.   Lighting of the premises;
      4.   Adequacy of supervision; and
      5.   Hours of operation. (Ord. 2013-1397, 12-17-2013)
10-8B-4: BUILDING HEIGHT, YARDS, COURTS AND LOT COVERAGE:
Height, yard, court and coverage requirements of sections
10-8A-4 and
10-8A-5 of this chapter shall apply in the B-2 General Retail Business
District. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-8B-5: SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
The Village building inspector shall not issue a permit for new construction or
substantial improvement of structures in areas zoned B-2 General Retail
Business District until such time that a site plan for the location of an
improvement to the premises in the district so zoned shall be submitted for
recommendation to the Zoning Board of Appeals. "Substantial improvement" is
defined as any repair, reconstruction, or addition of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds ten percent (10%) of the market value of the structure
before the improvement is started. The term should not, however, include such
actions taken to comply with existing State or local codes and ordinances or
alterations to a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places. Such site plans shall include all
other requirements of section
10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 2017-1520, 9-5-2017)
10-8B-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by conditional use permit upon application to
and approval by the board of trustees:
   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations, subject to Title 10, Chapter 13
(“Recreational Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments”) and section
10-3-4  (“Special Use and Site Plan Procedures”). (Ord. 2019-1608, 12-17-2019)
ARTICLE C. B-3 SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8C-1: Purpose
10-8C-2: Permitted Uses
10-8C-3: Special Uses
10-8C-4: Building Height, Yards, Courts And Lot Coverage
10-8C-5: Site Plan Approval
10-8C-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of the B-3 Service Business District to provide
adequate regulations of those businesses closely associated with the Illinois
River or those located along Galena Road designated a major thoroughfare on the
Comprehensive Regional Plan. Because of these unique locations where this
district is mapped, special uses and regulations are appropriate. (Ord. 740, 4-
7-1970)
10-8C-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall hereafter be
erected or altered within any B-3 Service Business District, unless otherwise
provided in this title, except for the following uses:
Any use permitted in the B-2 General Retail Business District.
Gasoline service stations, trucking depots and transfer stations.
Marinas, boatyards, boat sales, boat storage and boat clubs.
Motels and boatels.
Parks and recreation areas operated by a unit of government.
Water storage, purification, intake or pumping station and sewer lift station.
(Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-8C-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit upon application to and
approval by the Governing Body:
Any establishment where massage or massage therapy is provided for compensation
subject to the following conditions (such establishments are not allowed as
either a permitted use or special use in any other zoning district):
   A.   No portion of any building housing any such establishment may be
located within one hundred feet (100') of the lot line of any parcel occupied
by a building used for residential purposes or any parcel occupied by any
church or public or private school.
   B.   No such establishment shall be located within five hundred feet (500')
of any other such establishment.
   C.   No person shall provide massage or massage therapy within any such
establishment except between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. each day.
Trailer and mobile home parks.
   A.   In its deliberation, the Governing Body shall give due consideration
to: 1) the probable effect the proposed special use would have on surrounding
land uses; and 2) the location of access drives into the site with respect to
their creating traffic hazards.
   B.   The proposed site shall contain not less than ten (10) acres and not
less than fifty (50) mobile home spaces available at first occupancy, nor more
than ten (10) mobile homes per gross acre.
   C.   A greenbelt planting not less than twenty feet (20') in width shall be
located along all lot lines of the proposed site not bordering on a street or
the Illinois River. Such greenbelt shall be composed of one row of deciduous or
evergreen trees, spaced not more than forty feet (40') apart, and not less than
three (3) rows of shrubs, spaced out more than eight feet (8') apart. (Ord.
2017-1516, 9-5-2017)
10-8C-4: BUILDING HEIGHT, YARDS, COURTS AND LOT COVERAGE:
Height, yard, court and coverage requirements shall be the same as sections
10-8A-4 and
10-8A-5 of this chapter; except, that no building or structure shall be closer
than forty feet (40') to the right-of-way line of Galena Road and no building,
structure or fill shall be located or placed between the present shoreline and
permit line without first obtaining therefor a special use permit from the
Governing Body. Such permit shall be granted only if a specific detailed site
plan is presented and the evidence indicates that the proposal will enhance the
usefulness and beauty of the riverfront and will not adversely affect
surrounding properties. (Ord. 1104, 5-7-1996)
10-8C-5: SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
The Village building inspector shall not issue a permit for new construction or
substantial improvement of structures in areas zoned B-3 Service Business
District until such time that a site plan for the location of an improvement to
the premises in the district so zoned shall be submitted for recommendation to
the Zoning Board of Appeals. "Substantial improvement" is defined as any
repair, reconstruction, or addition of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds ten percent (10%) of the market value of the structure before the
improvement is started. The term should not, however, include such actions
taken to comply with existing State or local codes and ordinances or
alterations to a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places. Such site plans shall include all
other requirements of section
10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 2017-1520, 9-5-2017)
ARTICLE D. B-4 LOW IMPACT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8D-1: Purpose
10-8D-2: Permitted Uses
10-8D-3: Special Uses
10-8D-4: Building Height, Yards, Courts And Lot Coverage
10-8D-5: Performance Standards
10-8D-6: Use Of Hazardous Materials
10-8D-7: Site Plan Approval
10-8D-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of the B-4 low impact industrial district to
provide adequate regulations of those businesses engaged in "clean" (low
environmental impact) industrial and commercial uses of property so zoned that
will be compatible with neighboring residential and retail zoning districts.
(Ord. 1076, 6-15-1993)
10-8D-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall hereinafter be
erected or altered within any B-4 low impact industrial district, unless
otherwise provided in this title, except for the following uses:
Any use permitted in the B-2 general retail business district (subject to the
restrictions of that district).
Bakery manufacturing/processing.
Bedding and furniture storage/assembly.
Cloth products manufacturing.
Commercial testing laboratories (no hazardous materials).
Computer services.
Display rooms - merchandise retail/wholesale.
Electronic, scientific precision instrument manufacturing.
Frozen food lockers.
Health centers.
Laboratories - research and testing (no hazardous materials).
Laundries.
Light machinery products - appliances, business machines, computers, etc.
Lithographing.
Mail order houses.
Musical instruments assembly.
Orthopedic and medical appliance manufacture.
Photofinishing laboratories.
Pottery and ceramics manufacture.
Printing and publishing establishments.
Radio/TV stations (no tower).
Railroad transportation (no switching yards).
Recreation - indoor commercial.
Research - noncommercial, scientific, educational.
Wearing apparel assembly. (Ord. 1076, 6-15-1993)
10-8D-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit upon application to and
approval by the governing body:
Outdoor storage of materials, supplies and equipment (except for motor vehicles
in operable condition used for conducting business) used in conjunction with
any permitted use listed in section
10-8D-2 of this article.
In its deliberation, the Governing Body shall give due consideration to:
   A.   The probable effect the proposed special use would have on surrounding
land uses;
   B.   The type of material, equipment or supply to be stored outside;
   C.   The manner and method of enclosure (screening); and
   D.   The frequency with which the material, equipment or supply is to be
used or expended or moved in and out of the proposed outdoor storage location.
(Ord. 1076, 6-15-1993)
10-8D-4: BUILDING HEIGHT, YARDS, COURTS AND LOT COVERAGE:
Height, yard, court and coverage requirements of sections
10-8A-4 and
10-8A-5 of this chapter shall apply in the B-4 Low Impact Industrial District.
(Ord. 1076, 6-15-1993)
10-8D-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, and processing of materials, articles
and products shall be subject to the performance standards of the I-3 District
of the Peoria County zoning ordinance, which standards are hereby adopted by
reference. (Ord. 1076, 6-15-1993)
10-8D-6: USE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
The use of any and all hazardous materials within any area zoned B-4 Low Impact
Industrial District shall at all times be in strict accordance with applicable
State and/or Federal environmental laws and regulations. (Ord. 1076, 6-15-1993)
10-8D-7: SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
The Village building inspector shall not issue a permit for new construction or
substantial improvement of structures in areas zoned B-4 Low Impact Industrial
District until such time that a site plan for the location of an improvement to
the premises in the district so zoned shall be submitted for recommendation to
the Zoning Board of Appeals. "Substantial improvement" is defined as any
repair, reconstruction, or addition of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds ten percent (10%) of the market value of the structure before the
improvement is started. The term should not, however, include such actions
taken to comply with existing State or local codes and ordinances or
alterations to a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places. Such site plans shall include all
other requirements of section
10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 2017-1520, 9-5-2017)
ARTICLE E. I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8E-1: Purpose
10-8E-2: Permitted Uses
10-8E-3: Special Uses
10-8E-4: Restrictions On Sexually Oriented Adult Uses
10-8E-5: Site Plan Approval
10-8E-6: Conditional Uses
10-8E-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Generally: It is the purpose of the I-1 industrial district
regulations:
      1.   To protect established residential areas from nearby industrial,
retail and commercial activities which may create offensive noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, fire hazards and other objectionable
influences;
      2.   To protect established residential areas from nearby industrial,
commercial and retail activities which may cause deleterious secondary effects
as more fully set forth in subsection B of this section;
      3.   To protect established residential areas, recognizing the rising
incidence in the abuse of controlled substances, from the resultant damage to
the peace, health and welfare of the citizens of the village; and
      4.   To protect the limited amount of suitable industrial land from
preemption by other uses and thereby to protect and enhance the tax base of the
village. Limiting the location of sexually oriented adult uses and of
facilities established to treat the abuse of, or the psychological or
physiological dependence on, alcohol or controlled substances to the I-
1 industrial district will produce relatively small or fewer adverse secondary
effects on and will promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the citizens of the village. (Ord. 2008-1301, 9-2-2008)
   B.   Sexually Oriented Adult Businesses:
      1.   Purpose And Exemptions: It is a purpose of the sexually oriented
adult business regulations set out in this article to regulate sexually
oriented adult businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and
general welfare of the citizens of the village, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of adult
businesses within the village. The provisions of sexually oriented adult
business regulations have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it
is neither the intent nor the effect of sexually oriented adult business
regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Sexually oriented adult business regulations do not apply to theaters,
performing arts centers, civic centers, and dinner theaters where live dance,
ballet, music, and dramatic performances of serious artistic merit are offered
on a regular basis and in which the predominant business or attraction is not
the offering of entertainment which is intended for the sexual interests or
titillation of customers, and where the establishment is not distinguished by
an emphasis on or the advertising or promotion of nude or seminude
performances. Neither is it the intent nor effect of sexually oriented adult
business regulations to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
      2.   Findings: Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of
sexually oriented adult uses, presented in hearings and in reports made
available to the village, and on findings incorporated in the cases of Village
Of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); Pap's A.M. v.
Village Of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); Village Of Renton v. Playtime Theatres,
Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976),
and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409
U.S. 109 (1972); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village Of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir.
2003) (and cases cited therein); Wise Enterprises, Inc. v. Unified Gov't Of
Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, 217 F.3d 1360 (11th Cir. 2000); see BZAPS, Inc.
v. Village Of Mankato, 268 F.3d 603 (8th Cir. 2001); Sammy's Of Mobile, Ltd. v.
Village Of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Artistic Entm't, Inc. v.
Village Of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Schultz v. Village Of
Cumberland, 26 F.Supp.2d 1128 (W.D. Wisc. 1998), aff'd in part, rev'd in part,
228 F.3d 831 (7th Cir. 2000); see Gary v. Village Of Warner Robins, Georgia,
311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Blue Canary Corp. v. Village Of Milwaukee, 270
F.3d 1156 (7th Cir. 2001); Department Of Alcoholic Beverage Control v.
Alcoholic Beverage Control Appeals Bd. Of California, 99 Cal. App. 4th 880
(Cal. Ct. App. 2002); Matney v. County Of Kenosha, 86 F.3d 692 (7th Cir. 1996);
LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Berg v. Health &
Hospital Corp., 865 F.2d 797 (1989); DiMa Corp. v. Town Of Hallie, 20085 F.3d
823 (1999); Entertainment Concepts v. Maciejewski, 631 F.2d 497 (1980); Genusa
v. Village Of Peoria, 619 F.2d 1203 (1980); Graff v. Village Of Chicago, 9 F.3d
1309 (1993); North Avenue Novelties, Inc. v. Village Of Chicago, 88 F.3d 441
(1996); Chulchian v. Village Of Indianapolis, 633 F.2d 27 (7th Cir. 1980);
United States v. Sturman, 49 F.3d 1275 (7th Cir. 1995); County Of Cook v.
Renaissance Arcade And Bookstore, 122 Ill. 2d 123 (1988) (including cases cited
therein); and other cases; and on reports of secondary effects occurring in and
around sexually oriented adult businesses, including, but not limited to,
Phoenix, Arizona - 1979; Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Houston, Texas - 1997;
Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; Garden Grove, California
- 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Whittier,
California - 1978; Austin, Texas - 1986; Seattle, Washington - 1989; Oklahoma
Village, Oklahoma - 1986; police reports, Gary, Indiana - 2000; Dallas, Texas -
1997; St. Croix Village, Wisconsin - 1993; Bellevue, Washington - 1998; Newport
News, Virginia - 1996; New York Times Square study - 1994; and also on findings
from the Report Of The Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of
Adult Uses (June 6, 1989, state of Minnesota), the village finds:
         a.   Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses,
are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but
not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, illicit sex acts,
potential spread of sexually transmitted diseases, lewdness, public indecency,
illegal drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on property values,
urban blight, pornographic litter, and sexual assault and exploitation.
         b.   The consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of
sexually oriented businesses exacerbates the deleterious secondary effects of
such businesses.
         c.   Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a
harm, which the village has a substantial government interest in preventing
and/or abating. (Ord. 2008-1302, 9-2-2008)
10-8E-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall hereafter be
erected or altered within any industrial district, unless otherwise provided in
this title, except for the following:
Any permitted use allowed in any other district.
Building material storage yards, contractor plants or storage yards, and
lumberyards.
Laboratories.
Manufacturing, fabricating, assembly and processing of materials, ordnance and
products (other than automotive uses), subject to the following standards,
which standards shall not apply to agriculture, telecommunications carrier
facilities or exempt public utility structures:
   A.   All production, fabrication, servicing, assembling, testing, repair and
processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building or behind a
uniformly painted solid fence of at least six feet (6') in height; and
additional fencing or screening, landscaping and buffer yards as required by
the board of trustees. However, accessory uses, equipment and structures
(including, but not limited to: storage and uses related to experimentation,
testing, inspection and development of goods, materials or products and
equipment and structures incidental thereto) may be unenclosed; provided, that
the use is not adjacent to a residential district or business commercial
district.
   B.   No storage, cleaning of equipment, or accessory buildings may be
located in front of the building line established by the principal building or
in any required setback or buffer area.
Public utility substations, distribution centers, and gas regulator stations.
Wholesale business establishments, warehouses, and storage of household goods.
Offices and display rooms as an accessory use to any of the above permitted
uses.
Medical cannabis cultivation center but only under the following conditions:
   A.   No such cultivation center shall be located within two thousand five
hundred feet (2,500') of the property line of a preexisting public or private
preschool or elementary or secondary school or daycare center, daycare home or
group daycare home, part day childcare facility, public park, public library,
residential substance abuse treatment facility, place of worship, or an area
zoned for residential use.
   B.   No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in a
cultivation center.
   C.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to enter a
cultivation center unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   D.   Drive-through services shall be prohibited.
   E.   Outdoor seating areas shall be prohibited.
   F.   Consumption of medical cannabis on the premises, including the parking
area, shall be prohibited.
   G.   Hours of operation shall be not earlier than eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and not later than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
   H.   Any such cultivation center shall be operated in compliance with
applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations. (Ord. 2013-1397, 12-
17-2013; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. 2022-1679, 6-7-2022)
10-8E-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit upon application to and
approval by the Board of Trustees:
Any special use allowed in any other district.
Adult use businesses.
   A.   With respect to sexually oriented adult uses, the Board of Trustees, in
its deliberation, shall give due consideration to the probable effect the
proposed special use would have on surrounding land uses, including due
consideration to the following:
      1.   All factors set for consideration under the entry reading "drug
treatment and rehabilitation facilities" in this section;
      2.   A sexually oriented adult use shall not be allowed within five
hundred feet (500') of another existing sexually oriented adult use;
      3.   A sexually oriented adult use shall not be located within seven
hundred feet (700') of any zoning district which is zoned for conservation use
or residential use. For the purpose of this subsection, "zoned for residential
use" means R-1 through R-3 Districts, to include R-P Planned Residential
District, and B-1 through B-4 Business Districts. I-1 is not a category
included in "zoned for residential use" for purposes of this subsection;
      4.   A sexually oriented adult use shall not be located within five
hundred feet (500') of a preexisting school, park, cemetery, preschool, nursery
or place of worship; and
      5.   The sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises
of a sexually oriented adult use is prohibited unless the sexually oriented
adult use has a liquor license issued pursuant to applicable Village ordinance.
   B.   The provisions stated in this entry shall not apply to any sexually
oriented adult use in existence and lawfully established at the effective date
hereof, so long as the sexually oriented adult use continues to conduct its
business at the location it was doing business at the effective date hereof and
does not change the nature of the sexually oriented adult use; provided, that
such sexually oriented adult use may expand its operation into an adjoining
structure which is not closer to a district zoned for residential use or a
preexisting school or place of worship and is operated as an integral part of
the original location.
Automotive uses, subject to the following limitations:
   A.   All vehicles of whatever condition connected to the automotive use
shall be parked only on off-street parking facilities located on the lot
occupied by the automotive use.
   B.   No special use may be granted authorizing a junkyard or the activities
of an automotive parts recycler, scrap processor or rebuilder for any site
which is adjacent to property either zoned or utilized for residential
purposes.
   C.   All maintenance, repair, rebuilding or other processing of vehicles
shall occur solely within a totally enclosed permanent structure.
Drug treatment and rehabilitation facilities.
   A.   A special use permit shall be required to locate or relocate within the
Village.
   B.   With respect to drug treatment and rehabilitation facilities, the Board
of Trustees, in its deliberation, shall give due consideration to the probable
effect the proposed special use would have on surrounding land uses, including
consideration to:
      1.   The effect the project will have as a traffic generator on streets
giving access to the site;
      2.   The location of access drives into the site with respect to their
creating traffic hazards;
      3.   The adequacy of on site parking;
      4.   Lighting of the premises;
      5.   Adequacy of supervision;
      6.   Hours of operation;
      7.   Deleterious secondary effects the proposed special use would have on
surrounding land uses; and
      8.   The history of compliance with Village ordinances, the history of
peacefulness and compliance of the establishment at its prior location, if any,
police reports relevant to the establishment and other information relevant to
the effect the special use would have on surrounding land uses or the residents
of the Village.
Firearms related facilities subject to the following limitations:
   A.   Firearms related facilities may be located by special use only within
the I-1 Zoning District.
   B.   Any special use allowing the operation of a firearms related facility
shall be personal to the applicant/grantee. Such a special use may not be
assigned, sold, transferred or operated either voluntarily or involuntarily by
any person other than the approved applicant for the special use. Any transfer
of any interest in a corporate applicant/grantee by a shareholder, manager or
other is prohibited.
   C.   Any person granted a special use to establish firearms related facility
shall report and collect any Retailer's Occupation Tax or other Sales Tax due
on any transaction to the Illinois Department of Revenue and shall pay all
taxes when due.
   D.   The recipient of a special use to operate a firearms related facility
shall maintain a record of all transactions by the facility which shall be
available for inspection by any representative of the Police Department during
regular business hours. (Ord. 2018-1549, 3-20-2018; amd. Ord. 2022-1679, 6-7-
2022)
10-8E-4: RESTRICTIONS ON SEXUALLY ORIENTED ADULT USES:
   A.   Exterior Display: No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that
permits the observation of any material characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by display,
decoration, sign, show window or other opening from any public way or from any
property.
   B.   Minors:
      1.   Employment Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any sexually
oriented adult use business to employ in any capacity within the sexually
oriented adult business any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of
age.
      2.   Presence On Premises Prohibited:
         a.   It shall be unlawful for any individual under the age of eighteen
(18) years to enter or remain on the premises of a sexually oriented adult use.
         b.   It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented adult use licensee
or his manager or employee to allow a person who is under the age of eighteen
(18) years to enter or remain on the premises of a sexually oriented adult
business or use.
   C.   Illegal Activities Enumerated: Nothing contained in this section is
intended or shall be construed to permit or authorize activities which are
unlawful under State law or Village ordinance.
      1.   It shall be a violation of this subsection for a sexually oriented
adult use business to knowingly operate an adult video booth other than as
follows:
         a.   The adult video booth shall be permanently open.
         b.   The entranceway shall not be closed or obstructed, entirely or
partially, by any door, curtain, partition, drape or any other obstruction.
      2.   It shall be a violation of this subsection for any person to
knowingly enter or remain present in an adult booth at any time the adult booth
is occupied by another person, unless two (2) or more persons are necessary for
repair or maintenance of the booth.
      3.   It shall be a violation of this subsection for any person to create,
maintain, or permit holes or openings of any kind to exist between adult
booths.
      4.   It shall be a violation of this subsection for any person to
possess, use or distribute any illegal controlled substance on the premises of
a sexually oriented adult use.
      5.   It shall be a violation of this subsection for any person to engage
in any act of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, lewdness, assignation
or prostitution on the premises of a sexually oriented adult use.
   D.   Inspections: Sexually oriented adult uses shall permit officers or
agents of the Village to inspect, from time to time and at least twice a year,
the portions of the sexually oriented adult use premises where patrons are
permitted for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations
of this section, during those times when the sexually oriented business is
occupied by patrons or is open for business. Such inspections shall be made in
a reasonable manner, and shall not include areas of an adult motel which are
currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary
habitation.
   E.   Penalties: Any person or entity which shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to loss of any special use permit
previously granted hereunder. The Village Attorney is hereby authorized to
institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this section to
prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including
injunction, shall be brought in the name of the Village; provided, however,
that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder shall be held to
exclude ordinance violation proceedings authorized by law. (Ord. 2008-1302, 9-
2-2008)
10-8E-5: SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
The Village building inspector shall not issue a permit for new construction or
substantial improvement of structures in areas zoned I-1 Industrial District
until such time that a site plan for the location of an improvement to the
premises in the district so zoned shall be submitted for recommendation to the
Zoning Board of Appeals. "Substantial improvement" is defined as any repair,
reconstruction, or addition of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds
ten percent (10%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement
is started. The term should not, however, include such actions taken to comply
with existing State or local codes and ordinances or alterations to a structure
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places. Such site plans shall include all other requirements of
section
10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 2017-1520, 9-5-2017)
10-8E-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by conditional use permit upon application to
and approval by the board of trustees:
   Adult-use cannabis infuser organizations, adult-use processing
organizations, adult-use transporting organizations, and adult-use cultivation
centers, subject to Title 10, Chapter 13 (“Recreational Adult-Use Cannabis
Business Establishments”) and section
10-3-4 (“Special Use and Site Plan Procedures”). (Ord. 2019-1608, 12-17-2019)
CHAPTER 9
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purpose
10-9-2: Application Of Provisions
10-9-3: Plot Plan Required
10-9-4: Existing Parking And Loading Spaces
10-9-5: Additional Parking And Loading Spaces
10-9-6: Damage Or Destruction To Structure Or Use
10-9-7: Location Of Parking And Loading Spaces
10-9-8: Schedule Of Requirements
10-9-9: Waivers
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent added congestion of the public
streets and so promote the safety and welfare of the people by requiring, in
connection with any new construction, that off street parking and loading be
provided in accordance with the use to which the property is put and its
location in the village. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-9-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The off street parking and loading requirements of this chapter shall apply as
follows:
   A.   All buildings and structures erected and land uses initiated after the
effective date hereof shall not be required to furnish parking or loading
facilities if construction is begun thereon within six (6) months of the
effective date hereof and diligently prosecuted to completion.
   B.   When a building or structure erected prior to or after the effective
date hereof shall undergo any decrease in number of dwelling units, gross floor
area, seating capacity, number of employees, or other unit of measurement
specified hereinafter for required parking or loading facilities, and further,
when said decrease would result in a requirement for fewer total parking or
loading spaces through application of the provisions of this title thereto,
parking and loading facilities may be reduced accordingly; provided, that
existing parking or loading facilities shall be so decreased only when the
facilities remaining would at least equal or exceed the parking or loading
requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this title to the
entire building or structure as modified.
   C.   When a building or structure shall undergo any increase in the number
of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other unit of
measurement specified hereinafter for required parking or loading facilities
and when said increase would result in a requirement for additional total
parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this title
thereto, parking and loading facilities shall be increased accordingly so that
the total shall at least equal the parking or loading requirements resulting
from application of the provisions of this title to the entire building or
structure as modified. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-9-3: PLOT PLAN REQUIRED:
An application for a building permit for a new or enlarged building, structure
or use shall include therewith a plot plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, and
fully dimensioned showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in
compliance with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-9-4: EXISTING PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Accessory off street parking and loading spaces in existence on the effective
date hereof may not be reduced in number unless already exceeding the
requirements of this chapter for equivalent new construction, in which event,
said spaces shall not be reduced below the number required herein for such
equivalent new construction. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-9-5: ADDITIONAL PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the establishment of off street
automobile parking or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or
buildings, subject to full compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
except, that off street parking areas accessory to existing multiple-family
structures cannot be located off the premises containing the main use, unless
on a lot adjacent thereto, without authorization by the village board. (Ord.
740, 4-7-1970)
10-9-6: DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION TO STRUCTURE OR USE:
Any building, structure or use which is in existence and is a nonconforming use
on the effective date hereof and which subsequently shall be damaged or
partially destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause, shall not be
reconstructed, reestablished or repaired unless off street parking or loading
facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or
destruction shall be restored and continued in operation. However, it shall not
be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of
those required by this chapter for equivalent new construction. (Ord. 740, 4-7-
1970)
10-9-7: LOCATION OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
All required off street parking and loading shall be on the same lot with the
establishment or on an adjacent lot or one across a street therefrom. (Ord.
740, 4-7-1970)
10-9-8: SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS:
Requirements governing the number of off street parking and loading spaces in
relation to the use of property are as set forth in the following table and are
deemed to be minimum requirements. The requirements for any use not specified
therein shall be the same as for a similar specified use, as determined by the
board of appeals. For the purposes of this chapter, a parking space shall be
deemed an area of not less than one hundred seventy (170) square feet, at least
eight feet six inches (8'6") in width, and not less than twenty feet (20') in
length.
Use Minimum Required Minimum Required
    Parking Spaces   Loading Spaces
Use                       Minimum Required           Minimum Required
                          Parking Spaces             Loading Spaces
Banks, business or        1 per 400 square feet of   1 per 100,000 square feet
professional offices      floor area                 of floor area or major
                                                     fraction thereof
                                                     1 per 100,000 square feet
Bowling alleys            5 per alley                of floor area or major
                                                     fraction thereof
Churches, school
auditoriums, stadiums,    1 per 5 individual seats   0
sports arenas, indoor
theaters
Dwellings                 2 per dwelling unit        0
                          1 for each 4 beds, plus 1  1 for the first 40,000
Hospitals, sanatoriums,   for each staff and         square feet of floor area,
convalescent homes,       visiting doctor, plus 1    plus 1 for each additional
nursing homes             for each 3 other employees 100,000 square feet of
                                                     floor area
Hotels, motels, clubs     1 per 3 guests or 1 per    0
                          sleeping unit
Lodging, rooming,         1 per 3 guests, plus 1 for 0
boarding houses           the manager
Manufacturing and         1 per 2 employees per      1 for the first 40,000
industrial uses,          shift based upon the       square feet of floor area,
warehousing, research and largest shift              plus 1 for each additional
testing labs                                         100,000 square feet
Medical, dental clinics   5 per doctor engaged at    0
                          the clinic
Mobile home courts        2 per mobile home lot      0
Mortuaries, funeral       1 per 50 square feet of
parlors                   floor space in chapels and 1
                          parlors
Places of assembly not    1 per 75 square feet gross
enumerated herein without floor area                 0
fixed seating
                          Parking spaces equal to 25
                          percent of total
Private clubs (without    membership or 1 space for  1
sleeping rooms)           every 400 square feet of
                          floor area, whichever is
                          greater
                          1 per 300 square feet of   1 per 100,000 square feet
Retail stores and shops   floor area                 of floor area or major
                                                     fraction thereof
 
(Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-9-9: WAIVERS:
Notwithstanding the requirements set out in section
10-9-8 of this chapter, the required off street parking or loading may be
waived for establishments in the B-1 central business district where the
establishment participates in the development and maintenance of off street
parking in accordance with the plans for the Prospect Road business district as
adopted by the governing body, upon application to and approval of such waiver
by the planning commission, upon the commission finding that the establishment
is a cooperator in the Prospect Road business district plan implementation.
(Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
CHAPTER 10
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
10-10-1: Nonconformities Exist
10-10-2: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
10-10-3: Nonconforming Structures
10-10-4: Nonconforming Use Of Structure
10-10-5: Changes To Nonconforming Uses
10-10-6: Repairs And Maintenance
10-10-7: Discontinuation And/Or Removal Of Certain Nonconforming Uses And
Structures
10-10-1: NONCONFORMITIES EXIST:
Within the districts established by this title, there exist lots, structures
and uses of land and structures which were lawful before the effective date
hereof but which would be prohibited under the terms of this title. (Ord. 2013-
1393, 10-8-2013)
10-10-2: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
Where, at the effective date hereof, lawful use of land exists that is made no
longer permissible under the terms of this title, such use may be continued, so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied by such use at the effective
date hereof.
   B.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portions of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
hereof.
   C.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of one year or more, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
the regulations specified in this title for the district in which such land is
located.
   D.   All non-conforming uses of land for which a notice of discontinuation
has been delivered as authorized by section 8 of this chapter shall be
terminated in accordance with the terms of such notice. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970;
amd. Ord. 2022-1679, 6-7-2022)
10-10-3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Where a lawful structure, other than a sign or billboard, exists at the
effective date hereof that could not be built under the terms of this title by
reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may
be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
   A.   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity.
   B.   Should such a structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed, except in conformity with the provisions of this
title. A building designed for a nonconforming use, however, may be constructed
or altered beyond the limitations herein provided by action of the board of
appeals, after a public hearing, as required by law in case of variances. (Ord.
740, 4-7-1970)
10-10-4: NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURE:
If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination,
exists at the effective date hereof that would not be allowed in the district
under the terms of this title, the lawful use may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this title in
the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in changing the use of
the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
   B.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building
which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the effective date
hereof or of an amendment hereto, but no such use shall be extended to occupy
any land outside such building.
   C.   If a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one year
or more, it shall not be reestablished, unless the nonconforming use was in a
building designed, arranged and intended for such use.
   D.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, on which or in
which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located,
and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   E.   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for twelve (12) consecutive months,
the structure, or structures and premises in combination, shall not thereafter
be used, except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it
is located.
   F.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
   G.   All non-conforming uses of a structure for which a notice of
discontinuation has been delivered as authorized by section 8 of this chapter
shall be terminated in accordance with the terms of such notice. (Ord. 740, 4-
7-1970; amd. Ord. 2022-1679, 6-7-2022)
10-10-5: CHANGES TO NONCONFORMING USES:
Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall be permitted to
revert to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be substituted or
added to another nonconforming use. This section shall also apply to buildings,
structures, land or uses which hereafter become nonconforming due to any
reclassification of district under this title or any subsequent changes in the
regulations of this title. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-10-6: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use,
work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary
repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or
plumbing to an extent not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the current
replacement value of the building; provided, that the cubical content of the
building as it existed at the effective date hereof or an amendment hereto
shall not be increased.
   B.   Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any village official charged with protecting the public safety, upon
the order of such official. (Ord. 740, 4-7-1970)
10-10-7: DISCONTINUATION AND/OR REMOVAL OF CERTAIN NONCONFORMING USES AND
STRUCTURES:
   A.   The following nonconforming structures and uses shall be discontinued
and/or removed after delivery of a notice of discontinuation in accordance with
the terms of the notice:
      1.   Any nonconforming use which is conducted primarily on open land and
does not utilize any permanent enclosed structure or where the only structures
employed are accessory or incidental to such use.
      2.   Any nonconforming structure having an assessed value not exceeding
$1,500.00 on the date of the delivery of the notice of discontinuation.
      3.   Any nonconforming permitted or special automotive use subject to the
following conditions:
         a.   Any structure utilized in conjunction with an automotive use
discontinued under authority of this section may, after discontinuation of the
automotive use, be alternately utilized for the storage, production,
fabrication, servicing, assembly and processing of goods and materials
conducted wholly within and fully enclosed by the structure.
         b.   Any structure formerly utilized in conjunction with a
discontinued automotive use but thereafter devoted to an alternate use as
authorized by subsection a. immediately above, which structure is a
nonconforming structure as defined by this title shall be subject to the
limitations on enlargement, modification or reconstruction of nonconforming
structures otherwise set forth in this title.
   B.   The Village Board may at any time after identification of a
nonconforming use or nonconforming structure eligible for discontinuation under
the provisions of this section 10-10-7 direct the Village Administrator or such
other person as the Village Board may identify to deliver a notice of
discontinuation to the owner(s) of record of the lot or lots upon which a
nonconforming structure and/or use is located. Any such notice shall identify
the lot or lots subject to the notice, the use to be discontinued, any
structure directed to be removed, the deadline for discontinuation of the use
or removal of the structure and such other information deemed necessary or
useful by the Village Board. The notice of discontinuation shall be served
either personally or by certified mail to the owner(s) of record of the
affected parcel. In addition, the notice of discontinuation may be recorded in
the office of the Peoria County Recorder of Deeds.
   C.   Except as provided in subsection D immediately below, the deadline for
discontinuation of a nonconforming use or removal of a nonconforming structure
set forth in a notice of discontinuation shall be two years from date the
notice is delivered in the manner hereinabove set forth.
   D.   If a nonconforming use eligible for discontinuation under this section
10-10-7 has been operated in violation of any applicable federal, state or
local law, regulation or ordinance on a consistent basis over a period of at
least one year, the deadline for discontinuation of the nonconforming use shall
be six months after delivery of the notice of discontinuation.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person to continue a nonconforming use
identified in a notice of discontinuation after the deadline established in
such notice. It shall be unlawful for the owner(s) of any nonconforming
structure identified in a notice of discontinuation to fail to remove such
nonconforming structure by the deadline established in such notice. (Ord. 2022-
1679, 6-7-2022)
CHAPTER 11
OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Purpose
10-11-2: Manner Of Creation
10-11-3: Application For Designation
10-11-4: Content Of Overlay District Plan
10-11-5: Minimum Area
10-11-6: Procedure For Consideration Of Application
10-11-7: Notification Of Proposed Designation Of Overlay District
10-11-8: Modification Of Overlay District Plan
10-11-9: Modification Of Boundaries
10-11-10: Termination Of Overlay District
10-11-1: PURPOSE:
An overlay district is intended to provide a regulatory framework that will
facilitate innovative approaches to the development or redevelopment of land.
Adopted overlay district plans applicable within an overlay district may allow
within its boundaries the mixing of uses not ordinarily authorized within
traditional zoning districts, unusual bulk or coverage characteristics, shared
or unusual parking facilities, modified front, side and rear yard regulations,
nontraditional lot sizes and configurations and nontraditional layouts of
public infrastructure including, without limitation, streets, utilities and
parks. (Ord. 2018-1570, 10-16-2018)
10-11-2: MANNER OF CREATION:
The Village Board may in the manner provided by this chapter designate an
overlay district within any one or more of the traditional zoning districts
authorized elsewhere in this title. The boundaries of any overlay district
designated as provided in this chapter shall be shown on the official zoning
map as an overlay with respect to the existing underlying district or districts
with the additional designation of "OD" followed by the number of the ordinance
which designated the overlay district. No overlay district may be designated
without the simultaneous approval of a plan for the overlay district. (Ord.
2018-1570, 10-16-2018)
10-11-3: APPLICATION FOR DESIGNATION:
The Village of Peoria Heights or any other person or entity may apply to the
Zoning Officer for the designation of an overlay district. Any such application
must include:
   A.   The name, address, telephone number and email address of the applicant;
   B.   A legal description of the proposed overlay district;
   C.   The property identification numbers of all parcels located within the
proposed overlay district;
   D.   A proposed overlay district plan having the content hereinafter
specified;
Any application submitted by any person or entity other than the Village must
include the written consent to the proposed designation and plan of at least
one owner of record of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the parcels proposed to be
located within the overlay district and at least two-thirds (2/3) of the total
area of the proposed district. (Ord. 2018-1570, 10-16-2018)
10-11-4: CONTENT OF OVERLAY DISTRICT PLAN:
An overlay district plan may provide for uses, housing types, minimum lot and
yard requirements and setbacks, standards for building height and bulk,
accessory uses, accessory buildings, parking facilities, standards for signs,
and public or private infrastructure within the overlay district which
supersede regulations otherwise applicable within the underlying zoning
district and, where applicable, any standards for the subdivision of land
within the overlay district which are inconsistent with the standards found at
title 11, chapter 1 of this Code. An overlay district plan must include at
least the following components:
   A.   A description of the overall theme or purpose of the proposed overlay
district;
   B.   A detailed recitation of any modifications to zoning regulations or
subdivision standards which would be applicable within the proposed overlay
district;
   C.   A map drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet or such
other scale as the Zoning Officer may approve showing the following
information:
      1.   The boundary of the proposed overlay district;
      2.   All streets and zoning districts lying outside of but within two
hundred feet (200') of the boundaries of the proposed overlay district;
      3.   All existing or proposed streets located within the boundaries of
the proposed overlay district;
      4.   Major improvements which the applicant proposes to construct within
the proposed overlay district;
      5.   The underlying use districts applicable within the proposed overlay
district.
Except where specifically superseded or modified in the overlay district plan
approved upon the designation of the overlay district, all regulations
applicable within the underlying use district or districts over which the
overlay district is superimposed shall continue to apply as if the overlay
district did not exist. (Ord. 2018-1570, 10-16-2018)
10-11-5: MINIMUM AREA:
An overlay district must have an area of not less than three (3) acres and must
be compact and contiguous. (Ord. 2018-1570, 10-16-2018)
10-11-6: PROCEDURE FOR CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an application for designation of
an overlay district shall be considered in accordance with the procedure
established for the amendment of this title found at section
10-3-3 of this title. For purposes of considering an application for
designation of an overlay district, any references in section
10-3-3 of this title to an application or proposal for an amendment shall be
construed as a reference to an application or proposal for designation of an
overlay district. (Ord. 2018-1570, 10-16-2018)
10-11-7: NOTIFICATION OF PROPOSED DESIGNATION OF OVERLAY DISTRICT:
Notice of a public hearing on an application for designation of an overlay
district shall be published in the same manner and on the same schedule as
notices of proposed amendments to this title are published. In addition to the
published notice of hearing on the proposed designation of an overlay district,
if an application for the designation of an overlay district includes one or
more parcels owned by someone other than persons whose written consent to
designation of the overlay district have been submitted with the application
for designation, the applicant must give written notice of the hearing to the
person or persons in whose name general Real Estate Taxes for each such parcel
were or are to be billed as shown on the most recent records maintained by the
Peoria County Clerk. Such written notice shall contain the same information as
the notice published by the Zoning Officer with respect to the proposed overlay
district and shall either be personally served or sent by certified mail/return
receipt requested at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing on the
designation of the district. The applicant shall provide evidence in a form
satisfactory to the Zoning Officer that such notice has been given. (Ord. 2018-
1570, 10-16-2018)
10-11-8: MODIFICATION OF OVERLAY DISTRICT PLAN:
After submission of an application for designation of an overlay district, but
prior to such designation, the Village Board may in its discretion modify the
plan proposed by any applicant. After the designation of an overlay district
and approval of a plan for that district, such plan may not be modified except
in accordance with the procedure established in this chapter for the initial
designation of an overlay district and approval of a plan for that district.
(Ord. 2018-1570, 10-16-2018)
10-11-9: MODIFICATION OF BOUNDARIES:
After submission of an application for designation of an overlay district but
prior to such designation, the Village Board may in its discretion modify the
boundaries of the proposed district to exclude territory originally proposed
for inclusion in the overlay district. The boundaries of a proposed overlay
district may not be modified to include territory not originally proposed for
inclusion in the proposed district under the original application without the
submission of an amended application and consideration of that amended
application in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter.
After the designation of an overlay district, the boundaries of the district
may not be modified except through the submission of an application and
approval of that application in accordance with the procedures established in
this chapter. (Ord. 2018-1570, 10-16-2018)
10-11-10: TERMINATION OF OVERLAY DISTRICT:
An overlay district created under the terms of this chapter may be terminated
in accordance with the procedure established in this chapter for designation of
an overlay district, for any reason deemed appropriate by the Village Board
including, without limitation, the following:
   A.   Failure on the part of the proponent or proponents of the overlay
zoning district to substantially commence implementation of the overlay
district plan within two (2) years after designation of the overlay district
and approval of the plan for that overlay district;
   B.   Violation of the terms and conditions of the overlay district plan by
persons having an interest in property included within the overlay district;
and
   C.   A substantial change in circumstances within the overlay district or in
areas adjoining the overlay district.
Upon termination of an overlay district, the plan for that district shall be
void and of no further effect; provided, however, that in the event any person
has received a building permit for the construction of improvements to be made
in accordance with the plan for an overlay district prior to termination of the
overlay district, such owner may complete such improvements in accordance with
the plan and any building permit received for such improvements without regard
to the termination of the overlay district. (Ord. 2018-1570, 10-16-2018)
ARTICLE A. DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-11A-1: Theme And Purpose
10-11A-2: Modifications To Zoning Regulations
10-11A-3: Parcels Excluded From Downtown Overlay District
10-11A-1: THEME AND PURPOSE:
The Peoria Heights Downtown Overlay District (the "Downtown Overlay District")
consists of the Prospect business corridor, and shall include all property
lying within one block of Prospect Road between Glen Avenue on the north and
Lake Avenue on the south that is currently located within the B-1 Central
Business District ("B-1 District"), B-2 General Retail Business District ("B-
2 District"), and B-4 Low Impact Industrial District ("B-4 District")
established under this title as shown on the Village of Peoria Heights zoning
map effective as of September 1, 2018; provided, however, that the parcels
identified on "schedule 1" in section
10-11A-3 of this article shall be excluded from the Downtown Overlay District.
The Downtown Overlay District established pursuant to this article is intended
to attract commercial facilities, some with residential uses, to encourage a
pedestrian friendly urban environment, and to preserve the present character of
the downtown area. The Village has developed the Peoria Heights Commercial
Corridors Master Plan ("Master Plan") showing proposed streetscaping and
sidewalk enhancement recommendations for areas within the Village that include
the Downtown Overlay District, and those recommendations are incorporated into
this article as part of the theme, as more specifically provided below. (Ord.
2018-1573, 11-20-2018)
10-11A-2: MODIFICATIONS TO ZONING REGULATIONS:
Certain standards and regulations that are generally applicable in the B-
1 District, B-2 District and B-4 District along with other more generally
applicable provisions of this title are modified within the Downtown Overlay
District, but only to the extent hereinafter set forth:
   A.   Residential Uses:
      1.   In order to encourage appropriate residential uses, the following
alternate regulations shall apply within those areas of the Downtown Overlay
District that are currently located within the B-1 District or B-2 District.
         a.   Residential dwelling units may be established as a permitted use
within the Downtown Overlay District, but only under the following conditions:
            (1)   Such dwelling units are on the second, third or fourth floor
of a structure where the first floor is devoted to a retail or office use
lawfully established within the B-1 District and the B-2 District; and
            (2)   Dwelling units shall not be located on the same floor of a
building as non-residential uses. No dwelling unit on a floor containing only
residential uses may be converted to a non- residential use unless all dwelling
units on such floor are simultaneously converted to Code compliant non-
residential uses. No space on a floor containing any non-residential use may be
converted into a dwelling unit unless all space on that floor is simultaneously
converted into Code compliant dwelling units.
         b.   Other residential uses may be established within the Downtown
Overlay District as a special use in accordance with the procedures prescribed
by this title.
   B.   Front, Side, And Rear Yard Setbacks And Lot Coverage: Section
10-8A-5 of this title, which applies in the B-1 District, B-2 District and B-
4 District, provides that no front or side yards are required. The standards
established in section
10-8A-5 of this title are hereby modified within the Downtown Overlay District
so that buildings fronting on or otherwise facing Prospect Road shall be
constructed with no front yard and shall be constructed with a front facade
that is located at the front property line (along Prospect Road). No parking
lots or parking spaces shall be allowed in front of any structure within the
Downtown Overlay District fronting on Prospect Road except for on street
parking located on the Village right-of-way.
   C.   Parking Regulations: Chapter 9 of this title, which regulates the
number and placement of off street parking facilities, shall not apply with
respect to parcels located within the Downtown Overlay District and fronting on
Prospect Road. For parcels with residential uses located within the Downtown
Overlay District and fronting on Prospect Road, the minimum required off street
parking shall be one parking space per residential unit. No minimum off street
parking facilities shall be required for any commercial uses on parcels located
within the Downtown Overlay District and fronting on Prospect Road. All off-
street parking within the Downtown Overlay District shall be screened with
landscaping or decorative fencing.
   D.   Building Height: In addition to the building height provisions in
section
10-8A-4 of this title, no building within the Downtown Overlay District and
fronting on Prospect Road shall be constructed, reconstructed or modified so
that the highest point on the building and/or facade is greater than fifteen
feet (15') higher or lower than the highest point on the building and/or facade
of the buildings located immediately adjacent thereto.
   E.   Storefronts: The storefront of every building located within the
Downtown Overlay District and fronting on Prospect Road shall be constructed
with transparent glazed surfaces on not less than seventy five percent (75%) of
the first story facade surface. Buildings located on a corner lot shall have
transparent glazed surfaces on not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the
first story facade surface facing each street, and shall maintain the primary
point of ingress and egress from the building on the Prospect Road side of the
building.
   F.   Projecting Awnings And Canopies: Decorative awnings and canopies are
encouraged on all buildings located in the Downtown Overlay District and
fronting on Prospect Road, and the same may project across the front property
line into the public right-of- way. Any such awning or canopy and the
associated framing system shall be designed to resist deterioration due to
weathering, to withstand applicable wind and snow loads and to prevent nesting
or roosting by birds.
   G.   Width Of Sidewalks: Sidewalks on Prospect Road in the Downtown Overlay
District shall have a width of not less than fifteen feet (15').
   H.   Sidewalk Dining:
      1.   Any restaurant fronting on Prospect Road may place tables and chairs
on the sidewalk immediately adjoining the front of any portion of a building
occupied by such restaurant subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Only tables, chairs and other personal property which facilitates
outdoor dining may be placed on the adjoining sidewalk, provided the same shall
not be placed past the north or south property line of the parcel in question.
         b.   No dining facilities placed on a sidewalk shall obstruct the flow
of pedestrian traffic, and the property owner shall maintain a pathway on the
sidewalk of not less than four feet (4') in width at all times in order to
assure unobstructed passage by pedestrians.
         c.   The proprietor of the restaurant may erect movable fences or
other similar movable barriers for the purpose of defining the outdoor dining
area. Any such fence or barrier shall have openings that provide convenient
access to any doorways located within the adjoining building.
         d.   All such outdoor dining areas shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition with unconsumed food removed promptly after the departure of
the patrons to whom such food was served. The proprietor shall be responsible
for the prompt removal of any litter or debris generated by or located within
the outdoor dining area. The proprietor shall also be responsible for cleanup
and orderly placement of outdoor furniture at close of business each day.
         e.   All tables, chairs, fences and similar items placed on a sidewalk
shall be composed of corrosion resistant materials which are maintained in an
attractive condition, with all such tables, chairs and umbrellas to be matching
and/or coordinated.
         f.   Outdoor dining areas shall be allowed on the street adjoining
parcels that front on Prospect Road, but only with a street dining barrier that
is approved by the Village Zoning Officer.
         g.   Sidewalk and street dining facilities shall be established and
maintained in accordance with a site plan approved by the Village Zoning
Officer.
   I.   Location Of Utilities: One of the goals of the Master Plan is to
maintain consistency in the design and aesthetics of the Downtown Overlay
District. To maintain the design and desired aesthetics, all utilities shall be
located underground in the rights-of-way in a manner that will not conflict
with other services. Any utility accessory, including but not limited to any
antenna, pole or box, that is required to be above ground, shall be approved by
the Village Zoning Officer, and shall be constructed so as to result in the
blending of such accessories into the surrounding environment using
camouflaging architectural treatment. Poles that are necessary to be above
ground shall be consistent with the design and location of existing light
poles. Any accessory placed on a current pole must blend in color and style
with the pole.
   J.   Signage: All signs in the Downtown Overlay District shall comply with
the Sign Code provisions of title 9, chapter 4 of this Code.
   K.   Variances: Property owners may seek variances from the strict
application of the provisions of this article in accordance with the terms,
conditions and procedures outlined in subsection
10-3A-3B of this title. (Ord. 2018-1573, 11-20-2018)
10-11A-3: PARCELS EXCLUDED FROM DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Schedule 1:
Address PIN
Address     PIN
1312 Glen   14-22-401-009
1316 Glen   14-22-401-010
1318 Glen   14-22-401-011
1311 Samuel 14-22-401-016
1315 Samuel 14-22-401-017
1317 Samuel 14-22-401-018
1319 Samuel 14-22-401-019
1310 Samuel 14-22-402-005
1314 Samuel 14-22-402-006
1320 Samuel 14-22-402-025
1311 Duryea 14-22-402-014
1315 Duryea 14-22-402-015
1317 Duryea 14-22-402-016
1312 Duryea 14-22-403-007 and 14-22-403-008
1318 Duryea 14-22-403-009
 
   (Ord. 2018-1573, 11-20-2018)
CHAPTER 12
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Purpose
10-12-2: Definitions
10-12-3: Roof Mount SESs
10-12-4: Ground Mount SESs
10-12-5: Requirements For All SESs
10-12-6: Building Integrated Systems
10-12-7: Special Use Requirements
10-12-8: Administration
10-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the construction, installation,
and operation of Solar Energy Systems ("SES") in the Village of Peoria Heights
in a manner that promotes economic development and ensures the protection of
health, safety, and welfare while also avoiding adverse impacts. It is the
intent of this chapter to encourage the development of SESs that reduce
reliance on foreign and out-of-state energy resources, and bolster local
economic development and job creation. This chapter is not intended to abridge
safety, health or environmental requirements contained in other applicable
codes, standards, or ordinances. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
deemed to nullify any provisions of local, State or Federal law. (Ord. 2019-
1585, 3-19-2019)
10-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
   ACCESSORY: As applied to a building, structure, or use, one which is on the
same lot with, incidental to and subordinate to the main or principal structure
or use and which is used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or
principal structure, or the main or principal use.
   BUILDING INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: A solar energy system that consists of
integrating photovoltaic modules into the building structure as the roof or
facade and which does not alter the relief of the roof.
   GROUND MOUNT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system that is directly
installed into the ground and is not attached or affixed to an existing
structure.
   PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: A solar energy system that produces electricity by the
use of semiconductor devices called photovoltaic cells that generate
electricity whenever light strikes them.
   QUALIFIED SOLAR INSTALLER: A trained and qualified electrical professional
who has the skills and knowledge related to the construction and operation of
solar electrical equipment and installations and has received safety training
on the hazards involved.
   ROOF MOUNT: A solar energy system in which solar panels are mounted on top
of a building roof as either a flush mounted system or as modules fixed to
frames which can be tilted toward the south at an optical angle.
   SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in
the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES): The components and subsystems required to convert
solar energy into electric or thermal energy suitable for use. The area of the
system includes all the land inside the perimeter of the system, which extends
to any fencing. The term applies, but is not limited to, solar photovoltaic
systems, solar thermal systems and solar hot water systems. (Ord. 2019-1585, 3-
19-2019)
10-12-3: ROOF MOUNT SESs:
Roof mount SESs shall be permitted with a building permit in all zoning
districts where there is a principal structure. The building permit application
shall be submitted and shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable zoning
requirements. Building or roof mount SESs shall not exceed the maximum allowed
height for principal structures in any zoning district, and the collector
surface and mounting devices shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of
the building on which the system is mounted or built. (Ord. 2019-1585, 3-19-
2019)
10-12-4: GROUND MOUNT SESs:
Ground mount solar energy systems shall be permitted in all zoning districts
only with a special use permit, subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Height: Ground mount SESs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height
when oriented at maximum tilt.
   B.   Residential Zoning Districts:   SESs shall not be allowed as the
primary use or the principal structure in any Residential Zoning District.
Ground mount SESs shall not be allowed in a front yard of any Residential
Zoning District.
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   Ground mount SESs shall meet the accessory structure setbacks for
the zoning district in which the unit is located, but in no event shall the
setback be less than five feet (5').
      2.   Ground mount SESs shall not extend beyond the side yard or rear yard
setback when oriented at minimum design tilt.
      3.   Ground mount SES installations shall not be located within fifty
feet (50') of any principal structure that is used for residential purposes
unless the owner of the property with the residential structure joins in the
application for special use for the ground mount SES.
   D.   Screening: All ground mount SES installations shall be appropriately
screened as reasonably determined during the special use permit process set
forth in section
10-12-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-1585, 3-19-2019)
10-12-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SESs:
   A.   Reflection Angles: Reflection angles for solar collectors shall be
oriented such that they do not project glare onto adjacent properties.
   B.   Visibility: Solar energy systems shall be located in a manner to
reasonably minimize view blockage for surrounding properties and shading of
property to the north while still providing adequate solar access for
collectors.
   C.   Safety: Roof mount SESs, excluding building integrated systems, shall
allow for adequate roof access for firefighting purposes to the south facing or
flat roof upon which the panels are mounted.
   D.   Building Code: All SESs shall meet the requirements of the applicable
Village Building and Property Maintenance Codes.
   E.   Installation: All SES installations shall be performed by a qualified
solar installer.
   F.   Connection Inspection: Any connection of an SES to the public utility
grid shall be inspected by the appropriate public utility.
   G.   Approved Solar Components: Electric SES system components shall have a
UL listing or approved equivalent.
   H.   Appearance: Brand labels that are visible from the lot boundary of the
subject property shall be removed. (Ord. 2019-1585, 3-19-2019)
10-12-6: BUILDING INTEGRATED SYSTEMS:
Building Integrated Systems shall be permitted in all zoning districts but
shall meet the requirements of the applicable Village Building and Property
Maintenance Codes. (Ord. 2019-1585, 3-19-2019)
10-12-7: SPECIAL USE REQUIREMENTS:
All ground mount solar energy systems, including those that are the primary use
of the lot or are designed for providing energy to off-site uses or export to
the wholesale market, require a special use permit. The special use permit
application shall include, in addition to all information generally required
for special use applications, all of the following:
   A.   Property Lines: Existing property lines.
   B.   Buildings And Surfaces: Existing buildings and impervious surfaces.
   C.   Site Plan: A site plan of proposed conditions showing the following:
      1.   Location and spacing of the solar panels.
      2.   New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substation that is to be the connection point for the SES.
      3.   Perimeter fencing having a maximum height of eight feet (8') shall
be installed around the boundary of the SES. The fence shall contain
appropriate warning signage that is posted such that it is clearly visible on
the site.
   D.   Manufacturer Specifications: The manufacturer's specifications and
recommended installation methods for all major equipment, including solar
panels, mounting systems and foundations for poles and racks.
   E.   Connection And Interconnection: A description of the method of
connecting the solar array to a building or substation, and utility
interconnection details with a copy of written notification to the utility
company requesting the proposed interconnection.
   F.   Setbacks: Information establishing that the SES is located a minimum of
fifty feet (50') from any principal residential dwelling that is not part the
special use permit. (Ord. 2019-1585, 3-19-2019)
10-12-8: ADMINISTRATION:
Any person or business entity who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses
to comply with, or resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall face fines of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2019-1585, 3-19-2019)
CHAPTER 13
RECREATIONAL ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Purpose
10-13-2: Conditional Use Permits
10-13-3: Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower
10-13-4: Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center
10-13-5: Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization
10-13-6: Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization
10-13-7: Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization
10-13-8: Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization
10-13-9: Co-Location
10-13-10: On-Site Use Or Consumption
10-13-11: Security And Other Improvements
10-13-12: Application Procedure
10-13-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide regulations regarding
the cultivation, processing, transporting, and dispensing of adult-use cannabis
occurring within the corporate limits of the village. Such facilities shall
comply with all regulations provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
(410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder, and the regulations provided below. In the
event that the Act is amended, the more restrictive of the state or local
regulations shall apply. (Ord. 2019-1608, 12-17-2019)
10-13-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   Standards: An adult-use cannabis business establishment shall require
approval as a conditional use in the respective zoning use district in which
such organization is to be located. In determining compliance with this chapter
and eligibility as a conditional use, the following standards shall be
evaluated for the proposed adult-use cannabis business establishment based on
the entirety of the circumstances affecting the particular property for which
the conditional use is sought in the context of the existing and intended
future use of the adjacent and nearby properties:
      1.   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property.
      2.   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, including
co-tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage, security
installations/security plan and building code compliance.
      3.   Hours of operation, and anticipated number of customers and
employees.
      4.   Anticipated parking demand and available private parking supply.
      5.   Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent roadway
capacity and access to such roadways.
      6.   Site design, including access points and internal site circulation.
      7.   The adequacy of security measures.
      8.   Proposed signage plan.
      9.   Compliance with all requirements provided in this chapter as
applicable.
      10.   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with
this chapter.
   B.   Conditions: Upon application to and approval by the board of trustees
an adult-use cannabis business establishment may be allowed by a conditional
use permit, but only under the following conditions:
      1.   No adult-use cannabis business establishment shall conduct any sale
or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by applicable state and
local laws and regulations, including the CRTA and the provisions of this
chapter.
      2.   All adult-use cannabis business establishments shall operate the
establishment in compliance with all applicable state and local laws and
regulations, including the CRTA and the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   No adult-use cannabis business establishment nor any other person or
entity shall engage in advertising that contains any statement or illustration
that:
         a.   Is false or misleading;
         b.   Promotes overconsumption of cannabis or cannabis products;
         c.   Depicts a person under twenty- one (21) years of age consuming
cannabis;
         d.   Makes any health, medicinal or therapeutic claims about cannabis
or cannabis-infused products;
         e.   Includes the image of a cannabis leaf or bud; or
         f.   Includes any image designed or likely to appeal to minors,
including cartoons, toys, animals, or children, or any other likeness to
images, characters, or phrases that is designed in any manner to be appealing
to or encourage consumption of persons under twenty-one (21) years of age.
      4.   No adult-use cannabis business establishment nor any other person or
entity shall place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, an
advertisement of cannabis or cannabis-infused product in any form or through
any medium, including any sign under Title 9, Chapter 4:
         a.   In violation of the village sign code under Title 9, Chapter 4;
         b.   Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of school
grounds, a playground, a recreation center or facility, a child care center, a
public park or public library, or a game arcade to which admission is not
restricted to persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older;
         c.   On or in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter;
         d.   On or in publicly owned or publicly operated property; or
         e.   That contains information that:
         i.   Is false or misleading;
         ii.   Promotes excessive consumption;
         iii.   Depicts a person under twenty-one (21) years of age consuming
cannabis;
         iv.   Includes the image of a cannabis leaf; or
         v.   Includes any image designed or likely appeal to minors, including
cartoons, toys, animals, or children, or any other likeness to images,
characters, or phrases that are popularly used to advertise to children, or any
imitation of candy packaging or labeling, or that promotes consumption of
cannabis. (Ord. 2019-1608, 12-17-2019)
10-13-3: ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis craft grower may
be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   A.   No more than one (1) adult-use cannabis craft grower shall be granted a
conditional use under this chapter or otherwise permitted in the village.
   B.   Facility shall not be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500)
feet of another adult-use cannabis craft grower or adult-use cannabis
cultivation center; or
   C.   Facility shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of the
property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility, public park, public library, residential substance abuse
treatment facility, or place of worship located within the village. (Ord. 2019-
1608, 12-17-2019)
10-13-4: ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis cultivation center
may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   A.   No more than one (1) adult-use cannabis cultivation center shall be
granted a conditional use under this chapter or otherwise permitted to operate
in the village.
   B.   Facility shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of the
property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility, public park, public library, residential substance abuse
treatment facility, or place of worship located within the village. (Ord. 2019-
1608, 12-17-2019)
10-13-5: ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   A.   No more than one (1) adult-use cannabis dispensing organization shall
be granted a conditional use under this chapter or otherwise permitted to
operate in the village.
   B.   Facility shall not be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500)
feet of the property line of a pre-existing adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization.
   C.   Facility shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of the
property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility, public park, public library, residential substance abuse
treatment facility, or place of worship located within the village.
   D.   No person shall reside in or permit a person to reside in the facility.
   E.   Facility shall not permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
to enter a dispensing organization; provided, however, that if the facility is
also licensed as a medical cannabis dispensing organization, persons under the
age of twenty-one (21) may be permitted to enter only if accompanied by a
parent or guardian.
   F.   No drive-through services or sales shall be permitted.
   G.   No outdoor seating shall be permitted.
   H.   Hours of operation shall not be earlier than eight o’clock (8:00) A.M.
and not later than nine o’clock (9:00) P.M.
   I.   Facility shall not operate if its video surveillance equipment is
inoperative.
   J.   Facility shall not have fewer than two (2) people working at the
facility at any time while the facility is open to the public.
   K.   Consumption of adult-use cannabis on the premises, including the
parking area, shall be prohibited except as authorized by majority vote of the
village board of trustees in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 2019-1608, 12-
17-2019; amd. Ord. 2022-1684, 9-6-2022)
10-13-6: ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis infuser
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   A.   No more than one (1) adult-use cannabis infuser organization shall be
granted a conditional use under this chapter or otherwise permitted to operate
in the village.
   B.   Facility shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of the
property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility, public park, public library, residential substance abuse
treatment facility, or place of worship located within the village. (Ord. 2019-
1608, 12-17-2019)
10-13-7: ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis processing
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   A.   No more than one (1) adult-use cannabis processing organization shall
be granted a conditional use under this chapter or otherwise permitted in the
village.
   B.   Facility shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of the
property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility, public park, public library, residential substance abuse
treatment facility, or place of worship located within the village. (Ord. 2019-
1608, 12-17-2019)
10-13-8: ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis transporting
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   A.   No more than one (1) adult-use cannabis transporting organization shall
be granted a conditional use under this chapter or otherwise permitted in the
village.
   B.   Facility shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of the
property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility, public park, public library, residential substance abuse
treatment facility, or place of worship located within the village. (Ord. 2019-
1608, 12-17-2019)
10-13-9: CO-LOCATION:
If an adult-use cannabis dispensing organization seeks to co-locate with an
adult-use cannabis craft grower, an adult-use infuser organization, or both,
such establishment must include such a statement and plan for its impact and
operation in its application for conditional use. The zoning board of appeals
shall consider the application and may take appropriate action to impose
additional conditions as necessary and make recommendations to the village
board of trustees. Upon recommendation by the zoning board of appeals, the
village board of trustees may deny or authorize the co-location of such
establishments by final approval by a majority vote of the village board of
trustees. (Ord. 2019-1608, 12-17-2019)
10-13-10: ON-SITE USE OR CONSUMPTION:
If an adult-use cannabis business establishment seeks to allow on-premises
consumption of adult-use cannabis, such establishment must include such a
statement and plan for its impact and operation in its application for
conditional use. The zoning board of appeals shall consider the application and
may take appropriate action to impose additional conditions as necessary and
make recommendations to the village board of trustees. Upon recommendation by
the zoning board of appeals, the village board of trustees may deny or
authorize the on-premises consumption by final approval by a majority vote of
the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2019-1608, 12-17-2019)
10-13-11: SECURITY AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS:
Upon approval of a conditional use, the owner or operator of the adult-use
cannabis business establishment shall install building enhancements, such as
security cameras, lighting or other improvements, as set forth in the
conditional use permit, to ensure the safety of employees and customers of the
adult-use cannabis business establishment, as well as surrounding property
owners. Said improvements shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the floor plan for an adult-use cannabis business
establishment and the site on which it is located, consistent with the
requirements of the CRTA. (Ord. 2019-1608, 12-17-2019)
10-13-12: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
An adult-use cannabis business establishment shall require approval as a
conditional use in the respective zoning district in which such establishment
is sought to be located. An application for a conditional use permit under this
section shall be processed in the same manner and with the same review and
approval process as required for a special use permit under section
10-3-4 , except the standards set forth in section
10-13-2 (A) shall apply in lieu of the special use standards set forth in
section
10-3-4 (E). Further, the other provisions of section
10-3-4  shall apply to a conditional use granted under this chapter except as
otherwise provided herein. The application for a conditional use permit shall
include an affidavit of the applicant affirming compliance with the applicable
section of this section, all requirements of the CRTA, and any restrictions,
stipulations or conditions imposed during the review and approval process.
(Ord. 2019-1608, 12-17-2019)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Village Regulations   1
County Subdivision Code   2
CHAPTER 1
VILLAGE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Approval And Certification Required
11-1-2: Subdivision Plats
11-1-3: Water System
11-1-4: Record Of Subdivisions
11-1-5: Penalty
11-1-6: Exceptions To Standards Within Overlay Zoning District
11-1-1: APPROVAL AND CERTIFICATION REQUIRED:
   A.   No map or plat of a subdivision of lands situated in the Village, or of
any addition thereto, shall have any force, validity or effect, or be recorded
by the Recorder of Peoria County, until the same shall have been approved by
the Village Board of Trustees and so certified by the Village Clerk. (1914 Code
§ 12-1)
   B.   No such map, plat or subdivision shall be approved until the same shall
be certified by a competent surveyor and acknowledged by the owner, as provided
by the general laws of this State, and said owner or owners shall make oath
that they believe that they are the owners in fee of the property described in
said plat, and shall furnish the certificate of a reputable attorney that he
has examined the title to said property and has found the fee thereof to be in
the person making such plat, and that such property is free from incumbrance,
or if there is any incumbrance on said property, the persons holding such
incumbrance shall join in said plat and consent thereto in writing, such
consent being written upon said plat and properly acknowledged. (1914 Code §
12-3)
   C.   The Village Board of Trustees shall require a duplicate copy of such
map, plat or subdivision, if approved thereby, to be filed in the Office of the
Village Clerk. (1914 Code § 12-4)
11-1-2: SUBDIVISION PLATS:
   A.   Preliminary Plat: Any owner or owners of a tract of land in the Village
desiring to develop a subdivision shall submit to the President and Board of
Trustees two (2) copies of a plat for the use and development of the proposed
subdivision in tentative form. Said plat shall hereinafter be designated as a
"preliminary plat" and shall conform to the following requirements:
      1.   Every lot shall have an area of not less than six thousand (6,000)
square feet. Every lot shall have a minimum width of sixty feet (60') and a
depth of not less than one hundred feet (100').
      2.   Said plat shall be drawn to a scale of not smaller than one hundred
feet to the inch (1" = 100').
      3.   All section lines, adjacent subdivision lines, street and alley
lines, watercourses and existing features pertinent to a proper subdivision
shall be shown.
      4.   The name of the proposed subdivision and name of owner, or trustee
as owner, are to be shown.
      5.   The width of all proposed streets and roads with their proposed
names, alleys, lots, easements and building lines on property proposed to be
subdivided and the full width of streets bounding the proposed street names
shall conform to existing streets, if possible and logical, and shall not
conflict with other names in the territory. The minimum width of streets and
roads shall be fifty feet (50') with the placement of the curb lines to provide
a minimum width of traveled way of thirty feet (30').
      6.   All lot lines shall be shown and the lots properly numbered or
lettered. Building lines and easements shall be shown and determined by
measurements.
      7.   No lot or combination of lots shall be resubdivided for building
purposes not producing at least six thousand (6,000) square feet.
      8.   The subdivider shall provide all curbs, gutters, and a road of seven
inches (7") of compacted gravel.
      9.   The subdivider shall stipulate that he will grade, drain and surface
all streets shown on plat and maintain them in good repair for one year
thereafter, at which time, the Village shall assume the maintenance thereof.
      10.   When laying utilities, the subdivider shall provide a stub for
future openings for each lot. (Ord. 405, 8-15-1955)
      11.   Where the subdivider contemplates a change in classification of the
subdivision, as to zoning, the owner shall present a request for such change
indicating the areas desired and present the required change to the Zoning
Board of Appeals. (Ord. 405, 8-15-1955; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Final Plat: Within ninety (90) days after approval of the preliminary
plat, the original tracing of the final plat made in accordance with the
preliminary plat, together with a print thereof, shall be submitted to the
Village President and Board of Trustees. Such final plat shall bear a
certificate of approval by the Village President and Board of Trustees. (Ord.
405, 8-15-1955)
11-1-3: WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   Any person who develops a subdivision shall be responsible for the
installation of all necessary water mains. Unless the developer, owner or
contractor agrees so to do, no permit shall issue for the development of said
subdivision. (Ord. 896, 9-6-1977; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   All water mains hereafter constructed in any subdivision or addition to
the Village, whether platted or unplatted, or whether said plat has or has not
been accepted by the Village President and Board of Trustees, shall be of such
size and materials as shall be first approved in writing by the Village
President and Board of Trustees, and no such water mains shall be constructed
without written application for a permit to construct the same having first
been made to the Village President and Board of Trustees and permission in
writing granted by the Village President and Board of Trustees for the
construction of the same. (Ord. 392, 3-7-1955)
11-1-4: RECORD OF SUBDIVISIONS:
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all such maps and plats showing the
property subdivided, the date of said approval, and the date of recording.
(1914 Code § 12-6; amd. 2016 Code)
11-1-5: PENALTY:
Any owner of land in the Village, or any addition thereto, who shall violate
the provisions of this chapter by making any plat or selling or offering to
sell any lot according to any plat in which there is not compliance with this
chapter shall forfeit a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (1914 Code § 12-5; amd. 2016 Code)
11-1-6: EXCEPTIONS TO STANDARDS WITHIN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT:
Where the Village Board has designated an overlay zoning district in accordance
with the provisions of title 10 of this Code and the plan approved for that
overlay district contains standards for the subdivision of land or the
construction of improvements related to the subdivision of land which are
inconsistent with the standards established in this chapter, then the standards
established in the plan for the overlay district shall prevail over the
standards established in this chapter. Except where specifically superseded or
modified in the overlay district plan approved upon the designation of an
overlay district, all regulations pertaining to the subdivision of land as set
forth in this title shall continue to apply within the overlay district as if
the overlay district did not exist. (Ord. 2018-1570, 10-16-2018)
CHAPTER 2
COUNTY SUBDIVISION CODE
SECTION:
11-2-1: Adopted
11-2-2: Administration
11-2-3: Additional Guidelines
11-2-1: ADOPTED:
   A.   The village of Peoria Heights hereby adopts by reference the county
subdivision code as it now exists or may from time to time hereafter be
amended.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, the "county subdivision code" consists of
the following sections of the code of Peoria County:
      1.   Chapter 20, article 3, section 3.14 - subdivision.
      2.   Chapter 20, article 3, section 3.15 - subdivision waivers and
appeals.
      3.   Chapter 20, article 3, section 3.16 - plat approval.
      4.   Chapter 20, article 8 - subdivisions. (Ord. 2016-1464, 3-15-2016)
11-2-2: ADMINISTRATION:
For purposes of administering the county subdivision code within the village of
Peoria Heights, the following substitutions and/or references shall apply:
   A.   Any reference in the county subdivision code to the Peoria County board
shall be deemed to be a reference to the village board of the village of Peoria
Heights.
   B.   Any reference in the county subdivision code to the Peoria County
zoning board of appeals shall be deemed to be a reference to the zoning board
of appeals of the village of Peoria Heights.
   C.   Any reference in the county subdivision code to "department", "plat
officer" or any officer or administrative body not otherwise described above
shall be deemed to be a reference to the village administrator of the village
of Peoria Heights.
   D.   Any reference in the county subdivision code to the county engineer
shall be deemed to be a reference to a consulting engineer retained by the
village if deemed necessary by the village administrator. (Ord. 2016-1464, 3-
15-2016)
11-2-3: ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES:
   A.   References within the county subdivision code to the Peoria County
comprehensive land use plan and the future land use form map of Peoria County
shall not apply with respect to application of the county subdivision code
within the village of Peoria Heights.
   B.   Any provision of the county subdivision code requiring review or
certification by the Peoria County health department or any township shall not
apply with respect to the application of the county subdivision code within the
village of Peoria Heights.
   C.   Any reference in the county subdivision code to Peoria County zoning
regulations or the application of such regulations shall be deemed to be a
reference to the zoning ordinance of the village of Peoria Heights as from time
to time amended. (Ord. 2016-1464, 3-15-2016)
 
