VILLAGE CODE
of
RIVER FOREST, ILLINOIS
1981
Code current through:
Ord. 3967, passed 8-8-2025
 
General Ordinances of the Village
PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREAMBLE
         This code of the Village of River Forest, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 3967, passed August 8, 2025.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. __3971__
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE RIVER FOREST VILLAGE CODE
RELATIVE TO LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS AND TREE PRESERVATION
 
WHEREAS, the Village of River Forest (“Village”), is a duly incorporated and
existing non-home rule unit of local government as provided by Article VII,
Section 7 of the Illinois Constitution of 1970; and
 
   WHEREAS, Chapter 24 (Landscape Requirements) of Title 10 (Zoning) of the
River Forest Village Code (the “Village Code”) provides various sections
regulating landscaping requirements intended to preserve the appearance,
character, general health, safety and welfare of the Village; and
 
   WHEREAS, pursuant to the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1, the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass and enforce all necessary
ordinances to promote public health, safety and welfare; and
 
   WHEREAS, the Village has determined that amending the Village Code Zoning
Code to provide for amended regulations relative to tree preservation when
property owners are seeking zoning approval pertaining to their property that
may affect existing trees   within the Village is in the best interests of the
Village and its residents; and
 
   WHEREAS, in order to best serve and promote the public health, safety and
welfare of the Village and its residents, the President and Board of Trustees
desire to make certain amendments to the Village Code regarding tree
preservation, as set forth below.
 
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of River Forest, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
SECTION 1: Incorporation. That the recitals above shall be and are hereby
incorporated in this Section 1 as if restated herein.
           SECTION 2: Code Amendment. That Title 10 (Zoning) Chapter 24
(Landscape Requirements) Section 10-24-3 (Applicability) of the Village Code is
hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows, with additions underlined
and deletions to existing text marked using strikethrough:
“10-24-3: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to multi-family residential
buildings, commercial establishments, institutions and government buildings,
where the building footprint covers five thousand square feet or more of land
area. Only those provisions of this chapter related to subsection 10-24-4B,
"Parkway Landscaping", and Section 10-24-5, “Tree Preservation”, of this
chapter shall apply to single- family residential properties.
Planned development applications which have been approved before April 18,
2002, are hereby exempt from the requirements of this chapter.”
 
SECTION 3: Code Amendment.  That Title 10 (Zoning) Chapter 24 (Landscape
Requirements) Section 10-24-5 (Tree Preservation) of the Village Code is hereby
amended to read in its entirety as follows, with additions underlined and
deletions to existing text marked using strikethrough:
 
“10-24-5: TREE PRESERVATION:
 
It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish regulations limiting
the removal and ensuring the replacement of trees from single-family, multi-
family residential, commercial, institutional and governmental property within
the village and, in doing so, safeguard the ecological and aesthetic
environment of the community. These regulations are further intended to serve
to dissuade the unnecessary clearing and disturbing of land so as to preserve,
insofar as practical, the existing natural trees, and preserve existing
landscaping buffers to minimize the impact of adjoining differing land uses,
enhance and protect the integrity of roadway corridors, and reduce the surface
heat and negative visual impact of vehicular use areas.
    A.   Tree Removal:
       1.   Approval Required: No tree having a trunk size of six inches or
greater in diameter at breast-height, as measured four feet six twelve inches
above the established ground levels, shall be removed from any multi-family
residential, commercial, institutional and governmental property requiring
building permit approval as set forth in this code, or which is the subject of
a petition for a zoning variation or subdivision in the village, without
written approval from the zoning administrator or his their authorized
designee. For single-family residential properties, no Oak tree or Elm tree,
except for a Siberian Elm, having a trunk size of 20 inches or greater in
diameter at breast-height, as measured four feet six inches above the
established ground level, shall be removed without written approval from the
zoning administrator or their authorized designee; such trees meeting the
conditions for approval established in 10-24-5(A)(2) shall not be subject to
the replacement requirements of 10-24-5(A)(3). In cases where only a zoning
variation is sought, only those trees that are to be removed as a result of the
construction that requires the variation shall be subject to these regulations.
Undesirable species of trees such as those described in section 10-24-10 of
this chapter shall be exempt from these regulations. A written statement
indicating the reasons for removal of trees and a general description of the
trees to be removed shall accompany the application for tree removal.
       2.   Conditions Of Approval: The zoning administrator or his their
authorized designee shall approve all requests for tree removal if one or more
of the following conditions is present:
          a.   Safety Hazard To Pedestrians Or Vehicular Traffic: Necessity to
remove trees that pose a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
threaten to cause a disruption of public safety.
          b.   Safety Hazard To Buildings: Necessity to remove trees which pose
a safety hazard to a building.
          c.   Diseased Or Weakened Trees: Necessity to remove diseased trees
or trees weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury.
          d.   Observe Good Forestry Practice: Necessity to observe good
forestry practice, i.e., the number of healthy trees a given parcel of land
will support.
          e.   Location Of Proposed Structure: Necessity to remove trees in
order to locate proposed structure(s) without causing unreasonable economic
hardship.
          f.   Grade Changes: Necessity to remove trees in order to provide for
essential grade changes.
       3.   Replacement Trees: Any trees that have been identified for removal
must be replaced in accordance with the following criteria:
          a.   Replacement trees shall either:
             (1)   Equal or exceed the same size caliper as the tree removed;
or
             (2)   Consist of smaller trees, not less than three inches in
caliper, which add up to the caliper of the original tree.
          b.   All replacement trees shall be selected from the village's
recommended species list (see section 10-24-10 of this chapter).
          c.   Replacement trees shall be documented on the final landscape
plan.
          d.   Replacement trees may be used for required perimeter yard
landscaping and screening on the subject property.
    B.   Protection Of Existing Trees During Construction:
       1.   Tree Survey: A tree survey shall be submitted at the time of an
application for building permit approval indicating the location, size and
species (both scientific and common) of all trees located on the parcel with a
trunk size of six inches or greater in diameter at breast-height, as measured
four feet six twelve inches above the established ground level.
       2.   Integration Of Existing Trees Into Site And Landscape Plans:
Subject to the determination of the zoning administrator, every reasonable
effort shall be made to retain existing trees on the aforementioned trees
survey through the integration of those trees surveyed into the site and
landscape plan for the proposed development. Removal of trees designed for
preservation shall only be allowed by amendment to the approved landscape plan.
       3.   Tree Preservation Plan: A tree preservation plan shall be submitted
at the time of an application for site plan and architectural approval
indicating, at a minimum, the location of those trees to be preserved and the
methods which are to be used to preserve such trees. The tree preservation plan
shall specify the following preservation techniques:
          a.   Grading, Construction Equipment And Materials: All grading and
construction equipment and materials shall be forbidden from encroaching upon
the tree's drip line.
          b.   Materials Detrimental To Trees: Crushed limestone or any other
materials that may be detrimental to trees shall not be dumped within the drip
line of any trees nor shall be located at any higher location where drainage
toward the tree(s) could conceivably affect the health of said tree(s).
          c.   Storage Of Vehicles: No materials or vehicles shall be stored,
driven or parked within the drip line of any trees.
          d.   Installation Of Snow Fencing: Snow fencing, or an alternative
temporary barrier, with the written approval of the zoning administrator or
his their authorized designee, shall be installed at the periphery of the
tree's drip line to protect trees from root compaction by the storage of
materials or vehicles.
          e.   Pruning: Identification of any trees which have to be saved, but
which could be negatively affected during the construction process. All such
trees shall be pruned by a qualified arborist to compensate for root loss
during construction.
          f.   Preservation Methodology: The methods that are to be used to
preserve those trees shall be clearly specified. If, in the opinion of the
zoning administrator, or his their authorized designee the necessary
precautions, as specified in the tree preservation plan for the development,
were not undertaken before or during construction to ensure the preservation of
those trees, the site development permit for the parcel shall not be issued, or
if previously issued, may be revoked until such time as compliance with the
precautions is achieved.
          g.   Consultant: The village shall, at its discretion, have the right
to retain a professional tree consultant/forester to review the preservation
plans and to submit a written report to the zoning administrator. All expenses
incurred by the village shall be reimbursed by the developer.
          h.   Village Right To Inspection: The village shall have the right to
inspect the subject property at any time during the construction process, in
order to verify that the developer and contractor have protected trees in
accordance with the approved tree preservation plan.
       4.   Removal Of Trees Designated For Preservation: If it is determined
by the village that a tree designated for preservation is destroyed or razed
during the construction process by a deliberate action in violation of the
approved tree preservation plan, such tree shall be replaced with new trees in
accordance with the following exchange rate. Village staff may, with just
cause, waive the following exchange rate due to accidental damage to protected
trees:
          a.   Exchange Rate for multi-family residential, commercial,
institutional and governmental property:
 
 
 
Existing Trees      Number Of Replacement Trees
(In Caliper Inches)
36+                 1" for each 1" of tree removal
30-35               11
26-29               10
20-25               9
13-19               8
6-12                7
 
         b. Exchange rate for single-family property: The removal of any tree
designated for preservation on a single-family residential property, as
outlined in subsection 10-24-5(A)(1), shall require a replacement tree to be
planted. The replacement tree shall meet the minimum size requirement
established in subsection 10-24-5(D) and shall be a tree species identified as
well-suited for a residential planting site, based on the Morton Arboretum
Northern Illinois Tree Species List. A payment in lieu of replacement may be
made as established in subsection 10-24-5(E).
    C.   Trunk Size: Trunk size means diameter at breast-height, as measured
four feet six inches at twelve inches above the established ground. For the
above, in the event of a fraction of an inch, if the fraction is less than one-
half inch, it may be disregarded. If the fraction is one-half or greater, it
shall be counted as one inch.
    D.   Minimum Size Of Replacement Trees: All replacement trees shall be a
minimum trunk size of three inches in diameter at breast-height, as measured
four feet six inches above the established ground.
    E.   Payment In Lieu Of Replacement Trees: If it is determined by the
village that an insufficient area exists which would support any or all of the
replacement trees, the property owner shall contribute one hundred percent of
the dollar value (as determined by the most recent valuations of the
International Society of Arboriculture) of the replacement trees to the
village. Said funds shall be used for the sole purpose of planting trees at
locations determined by the village.”
 
   SECTION 4: Continuing Effect. That all parts of the Village Code not amended
herein shall remain in effect.
   SECTION 5: Severability. That if any Section, paragraph or provision of this
Ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the
invalidity or unenforceability of such Section, paragraph or provision shall
not affect any of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance.
   SECTION 6: Repeal. That all ordinances, resolutions, motions or parts
thereof in conflict with this Ordinance shall be and the same are hereby
repealed.
   SECTION 7: Effectiveness. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and
effect upon its passage and approval according to law.
Passed on a roll call vote of the Corporate Authorities on the 27 th day of
October, 2025.
 
AYES:    Trustees Bachner, Gillis, Vazquez, O’Connell, Keskitalo,
Brennan                                 
 
NAYS:    None                           
 
ABSENT:    None                              
 
 
APPROVED by me this 27 th day of October, 2025
 
 
_________________________
Village President
 
ATTEST:
 
_________________________
Village Clerk
 
 
APPROVED and FILED in my office this ___ day of _____________, 2025 and
published in pamphlet form in the Village of River Forest, Cook County,
Illinois.
 
 
_________________________
Village Clerk
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2065
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
THE VILLAGE CODE OF RIVER FOREST, ILLINOIS
BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of River
Forest, Illinois, as follows:
   Section 1: That the provisions of the Village Code of the Village of River
Forest, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., under the direction of
the governing body of the Village, containing all ordinances of a general
nature in effect at the time of such codification, shall be in force on and
after the first day of May, 1981, and all ordinances of a general nature in
force on said first day of May, 1981, and not contained in such Code are hereby
repealed from and after the first day of May, 1981, except as hereafter
provided.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the Official Village Code is identified by the proper catchline and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new
provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and the
insertion of the proper replacement pages in the copies of the Code, three (3)
copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk,
certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times
that said office is regularly open.
   Section 3: That the repeal provided for in the preceding section of this
ordinance shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty
or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before
the first day of May, 1981; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or
resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Village or
authorizing the issue of any bonds of the Village or any evidence of the
Village's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the Village;
nor shall such repeal affect the administrative ordinances or resolutions of
the President and Board of Trustees not in conflict or inconsistent with the
provisions of such Code; nor shall such repeal affect the annual appropriation
ordinance; nor shall it affect any ordinances levying or imposing taxes; nor
shall it affect any ordinances relative to the salaries and bonds of Village
officers and employees; nor shall it affect any right or franchise conferred by
ordinance or resolution of the Village on any person or corporation; nor shall
it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
on or prior to the first day of May, 1981; nor shall it affect any ordinance
passed after the first day of May, 1981.
   Section 4: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official
Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official Village Code.
   Section 5: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village to be
misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section
shall be punished as provided in Section 1-4-1 of the Village Code of River
Forest, Illinois.
   Section 6: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 7: This ordinance shall go into effect not less than ten days after
publication of such Code.
   Section 8: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
   Passed and approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
River Forest, Illinois, this 23rd day of March, 1981.
                           /s/
                           President
ATTEST:
/s/
Village Clerk
Published in book form March 23, 1981
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the President and Board, this Village Code is hereby declared
to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of River Forest.
This Village Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the RIVER FOREST
VILLAGE CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the President and
Board and shall be kept up to date as provided in Section
1-1-3  of this Chapter under the direction of the Village Administrator, acting
for said President and Board. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this Village Code by title in any legal document.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Village Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section to be amended, and this act shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Village Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Village Code.
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Village Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the President and Board. The Administrator shall see that the replacement pages
are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the
Administrator. Any person having in his custody an official copy of this
Village Code shall make every effort to maintain this Code in an up to date and
efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement
pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the
office of the Village Administrator. Said Code books, while in actual
possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the
property of the Village and shall be returned to the office of the Village
Administrator when directed by the President and Board.
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Effect of Repeal of Repealing Ordinances
1-2-3: Severability of Parts of Code
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this
Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Village
Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances; ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
Village; and all special ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, as far as they are substantially the
same as those of "The River Forest Code of 1931" and "The River Forest Code of
1957", and those of all other ordinances existing at the time of the adoption
of this Code shall be construed as a continuation thereof and not as new
enactments.
1-2-2: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF REPEALING ORDINANCES:
When any ordinance repealing any former ordinance, clause or provision shall be
itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed so as to revive such former
ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be therein so expressly
provided.
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE:
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Code be
declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words,
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since the
same would have been enacted by the President and Board without the
incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional word,
phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines Of Sections
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or person is
referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or the
masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as
males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these
rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code which
contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject
matter or content may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the village has been
changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the village's ordinances is not meant to amend
the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1981 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   ACTION: Shall include suits, prosecutions and all judicial proceedings.
   BOARD: The board of trustees of the village of River Forest, Illinois.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which any act provided by law is to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
unless the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, and then it shall also be
excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a
Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded.
   COUNTY: Cook County in the state of Illinois.
   FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the village shall begin on May 1 of each
calendar year.
   GENDER: Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
   HOLIDAYS: As used in this code, the following days are considered holidays:
New Year's Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day.
   IN THE VILLAGE: The words "in the village" or "within the village" shall
mean and include all territory over which the village now has or shall
hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other
regulatory powers.
   JOINT AUTHORITY: Words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more
public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to
a majority of such officers or persons.
   MONTH: A calendar month.
   NUMBER: Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to
several persons or things and words importing the plural may include the
singular.
   OATH: The word "oath" shall be deemed to include an affirmation and the word
"sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed".
   OCCUPANT OR TENANT: The words "occupant" or "tenant" applied to a building
or land means any person who holds a written or an oral lease of or actually
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with
others.
   OFFICER: Whenever the title of any village officer is used, it shall be
construed as if the words "of the village of River Forest" followed it.
   OFFICIAL TIME: Central Standard Time shall be the official time within the
village for the transaction of village business; provided, that daylight
savings time shall be used from the last Sunday in April to the last Sunday in
October; provided, that the date and time for advancing and retarding the time
shall be the same as that of the city of Chicago. All legal or official
proceedings of the village board and all official business of the village shall
be regulated as to time in accordance with the provisions of this definition.
When by ordinance, resolution or action of any municipal officer or body, an
act must be performed at or within a prescribed time, it shall be performed
according to the "official time" as herein described.
   OR, AND: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense
requires it.
   OWNER: The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant of the whole or a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation or any city or state or any
subdivision thereof; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal
representative thereof.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property, except "real
property" as defined in this section.
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before
and next after, respectively.
   PRESIDENT: The president of the village of River Forest.
   PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY: Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall
embrace all chattels real.
   SEAL: The seal of the village of River Forest.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STATE: The state of Illinois.
   STREET: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of
whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a
matter of right for purposes of traffic.
   TENSE: Words in the present tense include the future.
   VILLAGE: The village of River Forest in Cook County, state of Illinois,
except as otherwise provided.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: These terms may include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it
shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to
write, by his proper mark.
   YEAR: A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. (1981 Code; amd. Ord.
3173, 10-23-2006)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code, printed in boldface type,
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any
of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1981
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty; Continuing Violations
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-4: Penalties, Violation Of Certain Code Sections
1-4-5: Penalties For Late Payment Of Annual Inspection And Maintenance Fees
1-4-6: Penalties For Late Payment Of Annual Business, Occupation And Trade
License Fees
1-4-7: Returned Check Fee
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS:
Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the village any act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or wherever in such code
or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any ordinance shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each day any violation of any provision of this code or of
any ordinance shall continue. (1981 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply. (1981 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the president and board to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1981 Code)
1-4-4: PENALTIES, VIOLATION OF CERTAIN CODE SECTIONS:
   A.   Penalties: Effective May 1, 2003, the penalties for violation of the
sections of this code, indicated below, shall be twenty dollars if paid before
the due date and thirty five dollars if paid after the due date:
Regulations Violated Code Section
Regulations Violated                                              Code Section
For failure to obtain a license for:                               
   Dogs                                                        8-3-2
   Food establishments                                         6-5-2
   Public garages                                              7-5-2
   Service stations                                            7-4-2
   Taxicabs                                                    3-4-5
   Vehicles                                                    9-1-1
For failure to pay building permit fees                           4-2-1
For failure to correct firecode violation                         7-2-10
For accumulation of waste on premises                             6-3-9
For failure to obtain waste containers or violation of collection 6-3-6
requirement
For violation of disposal of wastes                               6-3-8
For failure to abate nuisance                                     6-8-6
 
(Ord. 3031, 5-12-2003)
   B.   Parking Violations: (Rep. per correspondence dated 11-10-2008)
   C.   Unauthorized Use: The fine for unauthorized use of accessible parking
spaces shall be two hundred fifty dollars. (Ord. 3184, 1-22-2007)
   D.   Prima Facie Proof: The fact that an automobile which is illegally
operated or parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered
prima facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time
of such violation. (Ord. 2506, 7-27-1992)
1-4-5: PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT OF ANNUAL INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE FEES:
The penalty for late payment of the following annual inspection and maintenance
fees required by the sections of this code shall be five dollars if paid more
than thirty days after the billing date, ten dollars if paid more than sixty
days after the billing date, and fifteen dollars if paid more than ninety days
after the billing date:
 
Regulations          Code Section
Sign regulations     4-5-3
Awnings and canopies 4-6-3
Driveways            5-3-2
 
The penalties provided for in this section shall become effective on May 1,
1981. (Ord. 2067, 4-13-1981; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
1-4-6: PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT OF ANNUAL BUSINESS, OCCUPATION AND TRADE
LICENSE FEES:
The penalty for late payment of the following annual business, occupation and
trade license fees required by title 3 of this code shall be ten dollars if
paid more than thirty days after the billing date, twenty dollars if paid more
than sixty days after the billing date, and thirty dollars if paid more than
ninety days after the billing date. (Ord. 2141, 2-13-1984, eff. 5-1-1984; amd.
Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
1-4-7: RETURNED CHECK FEE:
A fee of twenty five dollars will be assessed to the remitter for any check
that is returned to the village by its depository due to nonsufficient funds,
closed accounts or insufficient credit. (Ord. 2519, 10-13-1992)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election, Term Of Office
1-5-2: Oath; Bond
1-5-3: Voting Privileges
1-5-4: President Pro Tem; Vote
1-5-5: General Powers And Duties
1-5-6: Compensation
1-5-7: State Of Emergency
1-5-1: ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE:
The president shall be elected every other odd numbered year for a term of four
years, and shall serve as president of the board as provided by statute. The
date for inauguration of a newly elected president shall be at the beginning of
the regular meeting of the president and board of trustees on the second Monday
of May. (Ord. 3086, 9-27-2004)
1-5-2: OATH; BOND:
The president shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute. He shall
also, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute a bond to the
village in the sum of five thousand dollars, with surety to be approved by the
board, conditioned as required by law. (1981 Code)
1-5-3: VOTING PRIVILEGES:
The president shall vote in case of a tie or where one-half of the trustees
elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion, even though
there is no tie vote, or where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate
authorities is required by state statute. (1981 Code)
1-5-4: PRESIDENT PRO TEM; VOTE:
The president pro tem shall vote in his capacity as trustee but shall not be
entitled to another vote in his capacity as president pro tem. (1981 Code)
1-5-5: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Appoint Officers; Sign Permits: The president shall preside at all
meetings of the board, and shall cause to be signed all official documents
issued or granted by authority or order of the board and may revoke the same
for good cause, except where in conflict with law or ordinance. The president
shall make appointments to all nonelective offices, with the advice and consent
of the board.
   B.   Additional Duties: He shall perform all such other duties as are now or
may be hereafter delegated to him by ordinance and law. (1981 Code)
1-5-6: COMPENSATION:
The president shall not receive any compensation for his services as president,
either for attendance at the meetings of the village board or the board of
local improvements, or for the performance of any other duty or thing connected
with said office of president. (1981 Code)
1-5-7: STATE OF EMERGENCY:
   A.   The village president is authorized to declare of a state of emergency
within the village of River Forest based on the following findings and
supporting facts:
      1.   There has occurred, or there is actual imminent danger of occurring,
a natural disaster, catastrophe, pestilence or contagious disease, which is
likely to cause loss of life, loss of productivity, hardship or suffering to
the persons residing in or doing business in the village.
      2.   That the declaration of emergency is necessary in order to prevent
loss of life or injury, alleviate damages, loss, hardship, or suffering.
   B.   During a declared state of emergency, the village president is
authorized to exercise, by executive order, such powers of the village
president and board of trustees as may be reasonably necessary to respond to
the emergency.
   C.   A declaration of a state of emergency shall:
      1.   Be executed under oath.
      2.   Set forth the basis and underlying facts supporting the declaration
of a state of emergency.
      3.   Make reference to published statements of federal, state or county
agencies whose duty it is to address emergency matters.
      4.   To the extent possible, specify the procedures and protocols to be
followed during the state of emergency.
      5.   To the extent possible, make specific reference to any regulations
which may be subject to suspension during the state of emergency.
      6.   Consistent with division C.8. below, set forth the duration of the
state of emergency.
      7.   Be filed with the village clerk as soon as practicable.
      8.   Expire no later than the adjournment of the first regular or special
meeting of the village president and board of trustees after the state of
emergency has been declared.
   D.   A declaration of emergency pursuant to this authority may not suspend
in any way the rights of persons under the Illinois or United States
Constitutions. (Ord. 3800, 3-16-2020)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election, Term Of Office
1-6-2: Oath; Bond
1-6-3: Meetings Of The Board
1-6-4: Rules And Order Of Business
1-6-5: Standing Committees
1-6-6: Special Or Ad Hoc Committees
1-6-7: Compensation Of Board Members
1-6-1: ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE:
The Board shall consist of six members, elected as provided by statute for a
term of four years. This Board shall be the Legislative Department of the
Village government, and shall perform such duties, and have such powers, as may
be authorized by statute. The date for inauguration of newly elected Trustees
of the Village shall be at the beginning of the regular meeting of the
President and Board of Trustees on the second Monday of May. (Ord. 3086, 9-27-
2004)
1-6-2: OATH; BOND:
Members of the Board shall take the oath as prescribed by statute. The Chairman
of the Committee on Finance shall execute a bond to the Village in the sum of
five thousand dollars, with surety to be approved by the Board, conditioned as
required by law. (1981 Code)
1-6-3: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
   A.   Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the President and Board shall be
held at the Village Hall on the second and fourth Monday evenings of each month
at seven o'clock P.M.
   B.   Committee Of The Whole: The Village President and Board of Trustees
shall meet as a Committee of the Whole on the third Monday at seven o'clock
P.M. upon written call of the President, any three or more Trustees or the
Village Administrator. Such call shall specify the matters that will come
before the Board for discussion. Two days' previous notice thereof shall be
given to each member of the Board and the public. The Committee of the Whole
meetings shall be held as a means of exchanging ideas and information between
the administrative staff and the Village Board. As is the case with respect to
other standing committees of the Village Board, such committee may make
recommendations to the full Board at its regular and special meetings.
   C.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be held at any time on written
call of the President or any three or more Trustees; such call shall specify
the business that will come before the meetings and the Village Clerk shall
give two days' previous notice thereof to each member of the Board.
   D.   Place Of Meetings: All meetings of the Board shall be held in the
Village Hall, unless otherwise ordered by the Board.
   E.   Quorum: Four Trustees or the President and three Trustees, shall
constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time
to time and may compel the attendance of absentees.
   F.   Compelling Attendance: If less than a quorum of the Trustees is present
at any regular or special meeting at the time and place designated, such
Trustees may instruct the Village Clerk to send immediate notice to any absent
Trustee that can be found, commanding him to appear forthwith at such meeting.
Any Trustee who shall receive such notice and not obey the same by appearing
forthwith at such meeting as required thereby, without reasonable excuse, shall
be subject to a fine of not more than fifteen dollars for each offense.
   G.   Open Meetings: Meetings of every kind and nature shall be open to the
public, except where specifically exempted by statute. A meeting may be open to
the public and then closed to the public for the purpose of considering matters
specifically allowed to be considered at a closed meeting by statute.
   H.   Closed Meetings: No final action shall be taken at a closed meeting.
Final action on a matter discussed in a closed meeting shall be preceded by a
public recital of the nature of the matter being considered and other
information that will inform the public of the business being conducted. A
verbatim record of all closed meetings in the form of an audio or video
recording shall be made and disposed of as provided by law. Minutes of meetings
closed to the public shall be available only after the Village Board determines
that it is no longer necessary to protect the public interest or the privacy of
an individual by keeping them confidential.
   I.   Conduct Of Meetings Via Electronic Means: The Village Board may provide
for the conduct of its meetings via electronic means, provided no meetings
shall be held via such means until the Board shall have first promulgated rules
therefor. Such rules, as amended from time to time, shall be approved by a
motion of the Village Board. Participation by electronic means shall only be
permitted if a quorum of the Village Board is physically present.
   J.   Public Participation: Any person shall be permitted an opportunity to
address the Village Board at a public meeting during the citizen comments
portion of the public meeting. Comments made are subject to rules established
by the Village Board. (Ord. 3374, 5-23-2011)
1-6-4: RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
Rule 1. Agenda: Prior to each regular meeting of the Village Board, the Village
Administrator shall cause to be prepared an agenda. Said agenda shall
substantially conform to the following structure:
   I.   Call to order/roll call
   II.   Pledge of Allegiance
   III.   Citizen comments
   IV.   Elected official comments and announcements
   V.   Consent agenda (including minutes)
   VI.   Consent items for separate consideration
   VII.   Recommendations of boards, commissions and committees
   VIII.   Unfinished business
   IX.   New business
   X.   Executive session and any action on executive session items
   XI.   Adjournment
Rule 2. Voting: The ayes and nays shall be taken and recorded in the minutes in
the case of the passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose, and of any
resolution or motion creating a liability against the Village, or for the
expenditure or appropriation of its monies, or at the request of any member. A
concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office on the Village
Board, including the President, shall be necessary to the passage of same,
unless otherwise required by law. In all cases where a motion is entered into
the minutes, the names of the member moving and seconding shall be entered.
In addition, the Village Administrator shall prepare a consent agenda for each
regular meeting containing proclamations, unanimous recommendations of
committees or commissions, resolutions, monthly staff reports or motions which
require only a simple majority vote for passage. The Administrator shall not
include on such agenda any item which requires more than a simple majority vote
for passage. Failure of the President or any Trustee to object to the inclusion
of any item or items on such agenda shall constitute unanimous consent by the
Corporate Authorities to taking a single vote by yeas and nays on the various
items on such agenda. Upon objection by the President or any Trustee to the
inclusion of any item on such agenda, such item shall be removed from the
consent agenda. In the absence of objection or after such removal, the various
items on the consent agenda shall be voted on by the Trustees, and if necessary
the President, in a single vote by yeas and nays. The record of the meeting
shall reflect the names of those voting "yea" and of those voting "nay" with
respect to each item on the consent agenda.
When a question is stated from the Chair, every member present shall vote
therein, unless excused by the President and Board or unless he is personally
interested in the question before the Board. At the conclusion of the roll call
vote, the presiding officer shall announce the results.
Rule 3. Addressing The Board: Except during the portion of the meeting
dedicated to public participation, no person (other than the Village
Administrator or, upon consent of the Board, Village staff) may address the
Board without consent of a majority of the Trustees then present. The public
may address the Board with concerns or comments regarding issues relevant to
Village business. Issues relevant to Village business mean information about
Village events, issues that the Village has the authority to address, items
listed on the agenda and items or issues previously voted on by the Board or
that the Board has the authority to consider or vote on in the future. The
President or her/his designee shall limit comments to matters that are relevant
to Village business. Members of the general public who wish to address the
Board must sign the speaker form. Any person addressing the Board shall be
allotted five minutes to speak.
Rule 4. Rules May Be Suspended: These rules, except rule 2, may be temporarily
suspended by a vote of two-thirds of the Trustees present, but shall not be
repealed, altered or amended, unless notice thereof shall have been in writing,
and alteration and amendment submitted, at least one meeting prior thereto, and
two- thirds of the Trustees shall concur therein.
Rule 5. Expelling A Member: Any member acting or appearing in a disgraceful
manner, or who uses opprobrious or insulting language to or about any member of
the Board, or who does not obey the order of the Chair, shall be, on motion,
censured by a majority vote of the members present, or expelled by a two-thirds
vote of all members elected.
Rule 6. Reconsideration: A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time
during the same meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A
motion to reconsider must be made by a Trustee who voted on the prevailing side
of the vote or question to be reconsidered. Any Trustee may second a motion to
reconsider. A vote or question may be reconsidered at a special meeting held
prior to the next regular meeting but only if there are present at such special
meeting as many members of the Board of Trustees as were present when the
original vote was taken. Where a motion to reconsider is made at the same
meeting as the passage of the original motion, it may be postponed to the next
regular meeting. Where a motion to reconsider is to be made at a different
meeting than the original vote, the Trustee intending to make a motion to
reconsider shall inform the President, no more than three business days after
the meeting when the original vote was taken, along with the reason for the
motion to reconsider.
Rule 7. Presiding Officer To Decide: The presiding officer shall decide all
questions of order. In all cases not otherwise provided by law or ordinance,
the Village Board shall be guided by parliamentary law as contained in
"Robert's Rules of Order" and any amendments thereto. (Ord. 3731, 2-25-2019)
1-6-5: STANDING COMMITTEES:
The Village Board may from time to time establish and abolish standing
committees. Said committees shall be comprised of three Trustees as determined
by the consensus of the Trustees. The Chair of each committee shall be
determined by the consensus of the Village Board.
A standing committee shall only hold a meeting to consider a matter within its
jurisdiction, as determined by the Village Board. A standing committee may not
hold a meeting to consider matters outside of its jurisdiction, without the
permission of the Village Board. (Ord. 3757, 5-28-2019)
1-6-6: SPECIAL OR AD HOC COMMITTEES:
Special or ad hoc committees may from time to time be appointed by the Village
Board. Said committees shall serve only until the completion of their
assignment at which time a final written report shall be submitted to the
Board. (Ord. 2269, 11-9-1987)
1-6-7: COMPENSATION OF BOARD MEMBERS:
The members of the Board shall not receive any compensation for their services
as members of the Board, either for attendance at the meetings of the Board or
for the performance of any other duty or thing connected with said Office of
Trustee. (Ord. 2269, 11-9-1987)
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-7-1: Appointment And Term Of Office
1-7-2: Bond, Oath And Compensation
1-7-3: Functional Authority
1-7-4: Coordination Of Departments
1-7-5: Supervision, Duties And Responsibilities
1-7-6: Assistant Village Administrator
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village Administrator, an executive office of the Village, shall be
appointed by the President, by and with the consent of the Board for a term not
to exceed the term of the Village President and until his successor shall be
appointed and qualified. During the temporary absence or disability of the
Village Administrator, the President, by and with the consent of the Board, may
designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of his office.
(Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
1-7-2: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
Before taking office, the Village Administrator shall furnish a bond in such
amount and surety required by the President and Board. He shall take the oath
as prescribed by statute 1 , and he shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed from time to time by the Board. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-14-3.
1-7-3: FUNCTIONAL AUTHORITY:
The Village Administrator shall exercise executive and administrative control
over the operating departments of the Village. The Village Administrator shall
be responsible for the operation and administration of all departments. All
department heads will report to the Village Administrator. (1981 Code)
1-7-4: COORDINATION OF DEPARTMENTS:
As Manager for the Village, the Village Administrator is responsible to the
President and Board for coordination of Village departments, representation of
the Village with other governmental bodies, representation of the President and
Board with Village committees and commissions. The Village Administrator may
delegate certain duties, but he may not delegate or relinquish his overall
responsibility for the results and for his accountability to the President and
Board. (1981 Code)
1-7-5: SUPERVISION, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Village Administrator shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
   A.   Assist the Board in establishing salary schedules and coordinate and
assist the Board with any employee negotiations.
   B.   Act as the principal public relations executive of the Village.
   C.   Administer the approved personnel policies as established by the Board
and recommend to the Board the selection, promotion, demotion and removal of
any employees of the Village.
   D.   Have responsibility for hiring and firing of all employees, except
department heads, not under the supervision of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners.
   E.   Be responsible to the Board for administration of Village business,
prepare agendas and record minutes of all meetings of the Board, serve as
Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals, see that all required reports are
properly filed with the Federal, State and County authorities, and supervise
all purchasing and approve all bills for payment prior to the submission to the
Board.
   F.   Attend and observe meetings of Village committees and commissions as
may be requested by the Board.
   G.   Recommend and participate in the formulations of new policies and make
decisions within existing policies as they have been approved by the Board. He
will plan, organize, direct and coordinate the staff and programs of the
administration in close concert with department heads, the Village Engineer,
and the Village Attorney and Village Prosecutor.
   H.   Chair and conduct monthly meetings of all department heads (public
works, fire, police) and the Village Finance Director to foster and maintain
effective internal and external relationships and achieve economical,
productive performance.
   I.   Perform such other duties as may from time to time be required of him
by ordinance or resolution of the Board or by direction of the President. (Ord.
3416, 4-9-2012)
   J.   Establish and administer policies and procedures for purposes of
determining whether an employee or former employee is eligible to receive
benefits pursuant to the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act 1 . (Ord. 3478, 3-
11-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
1-7-6: ASSISTANT VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Selection And Employment: An Assistant Village Administrator shall be
selected and employed by the Village Administrator, when such position is
approved by the Board. He shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by the Board.
   B.   General Duties And Responsibilities: Provide staff support to the Plan
Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals.
Advise and assist the Village Administrator with urban planning and economic
development and redevelopment matters.
Advise and assist the Village Administrator with general public relations
matters and the regular publication of a Village newsletter.
Advise and assist the Village Administrator with the evaluation of Village
programs, in specific regard to program efficiency and cost effectiveness.
Advise and assist the Village Administrator in performing his duties and
responsibilities as Budget Officer.
Attend and observe meetings of Village boards, committees, associations and
commissions as may be requested by the village administrator.
Attend and observe meetings of the Oak Park/River Forest chamber of commerce
and the meetings of regional planning and policy bodies, as may be requested by
the village administrator.
Serve as safety director and perform all loss prevention responsibilities
assigned by the village administrator.
Function as acting village administrator in the absence of the village
administrator.
Perform such other duties and responsibilities as delegated to him by the
village administrator in addition to the duties and responsibilities listed
above. (Ord. 2333, 4-10-1989)
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE CLERK
SECTION:
1-8-1: Election And Term Of Office
1-8-2: Bond
1-8-3: Duty To Prepare Documents
1-8-4: Duty To Record And Publish Ordinances
1-8-5: Additional Powers And Duties
1-8-6: Compensation
1-8-7: Deputy Village Clerk
1-8-1: ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The village clerk shall be elected at the consolidated election for president
and shall hold office for a term of four years. The date of inauguration of a
newly elected village clerk shall be at the beginning of the regular meeting of
the president and village board of trustees on the second Monday of May. (Ord.
3086, 9-27-2004)
1-8-2: BOND:
The village clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute
to the village a bond in such amount and with surety required by the president
and board. (1981 Code)
1-8-3: DUTY TO PREPARE DOCUMENTS:
The village clerk shall:
   A.   Board Meetings: Attend all meetings of the board and keep a full record
of its proceedings in the journal; keep all records, receive, mark and properly
file all papers coming to this office belonging to the village; grant copies
certified under the corporate seal from the records or papers of the village
and execute such orders as he may receive from the board.
   B.   Prepare Permits And Licenses, Bonds: Prepare and deliver all permits,
licenses and bonds on receipt of the required sums of money therefor. (1981
Code)
   C.   Tax Levy Ordinances: He shall, on or before the second Tuesday in
September, or as required by law, each year, file with the county clerk of Cook
County a certified copy of the tax levy ordinance. (Ord. 2084, 10-12-1981, eff.
5-1-1982)
1-8-4: DUTY TO RECORD AND PUBLISH ORDINANCES:
The village clerk shall, within ten days after they are passed, cause all
ordinances of the village imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or
forfeiture, or making any appropriation to be published in such newspapers as
the president and board shall designate; and shall note at the foot of the
record of each ordinance a memorandum of the date of its passage, and the date
of its approval (if approved) by the president, and if published, the date of
such publication. He shall file the original ordinances in his office and
attach a certificate of publication to all ordinances requiring publication.
(1981 Code)
1-8-5: ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Notify Officers Elected Or Appointed: It shall be the duty of the
village clerk, within five days after the result of any election is declared,
or appointment made to notify all persons elected or appointed to any village
office, of their election or appointment, and unless such persons shall qualify
respectively in ten days after such notice, the office shall become vacant.
   B.   Custodian Of Seal And Records: He shall be custodian and keeper of the
corporate seal 1 , and of all books, records, ordinances and papers of the
village, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, and shall generally
do and perform such other duties as may be required of him by the president and
board, and by ordinance. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-16-1, "Village Seal", of this title.
1-8-6: COMPENSATION:
The village clerk shall not receive any compensation for services as the
village clerk, either for attendance at the meetings of the board or for the
performance of any other duty or thing connected with the office of village
clerk. (1981 Code)
1-8-7: DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERK:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of
deputy village clerk in and for the village, who shall perform the duties of
the office of village clerk in the absence or at the direction of the village
clerk. No more than two deputy village clerk positions shall be appointed by
the village clerk and such positions shall hold office at the pleasure of the
village clerk for a term of one year or until successors shall be appointed and
qualified. The appointment shall be made and the village board notified of the
appointments at the time other village officers are appointed. (Ord. 3200, 7-9-
2007)
   B.   Bond: The deputy village clerk shall, before entering upon the duties
of his office, execute a bond to the village in such amount and with such
surety required by the president and board.
   C.   Compensation: The deputy village clerk shall receive such compensation
as the president and board shall from time to time determine. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 9
VILLAGE FINANCE DIRECTOR
SECTION:
1-9-1: Appointment And Term Of Office
1-9-2: Bond, Oath And Compensation
1-9-3: Duties
1-9-4: Keep Books Of Account
1-9-5: Reports
1-9-6: Village Depositories
1-9-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village Finance Director shall be appointed by the President, by and with
the advice and consent of the Board, for a term not to exceed the term of the
Village President and until his or her successor shall be appointed and
qualified. During the temporary absence or disability of the Finance Director,
the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board, may designate
some properly qualified person to perform the duties of his office. (Ord. 3656,
7-10-2017)
1-9-2: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
Before taking office the Finance Director shall furnish a bond in such amount
and surety required by the President and Board. The Finance Director shall take
the oath as prescribed by statute for a Municipal Treasurer and as prescribed
by statute for a Municipal Comptroller, and he or she shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the Board. (Ord. 3362, 2-
28-2011)
1-9-3: DUTIES:
The Finance Director shall have the following duties:
   A.   Regarding Village monies:
      1.   Pay Out Monies:
         a.   Keep a true and accurate account of all monies paid into the
treasury, from whom and on what account received.
         b.   Pay out all such sums of money as may be ordered by the President
and Board, and only on checks signed by at least two of the following Village
officials: President, Chairman of the Finance Committee of the Board, Finance
Director, or Administrator.
         c.   Any bond or interest coupon issued by the Village and due and
payable shall be considered as a warrant duly authorized for payment.
      2.   Pay Out Money Only From Appropriate Fund: No money shall be paid by
the Finance Director upon any warrant, bond or coupon except from the monies
belonging to the particular fund or appropriation upon which such warrant shall
have been drawn, nor shall money be transferred from one fund to another after
it has been received by the Finance Director, nor appropriated to any other
purpose than that for which it has been collected or paid, without the vote of
a majority of the Board, unless otherwise provided for by ordinance or law.
      3.   Cancel Paid Warrants: The Finance Director shall cancel all warrants
paid out and redeemed by him or her and, upon the rendering of any monthly
report, the Finance Director shall cause the same to be accompanied by all
warrants, duplicate receipts in detail for all monies received, and such other
vouchers as will fully and entirely cover all his or her transactions for the
month of such report. The Village Clerk shall take charge of the Village
Finance Director's report, warrants and vouchers, and keep the same on file in
his or her office.
      4.   Keep Village Money Separate: The Finance Director shall keep all
monies belonging to the Village in his or her hands separate and distinct from
his or her own monies, and the Village Finance Director is expressly prohibited
from using, either directly or indirectly, the Village money or warrants in his
custody or keeping same for his or her own benefit or that of any person or
persons whatever. Any violation of this provision shall subject the Finance
Director to immediate removal from office by the Corporate Authorities, who may
declare the Finance Director's Office vacant.
   B.   Regarding accounting for Village monies:
      1.   General Powers And Duties: The Finance Director shall exercise a
general supervision over all the officers of the Village charged in any manner
with the receipt, collection or disbursement of the Village revenue, or with
the collection and return of the Village revenue into the treasury. The Finance
Director shall have custody and control of all Village documents, books and
papers which the Corporate Authorities may designate.
      2.   Tax Levy Ordinance: The Finance Director shall assist the Village
Clerk in preparation of the tax levy ordinance.
      3.   Designation Of Person To Sign Instruments: The Finance Director may
designate, in writing, one or more persons who shall have authority to affix
his or her signature as Finance Director to any written instrument which is
required to be signed by the Finance Director. When the Finance Director's
signature is so affixed to a written instrument at the Finance Director's
direction, the instrument, in all respects, shall be as binding on the Village
as if signed by the Finance Director in person. When the Finance Director
designates a person for this purpose, however, he or she shall notify the
President and Board to that effect and state in the notice the specific
instruments which he or she has authorized the person to sign.
      4.   Records Of Bonds Issued By Village: The Finance Director shall keep
in his or her office, in books used solely for that purpose, a correct list of
all the outstanding bonds of the Village, showing the number and amount of
each, and for and to whom the bonds were issued. When Village bonds are
purchased, paid or canceled, these books shall show these additional facts. In
his or her annual report the Finance Director shall describe, particularly, the
bonds sold during the year, and the terms of sale, with every item of expense
incurred therein.
      5.   Coordinate Financial Activities: The Finance Director shall control
and coordinate financial activities to assure fulfillment of operating budgets
for each department, approve operating plans, and assure efficient management
throughout the Village. He or she will carry out such contracts and commitments
as may be authorized by the Board.
      6.   Use Of Investments: The Finance Director shall assure the optimum
use of investment, detect and prevent inadvisable use of allotted funds, and
foster the best use of facilities in the interest of the Village.
      7.   Budgetary Control: The Finance Director shall assure budgetary
control throughout the Village, and, for any commitment of expenditure in
excess of the amount budgeted, obtain the approval from the Budget Officer or
submit the item in question to the Board for its approval.
      8.   Review Audit Reports: The Finance Director shall review all audit
reports of the Village and be available for consultation with any of the
auditors with respect to any matters arising out of such audits, and take all
appropriate action indicated by such audit reports.
   C.   The Finance Director shall perform such other duties as may be
prescribed by ordinance or law for a Municipal Treasurer and for a Municipal
Comptroller, including, but not limited to, such provisions in the Illinois
Municipal Code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-35-5 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 3362, 2-28-2011)
1-9-4: KEEP BOOKS OF ACCOUNT:
   A.   General: The books which must be kept by the Finance Director shall at
all times show the amounts of monies in his or her custody, amounts received
and amounts paid out. The Finance Director shall, upon receipt of all monies,
deposit same in the appropriate bank accounts as provided by law or ordinance.
   B.   Special Assessments: The Finance Director shall keep records pertaining
to receipts and disbursements applicable to special assessments in such form as
to permit cross reference to the detailed records maintained by the Village
Clerk. The amounts so received shall be held as a Trust Fund and applied only
to payment for the improvement for which the assessment was made, or for
principal and interest on bonds issued therefor, and for no other purpose
except as may be provided by law or ordinance. (Ord. 3362, 2-28-2011)
1-9-5: REPORTS:
   A.   Monthly Reports: The Finance Director shall, at the end of every month,
and more often if required, render an account to the Board, under oath, showing
his or her receipts and disbursements in detail during the month and the state
or condition of every account not closed on his or her books.
   B.   Annual Report: The Finance Director shall, annually, prior to October
15, make out and file with the Village Clerk a full and detailed account of all
Village receipts and expenditures, and of all his or her transactions as
Finance Director during the preceding fiscal year, which account the Clerk
shall cause to be published within ten days, as required by State law. (Ord.
3362, 2-28-2011)
1-9-6: VILLAGE DEPOSITORIES:
   A.   Naming: Alliance Financial Credit Union, Amalgamated Bank of Chicago,
Banco Popular, Bank of America, Charter One Bank, Chase, Citibank, Community
Bank of Oak Park and River Forest, Edward Jones, Fifth Third Bank, Forest Park
National Bank, Harris Bank, Leaders Bank, MB Financial, Suburban Bank & Trust,
TD Waterhouse, UBS, U.S. Bank, Wells Fargo Bank, and the Illinois Funds are
hereby designated as the depositories of Village money. Said depositories shall
disburse said money upon checks as provided for in subsection
1-9-3A of this chapter and as provided by law.
   B.   Compliance With State Law: The said depositories shall, before any
money is deposited, comply with all provisions required of them by law. (Ord.
3362, 2-28-2011)
CHAPTER 10
VILLAGE COMPTROLLER
(Rep. by Ord. 3362, 2-28-2011)
CHAPTER 11
VILLAGE ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-11-1: Appointment And Term Of Office
1-11-2: Bond, Oath And Compensation
1-11-3: General Duties
1-11-4: Attorney For Board Of Local Improvements
1-11-5: Employment Of Special Counsel
1-11-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village Attorney shall be appointed by the President, by and with the
advice and consent of the Board, for a term not to exceed the term of the
Village President and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified.
(Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
1-11-2: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
Before taking office, the Village Attorney shall furnish a bond in such amount
and surety required by the President and Board. He shall take the oath as
prescribed by statute, and he shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed, from time to time, by the Board. (1981 Code)
1-11-3: GENERAL DUTIES:
The Village Attorney shall:
   A.   Conduct Law Business Of Village: Superintend and conduct all the law
business of the Village, except such law business delegated to the Village
Prosecutor by the President and Board.
   B.   Draw Ordinances, Leases:
      1.   Draw such ordinances as may be required of him by the President and
Board, or by any committee thereof.
      2.   Draw the leases, deeds, papers and all contracts for the Village,
and when required, furnish written opinions on subjects submitted to him by the
President and Board. (1981 Code)
1-11-4: ATTORNEY FOR BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS:
The Village Attorney shall act as the Attorney for the Board of Local
Improvements 1 . He shall attend all meetings of the Board of Local
Improvements and supervise the keeping of a record of the minutes of said
meeting. He shall prepare or supervise the preparation of all necessary
instruments, resolutions, minutes of meetings, notices, preparation of records,
recommendations, estimates and ordinances, in connection with any proposed
local improvement, and shall prepare all contracts and contractor's bonds. It
shall be his duty to institute all court proceedings in connection with the
levying of special assessments or special tax proceedings for all local
improvements, and prosecute said proceedings to their conclusion. He shall
receive additional compensation for work in connection with local improvements,
as the President and Board shall determine, based upon the fair and reasonable
values of his services. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 2 of this Code.
1-11-5: EMPLOYMENT OF SPECIAL COUNSEL:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the Board from
employing the Village Attorney or any other attorney as special counsel to
represent the Village from time to time, and to pay such compensation to the
special counsel as the Board may, from time to time, determine. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 12
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Appointment And Term Of Office
1-12-2: Bond, Oath And Compensation
1-12-3: General Powers And Duties
1-12-4: Records
1-12-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the President, by and with
the advice and consent of the Board, for a term not to exceed the term of the
Village President and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. The
Village Administrator shall serve as ex-officio Director of Public Works in the
event of a vacancy or absence from this office. (Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
1-12-2: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
Before taking office, the Director of Public Works shall furnish a bond in such
amount and surety required by the President and Board. He shall take the oath
as prescribed by statute, and he shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed from time to time by the Board. (Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
1-12-3: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Director of Public Works shall have supervision and maintenance of the
Department of Public Works and shall perform the following duties:
   A.   Control and supervision over water supply, all water equipment and all
water distribution; all sewers and work in connection therewith, and all other
public utilities owned by the Village.
   B.   Inspection of streets, alleys, sidewalks and all other public
improvements.
   C.   Changes in and inspection of existing public utilities and new public
utilities which may be authorized.
   D.   Collection of all refuse and garbage, and the disposal of same.
   E.   Oversight and management of the Village's engineering function and
Village Engineer.
   F.   In all public improvements, he shall inspect the work as it progresses
and approve the installation before payment is made on account of work done,
and he shall be responsible for the maintenance of work so approved.
   G.   Perform such forestry services as assigned.
   H.   Perform such other duties as assigned. (Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
1-12-4: RECORDS:
The Director of Public Works shall:
   A.   Preserve in his office all records, including engineering field notes,
maps and plans, and index same.
   B.   Maintain in his office a complete atlas of all sewers laid or connected
in the Village, with all junctions and house connections distinctly recorded
therein.
   C.   Maintain the geographical information system (GIS) of the Village.
(Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
CHAPTER 13
HEALTH COMMISSIONER
SECTION:
1-13-1: Appointment And Term Of Office
1-13-2: Bond, Oath And Compensation
1-13-3: General Powers And Duties
1-13-4: Records
1-13-5: Monthly Report
1-13-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The Health Commissioner shall be appointed by the President, by and with the
advice and consent of the Board, for a period of one year and until his
successor shall be appointed and qualified. The Health Commissioner shall be a
resident of the Village. He shall have such assistants as the President and
Board may provide. (1981 Code)
1-13-2: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
Before taking office, the Health Commissioner shall furnish a bond in such
amount and surety required by the President and Board. He shall take the oath
as prescribed by statute, and he shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed from time to time by the Board. (1981 Code)
1-13-3: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Health Commissioner shall:
   A.   Have the management and control of all matters and things pertaining to
the Health Department.
   B.   Have and exercise a general supervision over the sanitary condition of
the Village. All orders and directions emanating from the Health Department
shall be issued in the name of the Health Commissioner.
   C.   Give to the President and the officers in charge of all other
departments all such professional advice and information as they may require
with a view to the preservation of the public health, and whenever they shall
hear of the existence of any contagious or pestilential disease, he shall
investigate the same and adopt measures to arrest its progress.
   D.   Enforce all the laws of the State, provisions of this Code and other
ordinances of the Village relating to health, and cause all nuisances affecting
the sanitary condition of the Village to be abated with all reasonable
promptness. For the purpose of carrying out the foregoing requirements, he and
any representative of the Health Department shall be permitted at all times to
enter into any house, store or other building and to cause the floors to be
raised, if he shall deem it necessary, in order to make a thorough examination
of cellars, vaults, sinks or drains and other parts of the building, and to
cause all dead animals or other unwholesome things or substances to be removed.
He shall be authorized to close immediately any store which sells to the
public, if health conditions, in his opinion, so warrant. (1981 Code)
1-13-4: RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of the Health Commissioner to cause to be kept a record of
all transactions of his office, including such statistical information as may
be necessary for the efficient working of his office. (1981 Code)
1-13-5: MONTHLY REPORT:
The Health Commissioner shall, monthly on or before the second Monday, send to
the President and Board a full and comprehensive statement of all matters
pertaining to his office. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 14
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-14-1: Officers Of The Village
1-14-2: Oath Of Office
1-14-3: Bonds Of Officers
1-14-4: Qualify For Office
1-14-5: Records And Documents Of Officers
1-14-6: Board May Require Other Duties
1-14-7: Compensation
1-14-1: OFFICERS OF THE VILLAGE:
   A.   Elected Officers: The elected officers of the Village are a President,
a Board of six Trustees, a Library Board of six Directors and a Village Clerk.
(1981 Code)
   B.   Appointed Officers: The other officers of the Village shall be
appointed by the President and Board at its first regular meeting in the month
of May in each year, or as soon thereafter as may be, and shall hold their
offices as hereinafter provided and until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Any officers so appointed may be suspended or removed from office
for good and sufficient cause, and all vacancies may be filled by said
President and Board. Said appointed officers may consist of a Village
Administrator, a Health Commissioner, Village Attorney, Village Finance
Director, Director of Public Works, Fire Chief, Chief of Police, and Village
Prosecutor. The President and Board may also, from time to time, appoint such
other officers as they may deem necessary. (Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
1-14-2: OATH OF OFFICE:
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers of
the Village, whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe to the
following oath:
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of
           according to the best of my ability."
Such oath or affirmation so subscribed shall be filed in the Office of the
Village Clerk. (1981 Code)
1-14-3: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
Each official bond with surety, as required by the President and Board, shall
be conditioned for the faithful and legal performance of the duties of the
officer giving the bond, and for the payment of all public monies received by
him, according to law 1 , and for a compliance with the ordinances, orders and
resolutions of the Board; provided, that no Village officer shall be accepted
as surety on the bond to the Village. All premiums on official bonds required
by this Code for Village officers or employees shall be paid by the Village.
(1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-14-3.
1-14-4: QUALIFY FOR OFFICE:
No officer shall enter upon the duties of his office until he has given bond as
required by this chapter, and if he shall not take oath and present such bond
to the Village Clerk within ten days after notification by the Clerk of his
election or appointment, his office shall be deemed vacant. (1981 Code)
1-14-5: RECORDS AND DOCUMENTS OF OFFICERS:
All books, papers, vouchers, warrants, entries, accounts and memoranda of each
and every officer may be examined at any time by the President or any member of
the Board. The Board may, by resolution, call upon any officer to make a
report, in writing, on any subject matter which said Board may designate in
such resolution and within such time as said resolution may prescribe.
Any person having been an officer of the Village shall, within five days after
notification and request, deliver to his successor in office all money,
property, books and effects of every description in his position belonging to
the Village or pertaining to said office. (1981 Code)
1-14-6: BOARD MAY REQUIRE OTHER DUTIES:
Each officer, besides the specific duties which he may be required to do by the
various provisions of the ordinances of the Village and the State law, shall
also perform such other and further duties and be subject to such other rules
and regulations as the Board may, from time to time, require. (1981 Code)
1-14-7: COMPENSATION:
Compensation shall be as provided by the Village in its annual budget. (1981
Code)
CHAPTER 15
ORDINANCES
SECTION:
1-15-1: Enacting Style of Ordinances
1-15-2: Record and Memorandum of Ordinances
1-15-3: Proof of Ordinances
1-15-4: Price and Cost of Copies of Ordinances
1-15-1: ENACTING STYLE OF ORDINANCES 1 :
The enacting style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the President
and Board of Trustees of the Village of River Forest, Illinois, as follows:",
and all ordinances passed by the Board must be signed by the President or by
the President Pro Tem. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-2.
1-15-2: RECORD AND MEMORANDUM OF ORDINANCES 1 :
The Village Clerk shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose,
all ordinances passed by the Board. Immediately following such ordinance, the
Village Clerk shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage and the
publication, where required, of the ordinance. The record and memorandum herein
required or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage and of the publication or posting of ordinances. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-5.
1-15-3: PROOF OF ORDINANCES 1 :
The contents of all Village ordinances, the date of passage and the date of
publication or posting, where required, may be proved by the certificate of the
Village Clerk, under the Seal of the Village.
Whenever Village ordinances are printed in book or pamphlet form, and purport
to be published by authority of the Board, such book or pamphlet shall be prima
facie evidence of the contents, passage and legal publication of such
ordinances, as of the dates mentioned in such book or pamphlet, in all courts
and administrative tribunals. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 3. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-6.
1-15-4: PRICE AND COST OF COPIES OF ORDINANCES:
Whenever an ordinance imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture,
or making any appropriation shall be printed in book or pamphlet form,
published by authority of the Board, the Village shall impose a reasonable
price commensurate with the cost of the printing thereof for the distribution
of such book or pamphlet to the public. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 16
VILLAGE SEAL, MOTTO, FLAG
SECTION:
1-16-1: Village Seal
1-16-2: Village Motto
1-16-3: Village Flag
1-16-1: VILLAGE SEAL:
The Seal heretofore provided and used by and for the Village (the impression of
which is in circular form) with the words "Village of River Forest, organized
October 24, 1980", on the outer circle, and in the interior of said circle the
monogram "RF" together with the inscription "SILVA IN FLUMINE", shall be and is
hereby established and declared to be the Seal of the Village. A facsimile of
such Seal is as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2366.png]
and same is declared to be and is adopted as the Corporate Seal of the Village
and shall be kept in the custody of the Village Clerk. (1981 Code)
1-16-2: VILLAGE MOTTO:
The motto "PROUD HERITAGE - BRIGHT FUTURE" shall be and is hereby established
and declared to be the motto of the Village. (1981 Code)
1-16-3: VILLAGE FLAG:
The official flag of the Village, adopted during the Centennial celebration in
1980, with the graphics and colors depicting the river and forest which gave
River Forest its name in 1880, shall be and is hereby established and declared
to be the flag of the Village. A facsimile of such flag is as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2368.png]
(1981 Code)
CHAPTER 17
VILLAGE FINANCES
(Rep. by Ord. 2578, 12-13-1993)
CHAPTER 18
FIRE CHIEF
SECTION:
1-18-1: Appointment And Term Of Office
1-18-2: Bond, Oath And Compensation
1-18-3: General Powers And Duties
1-18-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the President, by and with the consent of
the Board, for a term not to exceed the term of the Village President and until
his successor shall be appointed and qualified. During the temporary absence or
disability of the Fire Chief, the President, by and with the consent of the
Board, may designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of
his office. (Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
1-18-2: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
Before taking office the Fire Chief shall furnish a bond in such amount and
surety required by the President and Board. He shall take the oath as
prescribed by statute, and he shall receive such compensation as shall be
fixed, from time to time, by the Board. (1981 Code)
1-18-3: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Fire Chief shall have supervision and maintenance of the Fire Department
and shall perform the duties and have the authority set forth in section
7-1-4 of this Code. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 19
POLICE CHIEF
SECTION:
1-19-1: Appointment And Term Of Office
1-19-2: Bond, Oath And Compensation
1-19-3: General Powers And Duties
1-19-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The Police Chief shall be appointed by the President, by and with the consent
of the Board, for a term not to exceed the term of the Village President and
until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. During the temporary
absence or disability of the Police Chief, the President, by and with the
consent of the Board, may designate some properly qualified person to perform
the duties of his office. (Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
1-19-2: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
Before taking office the Police Chief shall furnish a bond in such amount and
surety required by the President and Board. He shall take the oath as
prescribed by statute, and he shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by the Board. (1981 Code)
1-19-3: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Police Chief shall have supervision and maintenance of the Police
Department and shall perform the duties and have the authority set forth in
sections
8-1-5 and
8-1-6 of this Code. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 20
VILLAGE ENGINEER
SECTION:
1-20-1: Appointment And Term Of Office
1-20-2: Bond, Oath And Compensation
1-20-3: General Powers And Duties
1-20-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village Engineer shall be appointed by the Village Administrator and report
to the Director of Public Works. During the temporary absence or disability of
the Village Engineer, the Village Administrator may designate some properly
qualified person to perform the duties of his office. (Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
1-20-2: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
Before taking office the Village Engineer shall furnish a bond in such amount
and surety required by the President and Board. He shall take the oath as
prescribed by statute, and he shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by the Board. (Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
1-20-3: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Village Engineer shall perform the following duties:
   A.   Advise the Board on all public works improvement plans, programs and
projects.
   B.   Prepare plans and specifications for specific projects for street,
waterworks and sewerage system improvements when authorized.
   C.   Conduct construction supervision and inspection of specific projects
for street, waterworks and sewerage system improvements when authorized.
   D.   Attend meetings of the Board and of Village committees and commissions
when required. (Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
CHAPTER 21
VILLAGE PROSECUTOR
SECTION:
1-21-1: Appointment And Term Of Office
1-21-2: Bond, Oath And Compensation
1-21-3: General Powers And Duties
1-21-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The village prosecutor shall be appointed by the president, by and with the
consent of the board, for a period of one year and until his successor shall be
appointed and qualified. During the temporary absence or disability of the
village prosecutor, the president, by and with the consent of the board, may
designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of his office.
(1981 Code)
1-21-2: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
Before taking office the village prosecutor shall furnish a bond in such amount
and surety required by the president and board. He shall take the oath as
prescribed by statute, and he shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by the board. (1981 Code)
1-21-3: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The village prosecutor shall perform the following duties:
   A.   Advise the board on enforcement of village ordinances.
   B.   Represent the village in local courts in the prosecution of violators
of village ordinances.
   C.   Attend meetings of the board and of village committees and commissions
when required. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 22
BUDGET POLICY
SECTION:
1-22-1: Budget Officer And Budget Procedures
1-22-2: Powers And Duties Of Budget Officer In Implementing Budget Policy
1-22-3: Compilation And Contents Of Budget
1-22-4: Passage Of Annual Budget, Effect
1-22-5: Capital Improvement Or Replacement Fund
1-22-6: Revision Of Annual Budget
1-22-7: Funds For Contingency Purposes
1-22-8: Public Inspection, Notice And Hearing On Budget
1-22-9: Purchasing
1-22-10: Property Tax Cap
1-22-11: Travel Expense Control
1-22-1: BUDGET OFFICER AND BUDGET PROCEDURES:
   A.   Statutes Adopted: The village hereby adopts 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through and including 5/8-2-9.10, providing for an annual
municipal budget in lieu of the passage of an annual appropriation ordinance.
   B.   Budget Officer:
      1.   Appointment: The village president with the approval of the board of
trustees, shall appoint a budget officer who shall have the powers, duties and
responsibilities enumerated in the above sections of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes as they are now, or may hereafter be amended.
      2.   Bond: The budget officer shall furnish a bond in such amount and
surety required by the president and board, or such other sum as may be
required by statute.
      3.   Removal From Office: The budget officer may be removed for cause at
any time by the president and board of trustees voting jointly. The action of
the president and board of trustees in removing the budget officer shall be
final.
   C.   Preliminary Budget: Copies of the preliminary annual budget shall be
made available for public inspection in typewritten form in the office of the
village clerk for at least ten days prior to the passage of the annual budget,
and not less than one week after the budget is available for inspection, and
prior to final action on the budget, at least one public hearing shall be held
on the budget by the president and board of trustees. Notice of this hearing
shall be given by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the
village at least one week prior to the time of the hearing.
   D.   Budget Revisions:
      1.   Authority: The board of trustees may delegate authority to the
village administrator, budget officer or finance director to delete, add to, or
change items previously budgeted to the department, board or commission,
subject to such limitation or requirement for prior approval by board of
trustees, upon a two- thirds vote of members, may establish. The budget officer
may revise or alter the annual budget by changing line items in the same
department category or same fund without board approval.
      2.   Vote On Revisions: The annual budget may be revised by a vote of
two-thirds of the board of trustees by deleting, adding to or changing budgeted
items. Changes made pursuant to subsection D1 of this section shall not be
considered revisions to the annual budget.
      3.   Restrictions On Revisions: No revision of budget items shall be made
which result in increasing the total budget unless funds are available to
effectuate the purpose of the revision.
      4.   Emergency Budget Revisions; Borrowing Money:
         a.   Notwithstanding the limitation of this section, the president and
board of trustees, by two-thirds vote, may make emergency revisions to the
annual budget for: 1) improvements or restorations made necessary by any
casualty or accident; 2) to meet any unforeseen emergency requiring immediate
action to prevent the spread of disease or avoid imminent danger to persons or
property.
         b.   Should any judgment be obtained against the village, the village
may borrow a sufficient amount to pay the same for a space of time expiring not
later than the close of the next fiscal year, which sum and interest shall, in
like manner, be added to and included in the amount authorized to be raised in
the general tax levy of the next year. (Ord. 3361, 2-28-2011)
1-22-2: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUDGET OFFICER IN IMPLEMENTING BUDGET POLICY:
The budget officer shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   Permit, encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures in all municipal departments, commissions and boards.
   B.   Compile an annual budget in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-2-9.3 and this code.
   C.   Examine all books and records of all municipal departments, commissions
and boards which relate to monies received by the village, village departments,
commissions and boards and paid out by the village, village departments,
commissions and boards; debts and accounts receivable; amounts owed by or to
the village, village departments, commissions and boards.
   D.   Obtain such additional information from the village, village
departments, commissions and boards as may be useful for purposes of compiling
a village budget, such information to be furnished by the village, village
departments, commissions and boards in the form required by the budget officer.
   E.   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no
expenditures are made by the village, village departments, commissions or
boards except as authorized by the budget. (Ord. 3361, 2-28-2011)
1-22-3: COMPILATION AND CONTENTS OF BUDGET:
The budget shall contain estimates of revenues available to the village for the
fiscal year for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended
expenditures for the village and all of the village's departments, commissions
and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be
presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management
practices. The budget shall contain actual or estimated revenues and
expenditures for the two years immediately preceding the fiscal year for which
the budget is prepared. Each budget shall show the specific fund from which
each anticipated expenditure shall be made. (Ord. 2084, 10-12-1981, eff. 5-1-
1982)
1-22-4: PASSAGE OF ANNUAL BUDGET, EFFECT:
Passage of the annual budget by majority vote of the president and members of
the board shall be in lieu of passage of an appropriation ordinance. The annual
budget need not be published except in a manner provided for in section
1-15-3 of this title. The annual budget shall be adopted by the corporate
authorities before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies.
Subsequent to the passage of the budget, an ordinance shall be passed
establishing the property taxes to be levied for the fiscal year. This
ordinance shall establish the property tax as provided for in the approved
budget, and as governed by applicable statutes. (Ord. 2084, 10-12-1981, eff. 5-
1-1982)
1-22-5: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT OR REPLACEMENT FUND:
Monies may be accumulated in a separate fund for the purpose or purposes of
specific capital improvements or replacements of specific types of municipal
equipment or other tangible property, both real and personal, to be designated
as the "capital improvement or replacement fund". Expenditures from the capital
improvement or replacement fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which
the capital improvement or replacement will occur. Should any surplus monies
remain after the completion or abandonment of any project for which the capital
improvement or replacement fund was inaugurated, then such funds no longer
necessary for capital improvement or replacement shall be transferred into the
general operating fund of the village during the first quarter of the fiscal
year following such abandonment, completion or discovery of surplus funds.
(Ord. 2084, 10-12-1981, eff. 5-1-1982)
1-22-6: REVISION OF ANNUAL BUDGET:
During the first thirty days of a fiscal year and after newly elected officials
have been installed, by a two-thirds majority vote of corporate authorities
then holding office, the annual budget for the village may be revised by
deleting, adding to, changing or creating subclasses within object classes and
object classes themselves.
During the remainder of the fiscal year, the budget officer shall recommend
revisions to the budget for the village by deleting, adding to, changing or
creating subclasses within object classes and object classes themselves.
Revisions requested by department heads, boards or commissions shall be
submitted in writing to the budget officer. The line item amount to be changed
in the budget and the reason therefor shall be clearly stated. The budget
officer shall review all requests for budget revisions as to their effect on
the budget in total and the availability of funds. All requests and
recommendations for revisions of the budget shall be submitted to the budget
officer for approval. The budget officer may revise or alter the annual budget
by changing line items in the same department category or same fund without
board approval. The president and board, by two-thirds majority vote, shall
have the authority to revise the budget by transferring monies between funds.
No revisions of the budget shall be made increasing the budget in the event
funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of the revision. (Ord. 3361,
2-28-2011)
1-22-7: FUNDS FOR CONTINGENCY PURPOSES:
The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes not to
exceed two percent of the total budget, less the amount set aside for
contingency purposes, which monies may be expended for contingencies upon a
majority vote of the corporate authorities then holding office. (Ord. 2084, 10-
12-1981, eff. 5-1-1982)
1-22-8: PUBLIC INSPECTION, NOTICE AND HEARING ON BUDGET:
The corporate authorities shall make the tentative annual budget conveniently
available to public inspection for at least ten days prior to passage of the
annual budget, by publication in such form as the corporate authorities may
prescribe. Not less than one week after the publication of the tentative annual
budget, and prior to final action on the budget, the corporate authorities
shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative budget, after which
hearing or hearings the tentative budget may be further revised and passed
without further inspection, notice or hearing. Notice of this hearing shall be
given at least one week prior to the time of the hearing by publication in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality. (Ord. 2084, 10-12-
1981, eff. 5-1-1982)
1-22-9: PURCHASING:
All purchases of goods and services shall be made in accordance with this
section. All purchases of twenty thousand dollars or more shall be approved by
the village board and shall be by competitive bid with the contract being
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder; provided, however, that the aforesaid
requirement for competitive bidding can be waived by the village board by a
vote of two-thirds of the trustees then holding office. The village board shall
have the right to reject all bids submitted.
Purchases under twenty thousand dollars which have been previously approved in
the current budget shall be approved by the village administrator without
competitive bids. Except in an emergency or when commercially unreasonable, the
village administrator shall require the submission of at least three written
quotations prior to approval when the cost is greater than ten thousand
dollars. The village administrator shall report all purchases of ten thousand
dollars or more in writing to the village board no later than the next regular
meeting. (Ord. 3160, 6-12-2006)
1-22-10: PROPERTY TAX CAP:
   A.   Applicability And Purpose: This section shall apply only if the village
of River Forest is a home rule unit. The purpose of this section is to restrict
the village's authority to levy property taxes. As set forth in this section,
the village is limited in the amount of property taxes it may increase its levy
over the prior year to the lesser of five percent or the consumer price index.
However, the village reserves the right in this section, as set forth below, to
base future property tax levies on the maximum amount it could have levied in
each year, regardless of whether or not the village actually levied that
maximum amount.
   B.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases have the following meanings:
   AGGREGATE LEVY: The annual levy of property taxes by the village for all
purposes, with the exception of:
      1.   Amounts levied for the specific purposes of special service areas;
      2.   Amounts levied for payments of debt service up to an amount equal to
that allowed to the village under the PTELL while the village was a non-home
rule unit; and
      3.   Other amounts excluded from the aggregate levy under the PTELL or
other state statute.
   CONSUMER PRICE INDEX: The consumer price index for all urban consumers for
all items, published by the United States department of labor.
   LEVY CAP: The amount of the aggregate levy for the year preceding the
effective date hereof increased each year thereafter by the lesser of five
percent or the percentage increase in the annualized consumer price index from
December of two years prior to the current levy year to December of one year
prior to the current levy year.
   PTELL: The property tax extension limitation law, as amended.
   VILLAGE: The village of River Forest and any other entity with the authority
to levy taxes through the village's authority to levy taxes.
   C.   Tax Cap: The village shall not certify to the Cook County clerk an
aggregate levy in one year that exceeds the levy cap. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to impair any contract executed prior to the effective date
hereof.
   D.   Exceptions: The village shall abide by the provisions of this section,
except upon the affirmative vote of five members of the corporate authorities
holding office conducted after a public hearing, held not more than thirty days
nor less than fifteen days after notice of the hearing was published in a
newspaper published in and of general circulation in the village, for one or
more of the following purposes:
      1.   A bona fide emergency resulting in damage to the village's property,
such as, but not limited to, replacement of village infrastructure resulting
from a natural disaster;
      2.   A new unfunded mandate from the federal government, state of
Illinois or county of Cook causing an increase in the village's expenditures
without providing for an equal or greater amount of offsetting revenue for the
village;
      3.   A new reduction in shared revenue from the state of Illinois. (Ord.
3454, 9-10-2012)
1-22-11: TRAVEL EXPENSE CONTROL:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases have the following meanings:
   ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters,
circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
   PUBLIC BUSINESS: Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose
which is required or useful for the benefit of the village to carry out the
responsibilities of village business.
   TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the village or by wards or charges of the village involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services.
   B.   Reimbursement:
      1.   Limitations: The village shall only reimburse the types of travel,
meal, and lodging expenses incurred by its employees and officers up to the
maximum allowable amounts set forth in 7.20.1.A. through 7.20.1.D. of the
"Village Of River Forest Employee Personnel Manual", as may be amended from
time to time (the "personnel manual").
      2.   Forms Required: No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses
incurred by an employee or officer shall be authorized unless the standardized
forms required by the personnel manual have been submitted and approved in
accordance with the personnel manual. All documents and information submitted
with the forms referenced herein are public records subject to disclosure under
the Illinois freedom of information act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 et
seq., as may be amended from time to time.
      3.   Preapproval: Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of: a) any
officer or employee that exceeds the maximum reimbursement allowed under this
section, or b) any member of the corporate authorities of the village, shall
only be approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the corporate
authorities of the village. However, in the event of an emergency or other
extraordinary circumstance, the corporate authorities of the village may
approve more than the maximum allowable expenses set forth above.
      4.   No Entertainment: No reimbursement shall be made to any member of
the corporate authorities, employee, or officer for any entertainment expense.
Activities which would otherwise be considered entertainment, but which are
excluded from the prohibition on reimbursement due to being ancillary to the
purpose of the program or event, may be reimbursed in accordance with this
section. (Ord. 3633, 12-12-2016)
CHAPTER 23
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-23-1: Preamble And Other Laws
1-23-2: Definitions
1-23-3: Prohibited Political Activities
1-23-4: Gift Ban
1-23-5: Ethical Standards
1-23-6: Duty To Report
1-23-7: Ethics Advisor
1-23-8: Ethics Commission
1-23-9: Enforcement And Penalties
1-23-10: How To Make A Complaint
1-23-1: PREAMBLE AND OTHER LAWS:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a code of ethical conduct for all
"Village covered individuals" and "contractors," as defined in Section
1-23-2 below. The requirements of this Chapter are intended to meet or exceed
the ethics requirements imposed in State or Federal law on Village covered
individuals and contractors. These ethical standards are intended to be self-
enforcing and are most effective when village covered individuals and
contractors are thoroughly familiar with and embrace the ethical standards.
Therefore, the ethical standards shall be included in the regular orientations
for all village covered individuals and contractors. Upon entering office,
employment or service to the village, as the case may be, each village covered
individual shall sign a statement affirming they have read and understand the
ethical standards in this chapter. To the extent State or Federal law, or
another Village ordinance, policy or requirement, imposes stricter ethical
standards than in this Chapter, the strictest standards shall apply. Additional
ethics requirements applicable to Village covered individuals and / or
contractors, as the case may be, are imposed in the following laws, among
others:
   A.   Illinois Governmental Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 420/1-101, et seq., as
amended;
   B.   Illinois State Officials and employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1, et
seq., as amended;
   C.   Illinois Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/1-1, et seq., as amended;
   D.   Illinois Lobbyist Registration Act, 25 ILCS 170/1, et seq.
   E.   Illinois Public officer Prohibited Activities Act, 50 ILCS 105/0.01, et
seq., as amended;
   F.   Illinois Public officer Simultaneous Tenure Act, 50 ILCS 110/0.01, et
seq., as amended;
   G.   Illinois Local Government Employees Political Rights Act, 50 ILCS 135/
1, et seq., as amended;
   H.   Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1, et seq., as amended;
   I.   Illinois Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1-1, et seq., as amended; and
   J.   Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/1-1, et seq., as amended. (Ord.
3861, 4-25-2022; amd. Ord. 3960, 7-14-2025)
1-23-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall be given these
definitions, whether or not capitalized herein:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected Village office, or who has been appointed to fill a
vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at
a regular election for such office, as defined in Section 9-1.3 of the Illinois
Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/9-1.3, as amended.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section
3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, 5 ILCS 315/3, as amended.
COMPENSATED TIME: Means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of their employment, but for purposes of this chapter,
does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to Village covered individuals whose hours are not fixed,
"compensated time" includes any period when the person is on premises under the
control of the employer or when the person is executing their official duties,
regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked more than the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of their employment.
CONTRACTOR: Means a contractor, sub-contractor or any person or entity doing,
or seeking to do, business with the Village.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 9-1.4 of
the Illinois Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4, as amended.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the Village of River Forest, whether on a full
time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose official duties are
subject to the direction and control of the Village with regard to the material
details of how the work is to be performed but does not include an independent
contractor.
EMPLOYER: The Village of River Forest.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, tickets, travel expenses and honoraria for
speaking engagements related to or attributable to the Village covered
individual's employment or work on behalf of the Village.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER: Any individual's spouse, domestic partner, civil union
partner, parent, step-parent, child, step-child, sibling, step-sibling,
dependent, or any family member living in the same household as such
individual, including a fiancé or fiancée.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in their official capacity.
OFFICIAL DUTIES: Actions performed that are either required or authorized as
part of an individual's position to effectuate the assignments of that
position.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office, question of public policy or any political
organization, but does not include activities: a) in furtherance of the
person's "official duties" such as work associated with executive, legislative,
or administrative action or b) relating to collective bargaining. Political
activity as defined herein shall not include any activities which the Village
is precluded from regulating under the United States Constitution, the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, Federal law or State law.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or a County Clerk under
Section 9-3 of the Illinois Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/9-3, as amended, but only
with regard to those activities that require filing with the State Board of
Elections or a County Clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
   A.   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action from the Village: 1) by an officer board or
commission appointment, or 2) by an employee, or by the officer or another
employee directing that employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business with the Village;
   C.   Conducts Village activities with a Village covered individual;
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of a Village covered individual;
   E.   Is registered or required to be registered with the Illinois Secretary
of State under the Illinois Lobbyist Registration Act, 25 ILCS 170/1, et seq.,
as amended,; or
   F.   Is an agent of, a spouse of, or an immediate family member who is
living with a "prohibited source."
VILLAGE BOARD MEMBERS AND COMMISSIONERS: Means each of the Village President,
Village Clerk, members of the Board of Trustees and members of the official
advisory groups of the village.
VILLAGE COVERED INDIVIDUAL: Means each of the Village Board members and
commissioners, appointed officers, members of official advisory groups,
volunteers and employees of the Village. (Ord. 3861, 4-25-2022; amd. Ord. 3960,
7-12-2025)
1-23-3: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Village covered individuals and contractors shall not knowingly perform
any prohibited political activity during any time where they are being
compensated by the Village. Except as noted herein, Village covered individuals
and contractors shall not knowingly use any Village property or resources by
engaging in any prohibited political activity. Exceptions:
      1.   A Village employee may use a Village vehicle designated for their
unrestricted full time use for any purpose while not on compensated time, and
      2.   A Village officer may use any room for a political campaign which
room is available for use by the general public.
   B.   At no time shall any Village covered individual or contractor knowingly
use the services of any other Village covered individual or contractor, by
requiring that person to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as part
of that person's Village work or duties, 2) as a condition of Village
employment or doing business with the Village, or 3) during any compensated
time.
   C.   Village covered individuals and contractors shall not be required at
any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration
for being awarded business with the Village, additional compensation or any
employee benefit.
   D.   A Village covered individual shall not be awarded any additional
compensation or employee benefit in consideration for the person's
participation in any prohibited political activity.
   E.   Nothing in this Section prohibits activities that are otherwise
appropriate for a Village covered individual to engage in as a part of their
official Village employment, duties or activities that are undertaken by a
Village covered individual on a voluntary basis as permitted by law, including,
but not limited to, pursuant to the Illinois Local Government Political Rights
Act, 50 ILCS 135/1, et seq., as amended.
   F.   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment, or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by Federal funds and that is subject to the Federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of Village employment or tenure
solely because they are a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 3861, 4-25-2022)
1-23-4: GIFT BAN:
   A.   Solicitation Or Acceptance Of Gifts: Except as set forth in Subsection
1-23-4.B. of this Section, no Village covered individual, and no immediate
family member of a Village covered individual (collectively the "recipients"),
shall knowingly solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, or which
is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall
knowingly offer or make a gift that violates this Section.
   B.   Exceptions: Subsection 1-23-4.A. of this Section is not applicable to
the following:
      1.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
      2.   Anything for which the Village covered individual or their spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
      3.   Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code
or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
      4.   Educational materials.
      5.   Reasonable expenses associated with travel in furtherance of
official duties
      6.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual’s parent, child, sibling, parent’s sibling, grandparent’s sibling,
first cousin, child of a sibling, spouse, grandparents, grandchild, parent-in-
law, child-in-law, sibling-in-law, stepparent, stepchild, stepsibling, half-
sibling, and including the parent or grandparent of the individual's spouse and
the individual's fiancé or fiancée.
      7.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the Village covered
individual's association with the Village or their immediate family members
association with the Village and not because of the personal friendship. In
determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the
recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered,
such as: a) the history of the relationship between the individual giving the
gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts
between those individuals; b) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient
the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual
knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same
time gave the same or similar gifts to other Village covered individuals, or
their spouses or immediate family members.
      8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy-five dollars per person
in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are:
a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or b)
catered. For the purposes of this Section, "catered," means food or
refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
      9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of the Village covered
individual), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the
official position or employment of the Village covered individual, and are
customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
      10.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this Section, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to a Village
covered individual from another Village covered individual and
"intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to a Village covered individual
by an officer or employee of another governmental entity.
      11.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
      12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars.
Each of the exceptions listed in this Subsection 1-23-4.B. is mutually
exclusive and independent of every other.
   C.   Disposition Of Gifts: A Village covered individual, their spouse or an
immediate family member living with the Village covered individual, does not
violate this chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to
return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an
amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income
taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now
or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 3861, 4-25-2022; amd.
Ord. 3960, 7-14-2025)
1-23-5: ETHICAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose And Application: The Village adopts these ethical standards to
assure public confidence in the integrity of local government and its effective
and fair operation. This section shall apply to all village covered individuals
and contractors.
   B.   Policy Statement: The citizens and businesses of the Village are
entitled to have fair, ethical and accountable local government in connection
with Village covered individuals and contractors who have earned the public's
full confidence. In keeping with the Village's commitment to excellence, the
effective functioning of democratic government requires that:
      1.   Village covered individuals and contractors comply with the letter
and spirit of the laws and policies affecting the operations of government and
avoid even the appearance of impropriety;
      2.   Village covered individuals and contractors be independent,
impartial and fair in their judgment and actions;
      3.   Village covered individuals use public office for the public good,
not for personal gain;
      4.   Public deliberations and processes are conducted by Village covered
individuals transparently, unless legally entitled to be conducted in executive
session, in an atmosphere of respect and civility; and
      5.   Public deliberations and processes are conducted by the Village
Board members and commissioners free of abusive conduct and personal attacks
that are unrelated to public business.
   C.   Ethical Standards: Pursuant to the above policy statement, and to
assure public confidence in the integrity of local government and commitment to
respect and civility in public discourse, the following ethical standards are
imposed:
      1.   Working For The Common Good: Recognizing that stewardship of the
public interest must be their primary concern, Village covered individuals
shall work for the common good of the people of the Village, shall work for the
best interests of the Village and shall not work on behalf of any private or
personal interest, and they shall assure fair and equal treatment of all
persons, claims and transactions coming before the Village. Village covered
individuals shall put forth an honest effort in the discharge of their official
duties in a fiscally responsible manner.
      2.   Compliance With Laws: Village covered individuals and contractors
shall comply with the laws of the United States, the State of Illinois and the
Village of River Forest in the performance of their official duties. These laws
include, without limitation: the United States and Illinois constitutions; the
State and County laws and ordinances pertaining to conflicts of interest, gift
bans, election campaign disclosures, employer responsibilities, and open
processes of government; and local ordinances and policies.
      3.   Respect For Process: Village covered individuals shall perform their
official duties in accordance with the processes and rules of order established
by the Village governing the deliberation of public policy issues, meaningful
involvement of the public, and implementation of policy decisions of the
Village Board by the Village staff.
      4.   Conduct Of Public Meetings: Village covered individuals shall
prepare themselves for public issues; listen courteously and attentively to all
public discussions before the public body; and focus on the business at hand.
Village Board members and commissioners shall further refrain from interrupting
other speakers; making personal comments not germane to the business of the
body; or otherwise interfering with the orderly conduct of meetings.
      5.   Sharing Of Relevant Information: Village Board members and
commissioners shall publicly share substantive information that is relevant to
a matter under consideration by their respective bodies, which may have been
received from sources outside of the public decision making process.
      6.   Conflict Of Interest: In order to assure their independence and
impartiality on behalf of the common good, the Village covered individuals
shall not use their official offices or positions to influence government
decisions in which they currently have or are actively pursuing a financial
interest or an organizational responsibility or personal relationship which may
create a conflict of interest, or which give the appearance of a conflict of
interest. As may be related to matters before them, Village covered individuals
shall disclose investments, interests in real property, sources of income, and
gifts, including those held or received by their spouses; and they shall
abstain from participating in deliberations and decision making where conflicts
may exist.
No Village covered individual, or that person's immediate family members living
with the Village covered individual, shall have a financial relationship or a
controlling interest, whether directly or indirectly personally and/or through
any business, corporation, LLC, partnership, or consulting or professional
entity, in or be engaged in doing business with, any elected or appointed
officer, contractor, employee or vendor of the Village of River Forest.
No Village covered individual shall have a financial or other personal
interest, whether directly or indirectly, with any Village covered individual
or contractor which is incompatible with the proper discharge of their official
duties or work on behalf of the Village or that would tend to impair their
independence of judgment.
No Village covered individual shall hire or recommend for employment with the
Village, or with a contractor, any immediate family member of the Village
covered individual.
Nothing herein shall limit any appointment power of the Village President
otherwise conferred by the Village Code.
      7.   Confidential Information: Village covered individuals and
contractors shall respect the confidentiality of information concerning the
property, personnel or affairs of the Village. Village covered individuals and
contractors shall neither disclose confidential information without proper
legal authorization, nor use such information to advance their personal,
financial or other private interests.
      8.   Use Of Public Resources: Village covered individuals shall be
prohibited from using public resources not available to the public in general,
such as Village staff time, equipment, supplies or facilities, for private gain
or personal purposes.
      9.   Representation Of Private Interests: In keeping with their role as
stewards of the public interest, Village covered individuals and contractors
shall not appear on behalf of the private interests of third parties before any
board or commission of the Village on which they serve, and for purposes of
this Subsection the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, and Development
Review Board shall be considered as one commission. This prohibition shall not
prohibit a Village covered individual or contractor from appearing on their own
behalf before any board or commission of the Village on which they serve.
      10.   Positive Workplace Environment: Village covered individuals shall
support the maintenance of a positive and constructive workplace environment
for Village staff and for citizens and businesses dealing with the Village.
Village Board members and commissioners shall recognize their special role in
dealings with Village staff to in no way create the perception of inappropriate
direction to Village staff.
      11.   Policy Role Of Village covered individuals: Village covered
individuals shall respect and adhere to the administrative structure of the
Village as outlined in the Village Code. The Village President and Board of
Trustees determines the policies of the Village with the advice, information
and analysis provided by the Village's public, boards and commissions, and
staff. Village covered individuals shall not interfere with the administrative
functions of the Village or the official duties of the Village administrator,
nor shall they impair the ability of Village staff to implement Village policy
decisions.
      12.   Statement Of Economic Interest: All officers, including appointees
to Village commissions, shall file a statement of economic interest with the
Cook County Clerk with the information required by, and within the time
required by, article 4A of the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act, 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 420/4A, as amended. (Ord. 3861, 4-25-2022; amd. Ord. 3960, 7-
14-2025)
1-23-6: DUTY TO REPORT:
This Section applies to Village covered individuals and contractors who do not
otherwise have a duty to report violations of this Chapter under Federal law,
State law or Village ordinance or policy. Village covered individuals and
contractors who have a duty to report violations of this Chapter under Federal
law, State law or another Village ordinance or policy shall not be required to
comply with the duty to report in this Section and shall instead report
violations of this Chapter as otherwise required.
Any Village covered individual or contractor with knowledge that a Village
covered individual or contractor has violated a requirement of this Chapter has
an obligation to report the violation to the to the chair of the ethics
commission. Village covered individuals must report any potential violation
within a reasonable time of obtaining knowledge of the violation, but in no
case shall the time period for a report be longer than seventy-two (72) hours.
In the event any person associated with the village receives a complaint of a
violation of this section, that person shall refer the complaint to the chair
of the ethics commission within twenty-four (24) hours. After a report or
referral is made pursuant to this section, the reporting individual and the
nature of the report shall remain anonymous except to those required under this
code to have such knowledge until such time as the complaint is required to be
made public under the relevant provisions of this chapter. Retaliation against
a village covered individual or contractor for filing or referring a complaint
under this section is prohibited and constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 3861, 4-25-2022; amd. Ord. 3960, 7-12-2025)
1-23-7: ETHICS ADVISOR:
The Village Attorney shall serve as the Village's ethics advisor and, upon
request, shall provide guidance to Village covered individuals concerning the
interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord.
3861, 4-25-2022)
1-23-8: ETHICS COMMISSION:
   A.   There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Ethics
Commission of River Forest. The Commission shall be comprised of a chairperson
and two other members nominated by the Village President and approved by the
Board of Trustees. All members shall be residents of the Village. No person
shall be appointed as a member of the Commission who is an immediate family
member of the Village President or Board of Trustees. Initially, two
commissioners shall serve two-year terms, and the third commissioner shall
serve a one-year term. Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to two-
year terms. Commissioners may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms. A
quorum shall consist of two commissioners, and official action by the
Commission shall require the affirmative vote of two members.
   B.   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   To receive, consider and investigate complaints made under this
chapter and to make recommendations to the village board for enforcement
violations that the commission determines occurred.
      2.   To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its
duties and the exercise of its powers.
      3.   The Commission is authorized to act upon the receipt of a written
complaint alleging a violation of this Chapter. Upon receipt of a written
complaint, the Commission may, based upon its assessment of the validity of a
written complaint, pursuant to the procedures below, investigate, conduct
hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for disciplinary actions and/
or fines in accordance with Section
1-23-9 of this Chapter.
      4.   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated the provisions of this Chapter.
      5.   To compel the following from Village covered individuals and
contractors: production of documents and other evidence, in both physical and
electronic format; attendance at duly noticed hearings; and, response under
oath to questions, in both written and oral format.
It is the obligation of all Village covered individuals and contractors to
cooperate with the commission during the course of its investigations. Failure
or refusal to cooperate with requests by the Commission shall be a violation of
this Chapter.
   C.   1.   Complaints submitted pursuant to this chapter shall be handled by
the commission in the manner set forth below. If the complaint alleges facts
which may constitute a crime, it shall first be referred to a law enforcement
agency or the State's Attorney and may later be refiled with the Commission, at
the request of the complainant, if the agency or State's Attorney declines
prosecution or fails to act within thirty days.
      2.   a.   The Commission, and any person who takes part in the
administration of any complaints, shall keep complaints confidential to the
fullest extent permitted by law until and unless the Commission determines that
the complaint is supported by sufficient evidence and the Commission determines
there are reasonable basis for a complaint. Prior to a determination by the
Commission that there are reasonable grounds that the complaint establishes a
violation of this Chapter, consideration of complaints by the Commission at a
meeting shall be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the Open
Meetings Act.
         b.   Initial Review: Within ten (10) days after the receipt of a
complaint, the Commission shall meet and conduct an initial review of the
sufficiency of the complaint. The Commission may dismiss a complaint if any of
the following criteria are met:
            (1)   The complaint, on its face or as clarified, fails to state a
violation of one of the laws or regulations within this chapter.
            (2)   The complaint, on its face or as clarified, lacks sufficient
factual detail, or is so speculative, conclusory or incoherent that the
Commission cannot infer that a violation may have occurred or may be occurring.
            (3)   Based on all of the facts and information provided by the
complainant, or publicly available information, the Commission cannot
reasonably conclude that a violation has occurred.
            (4)   The Commission obtained credible information indicating that
the allegations raised by the complainant are currently resolved.
            (5)   The Commission determines that the complaint is moot or
unripe.
            (6)   The Commission is currently investigating the same conduct in
another complaint.
            (7)   Other good cause provided by the Commission.
   If the Commission dismisses a complaint it shall include the reasoning for
the dismissal in the meeting minutes and in a written determination.
   Notwithstanding any term in this Chapter to the contrary, the Commission may
dismiss a complaint at any stage. If the commission dismisses a complaint it
shall include the reasoning for the dismissal in the meeting minutes and in a
written determination. The commission shall work as quickly as possible to
resolve all complaints it receives.
         c.   A copy of the complaint may be provided to the village attorney,
village administrator, village president and village board of trustees upon the
determination that there is a reasonable basis for a complaint.
         d.   The village administrator shall assign village staff to support
the commission in the discharge of its duties under this section. A copy of the
complaint shall not be provided to any person who is subject of the complaint
unless and until the commission shall determine the complaint passes initial
review pursuant to section
1-23-8(c)(2)(a). Any person to whom the complaint is provided prior to
determination of initial review is bound by all anonymity provisions set forth
in this code.
         e.   Investigation: If the Commission determines that a complaint
passes an initial review, the Commission shall send by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed
against them and a copy of the complaint. The Commission shall send by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the
complaint to an identified complainant, within five business days after the
Commission's determination that the complaint passed the initial review. The
notices to the respondent and an identified complainant shall also advise them
of the date, time, and place of a Commission hearing to determine the
sufficiency of the complaint and to establish whether reasonable grounds exist
to proceed.
      3.   If the complaint is deemed to be supported by sufficient evidence to
allege a violation of this Chapter and there is a determination of reasonable
grounds to proceed, then the Commission shall issue notice to the respondent
and an identified complainant including a hearing date scheduled within four
weeks after the complaint's receipt. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient
to allege a violation or if there is no determination of reasonable grounds to
proceed, then the Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice to the respondent and an identified complainant, of the
decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public.
      4.   On the scheduled date and upon at least forty-eight hours' public
notice of the meeting, the Commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint
and shall allow the respondent and an identified complainant the opportunity to
present testimony and evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public if
authorized by the Open Meetings Act.
      5.   The Commission may recommend that the board of trustees fine any
person who knowingly violates any provision of this Chapter within the
Commission's purview or who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a
violation of this Chapter within the Commission's purview. The Commission may
recommend to the Village President and Board of Trustees any appropriate
discipline up to and including discharge or removal of office for any Village
covered individual found in violation of this chapter or person filing a
frivolous complaint. The recommendation of the Commission shall be deemed
sufficient cause for discipline, discharge or removal from office without
further proceedings by the Village, unless the offender is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners or as otherwise
required by a collective bargaining agreement or employment contract.
      6.   As soon as practicable after the date the hearing or any recessed
hearing is concluded, the commission shall either: a) dismiss the complaint for
any of the reasons in section
1-23-8. (c)(2)(b). above or b) issue a recommendation, including but not
limited to discipline, a fine, or both to the village board for enforcement.
The findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any fine
imposed shall not be confidential and shall be a matter of public information.
      7.   If a complaint is filed during the sixty days preceding the date of
any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the commission shall meet
at the earliest date possible with the intent to render its decision prior to
the election. (Ord. 3861, 4-25-2022; amd. Ord. 3960, 7-12-2025)
1-23-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter or who
knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation of this chapter is
subject to a fine in an amount of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750).
   B.   Subject to limitations in collective bargaining agreements and
contracts to which the Village is a party, in addition to a fine, any Village
covered individual who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter or who
knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation of this chapter is
subject to discipline, discharge, or removal from office, as the case may be.
Subject to limitations in contracts to which the Village is a party, in
addition to a fine, any contractor which knowingly violates any provision of
this chapter or who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation
of this chapter, the Village Board may determine that such contractor is no
longer eligible to do business with the Village and bar said contractor from
doing business with the Village.
   C.   Unless the conduct in question also violates federal, state, or county
law, rules or regulations, or also violates other sections of this chapter or
any other chapter of this code, the village board shall have the exclusive
authority to enforce the recommendations of the ethics commission relating to
alleged violations of the ethical standards of this section and impose
penalties for violations thereof. Except as otherwise provided by law, a
violation of the ethical standards shall in no way be construed as a basis for
challenging the validity of a decision rendered by the village board or any
advisory board or commission of the village. Members of the public are
encouraged to bring violations of the ethical standards to the attention of the
ethics commission.
   D.   Penalties for violations of this section shall be in the form of
reprimand, formal censure or removal of an officer from an advisory board or
commission of the village. Further, the village board shall have the option of
referring a violation of this section to the village prosecutor for issuance of
a citation in the circuit court of Cook County, in which case the village
prosecutor shall seek a monetary fine prosecutor to section
1-23-9 of this chapter. However, no penalty shall be imposed by the village
board under this section without first providing the village covered individual
or contractor with reasonable notice of the charges and an opportunity to be
heard before the village board. The penalties provided for in this section
shall be considered cumulative and shall in no way be construed as preventing
the enforcement of any federal, state or county law, ordinance, rule or
regulation, or other sections of this chapter or any other chapter of this
code.
   E.   Retaliation by any village covered individual or contractor against any
person that files a complaint under this chapter is prohibited and constitutes
a violation of this chapter subject to the penalties and enforcement provisions
set forth herein (Ord. 3861, 4-25-2022; amd. Ord. 3960, 7-12-2025)
1-23-10: HOW TO MAKE A COMPLAINT:
   A.   In the event a person wishes to make a complaint alleging a violation
of chapter, a complainant may take the following actions:
      1.   Complete a complaint form available on the village’s website on the
local ethics commission page, or
      2.   Submit an email to the chair of the ethics commission via email
address on the local ethics commission page.
   B.   Complaints shall include facts including, but not limited to, the
alleged violator, alleged violation and timing of the alleged violation.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the village administrator to ensure
that a publicly available complaint intake form is maintained on the village
website. This form shall allow for the complainant to remain anonymous if they
so choose.
   D.   Notwithstanding other provisions herein, no penalties shall be assessed
if the conduct alleged in complaint ceased more in twenty-four (24) months
prior to the time the complaint is made. If the alleged violation is ongoing in
nature, then this limitation shall not apply. (Ord. 3960, 7-12-2025)
CHAPTER 24
PSEBA BENEFIT ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
1-24-1: Purpose
1-24-2: Policy And Procedure For Administering Applications For PSEBA Benefits
1-24-3: Policy And Procedure For Hearings For PSEBA Benefits
1-24-4: PSEBA Benefits Granted By The Village
1-24-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of
determining the eligibility of a Village employee for the benefits enumerated
under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act, 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes
320/1, et seq., as amended ("PSEBA"). All benefits provided by the Village to
employees pursuant to the PSEBA shall be consistent with the PSEBA. (Ord. 3658,
8-21-2017)
1-24-2: POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING APPLICATIONS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
   A.   Employees, or family member(s) of injured or deceased employees, who
may qualify for PSEBA benefits must file a full and complete application in
writing with the Village Administrator.
   B.   A complete application shall include the following:
      1.   The applicant's name and date of hire, detailed information
regarding the incident for which PSEBA benefits are sought, including
information relating to how the injury was sustained in the line of duty,
including the date, time, place, nature of injury, and other factual
circumstances surrounding the incident.
      2.   The applicant's firsthand knowledge explaining, to the Village's
satisfaction, how the injury directly resulted from:
         a.   Response to fresh pursuit;
         b.   Response to what is reasonably believed to be an emergency;
         c.   Response to an unlawful act perpetrated by another; or
         d.   The investigation of a criminal act.
      3.   A signed unconditional PSEBA medical authorization release which
authorizes the Village to collect information related to the incident
including, but not limited to, disability pension proceedings, worker's
compensation records, and medical records, and a complete list of the names and
addresses for all health care providers involved in the diagnosis, treatment,
review or handling of the injury for which PSEBA benefits are sought.
      4.   A signed unconditional PSEBA general information release specifying
the name and signature of the applicant or her/his authorized representative
along with legal proof of said representation and name and signature of witness
authorizing the collection of information necessary to review the application.
      5.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses to the
incident resulting in the injury for which PSEBA benefits are sought, along
with any statements of the witnesses which the applicant either possesses, may
obtain or is aware of.
      6.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses the
applicant intends to call at the PSEBA hearing, along with their anticipated
subjects of testimony and any opinions the witnesses are expected to give.
      7.   Information and documentation filed with the River Forest Police
Pension Fund Board or the River Forest Firefighters' Pension Fund Board.
      8.   Information regarding other sources of health insurance benefits
currently enrolled in, received by, or available to the applicant and/or the
applicant's family members, including the source of the benefits and the
benefits provided or available.
   C.   The PSEBA application must be sworn to by the applicant and notarized
to certify the truthfulness of the application's contents.
   D.   On the date that the PSEBA application is deemed complete by the
Village, the completed application shall then be submitted to the Village
Administrator as the preliminary record, and a copy of the same shall be date
stamped and provided to the applicant.
   E.   Upon receipt of a complete application for PSEBA benefits, the Village
Administrator shall set the matter for an administrative hearing before a
Hearing Officer to make a determination on whether to grant the application and
provide the applicant with benefits under the PSEBA.
   F.   The applicant shall be given written notice of the date for the
administrative hearing not less than ten calendar days prior to the
commencement of the hearing. If the applicant, upon receiving written notice of
the administrative hearing, cannot attend said date, the applicant must contact
the Hearing Officer in writing within seven calendar days after being served.
The Hearing Officer shall establish an alternative hearing date within thirty
calendar days of the original hearing date. The applicant's failure to appear
at the administrative hearing shall result in denial of PSEBA benefits.
   G.   The Village Administrator may delegate any of his/her authority, duties
and obligations under this chapter, in whole or part, to a designee, or
designees. (Ord. 3658, 8-21-2017)
1-24-3: POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
   A.   Hearing Officer: The Village Administrator shall be the Hearing Officer
for hearings on applications for PSEBA benefits. The Hearing Officer shall have
all of the authorities granted under statute and common law relative to the
conduct of administrative hearings, including to:
      1.   Adopt, revise and enforce rules of procedure for hearings;
      2.   Preside over hearings;
      3.   Administer oaths;
      4.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under PSEBA;
      5.   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production
of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the applicant, the Village,
the Hearing Officer;
      6.   Rule upon objections to the admissibility of evidence;
      7.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
in evidence introduced at the hearing; and
      8.   Issue a final determination on applications for PSEBA benefits based
on the evidence presented at the hearing, the determination of which shall be
in writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision and order.
   B.   Hearings: Hearings for the determination of eligibility for benefits
under PSEBA shall be initiated by the Village after the submission of a full
and complete PSEBA application, and a determination by the Hearing Officer that
it is appropriate to proceed with the hearing, which determination shall
include consideration of the status of any disability pension proceeding
related to the applicant and whether the disability pension proceeding has
resulted in a final and non-appealable decision. A hearing shall be held to
adjudicate and determine whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under
the PSEBA. If the applicant is found eligible, the PSEBA benefits provided to
the applicant shall be consistent with the PSEBA.
      1.   Record: Hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter,
and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified court
reporter.
      2.   Procedures: The Village and the applicant shall be entitled to
representation by counsel at hearings and may present witnesses, testimony and
documents, may cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance
by the Hearing Officer of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant
witnesses or the production of relevant documents. The Hearing Officer may
issue subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the
production of relevant documents in his/her discretion.
      3.   Evidence: The Illinois Rules of Evidence shall apply to the extent
practicable unless, by such application, the Hearing Officer determines that
application of the rule would be an injustice or preclude the introduction of
evidence of the type commonly relied upon by a reasonably prudent person in the
conduct of her/his affairs. Such determination shall be in the sole discretion
of the Hearing Officer.
      4.   Final Determination: A written determination by the Hearing Officer
of whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under the PSEBA shall
constitute a final administrative determination for the purpose of judicial
review under the common law writ of certiorari. Motions to reconsider, set
aside or challenge the final determination of the Hearing Officer are not
permitted.
      5.   Burden Of Proof: At any administrative hearing, the applicant shall
have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the applicant is
eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA benefits. The standard of proof in all
hearings shall be by the preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 3658, 8-21-2017)
1-24-4: PSEBA BENEFITS GRANTED BY THE VILLAGE:
   A.   Basic Group Insurance Plan: If an applicant is determined to be
eligible for PSEBA benefits, the applicant will be eligible to receive
continued health coverage consistent with the PSEBA under the Village's basic
group health insurance plan. The basic group health insurance plan shall be the
least expensive health plan offered to Village employees. The basic group
health insurance plan may change from time to time in the Village's sole
discretion. PSEBA beneficiaries may only change from one health insurance plan
to another during the Village's open enrollment period. PSEBA beneficiaries may
choose to enroll in any other health insurance plan offered by the Village
different from the basic group health insurance plan, but any PSEBA beneficiary
who does so shall pay the difference in insurance premiums between the
Village's basic plan and the other plan. Failure of a PSEBA beneficiary to
timely pay the difference in insurance premiums shall result in coverage in the
basic health insurance plan. PSEBA benefits do not include benefits not
provided in the Village's basic group health insurance plan, such as, but not
limited to, dental, vision, life insurance, etc.
   B.   Reduction Or Elimination Of PSEBA Benefits By Other Health Coverage: If
an applicant or PSEBA beneficiary becomes eligible to receive health insurance
benefits from any other source, including, but not limited to, Medicare, the
PSEBA beneficiary's PSEBA coverage may be reduced or eliminated as determined
by the Village consistent with PSEBA. If there is another source, the applicant
or PSEBA beneficiary shall notify the Village of that source no later than five
business days from that source becoming available to the applicant, the
applicant's beneficiaries or the PSEBA beneficiary. Applicants and PSEBA
beneficiaries have an ongoing obligation to, and shall, update the Village with
their health insurance coverage information available from any other source,
and failure to do so may result in the denial of benefits and/or reimbursement
to the Village for duplicate coverage. If duplicate coverage has been received
by a PSEBA beneficiary, further PSEBA benefits will be denied until the Village
has been fully reimbursed by the PSEBA beneficiary for what it would have been
credited if it had known about other coverage. Receipt of health insurance
benefits from other sources without notice to the Village shall require the
PSEBA beneficiary to reimburse the Village for the value of those benefits.
   C.   Affidavit Of Continued PSEBA Eligibility: All recipients of PSEBA
benefits from the Village shall complete and return to the Village
Administrator on an annual basis an affidavit verifying the recipient's
continued eligibility for PSEBA benefits. The affidavit must be completed and
returned to the Village Administrator within sixty calendar days of written
notice from the Village. If the recipient does not complete and return the
affidavit within the time required, the Village Administrator shall give the
recipient an additional written notice providing an additional thirty calendar
days for the recipient to complete and return the affidavit. Failure to return
the affidavit within the time required shall result in the recipient incurring
responsibility for reimbursing the Village for premiums paid during the period
the affidavit is due and not filed. (Ord. 3732, 3-11-2019)
CHAPTER 25
ANTI-HARASSMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-25-1: Purpose
1-25-2: Prohibited Conduct
1-25-3: Sexual Harassment
1-25-4: Employee Responsibility
1-25-5: Reporting Complaints Of Harassment
1-25-6: Village Response
1-25-7: Federal And State Remedies
1-25-8: Policy Against Retaliation
1-25-9: Confidentiality
1-25-1: PURPOSE:
The Village is committed to maintaining an environment free from discrimination
and harassment. In keeping with this commitment, the Village will not tolerate
any form of harassment that violates this policy. This policy forbids
harassment by any employee, supervisor, elected official, vendor, client,
customer or other person, against any employee or third party. (Ord. 3671, 12-
11-2017)
1-25-2: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   Harassment consists of discriminatory employment action and any
unwelcome conduct, whether verbal, physical, or visual, that is based upon a
person's protected status, including race, age, genetic information, sex,
sexual orientation, color, religious affiliation, political preference,
national origin, disability, ancestry, marital status, status as a civil
partner, unfavorable discharge from the military (except dishonorable), or
other protected status under applicable law. The Village will not tolerate
harassing conduct that results in tangible employment action that interferes
unreasonably with an individual's work performance, or that creates an
intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment.
   B.   The conduct forbidden by this policy specifically includes, but is not
limited to:
      1.   Bullying, causing mental distress, epithets, slurs, negative
stereotyping, threatening or intimidating acts that are based on a person's
protected status; and
      2.   Written or graphic material circulated, available on the Village's
computer system, or posted or distributed within the workplace that is obscene,
hostile or derogatory toward a person or persons because of their protected
status.
   C.   Even where the conduct is not sufficiently severe or pervasive to
constitute actionable harassment, the Village discourages any such conduct in
the workplace and such conduct may serve as the basis for disciplinary action
under the Village's policies. (Ord. 3671, 12-11-2017)
1-25-3: SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   This policy forbids harassment based on gender regardless of whether
the offensive conduct is sexual in nature and regardless of whether the
individual being harassed is of the same or different gender.
   B.   Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, or other verbal
or physical conduct based on sex constitute sexual harassment when: 1)
submission to the conduct is an explicit or implicit term of employment, 2)
submission to or rejection of the conduct is used as a basis for an employment
decision affecting an individual (tangible employment action), or 3) such
conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an
individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive
working environment.
   C.   This policy forbids any unwelcome or harassing conduct based on gender
regardless of whether it rises to the level of a legal violation.
   D.   The Village considers the following conduct to represent, but are not
limited to, some of the types of acts that violate this policy:
      1.   Physical assaults of a sexual nature including but not limited to
rape, sexual battery or molestation, intentional physical conduct which is
sexual in nature, such as touching, pinching, patting, grabbing, etc.
      2.   Unwanted sexual advances, propositions or other sexual comments
including, but not limited to sexually oriented gestures, noises, remarks, and
jokes, sexual innuendo or suggestive comments, or verbal abuse of a sexual
nature. Also included are preferential treatment and promises of a preferential
treatment to an employee for submitting to sexual conduct.
      3.   Sexual or discriminatory displays or publications anywhere in the
Village's workplace by Village employees including but not limited to pictures,
posters, calendars, graffiti, objects, reading materials, or other materials
that are sexually suggestive, demeaning or pornographic. (Ord. 3671, 12-11-
2017)
1-25-4: EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITY:
Everyone at the Village can help assure that the workplace is free from
prohibited discrimination or harassment. Every employee is expected to refrain
from any behavior or conduct that could reasonably be interpreted as prohibited
harassment. (Ord. 3671, 12-11-2017)
1-25-5: REPORTING COMPLAINTS OF HARASSMENT:
In the event an employee believes he or she has been confronted by or has
witnessed an act of harassment, it is the employee's responsibility to
immediately report such action to the employee's Supervisor, Department Head,
Assistant Village Administrator, Village Administrator or Village Attorney.
These are the individuals who are authorized by this policy to receive and act
upon complaints of harassment or discrimination on behalf of the Village. This
policy does not require reporting harassment or discrimination to any
individual who is the source of the harassing or discriminatory conduct.
It is critical in establishing a workplace free of harassment that an
individual who experiences or witnesses an incident perceived as being
harassing has access to a mechanism for reporting such incidents. At the same
time, the purposes of this policy against harassment in the workplace are not
furthered where a complaint is found to be false and frivolous and made to
accomplish some other end than stopping harassment. A complaint that is
determined to be false and frivolous can result in a severe level of discipline
or discharge. A false or frivolous complaint does not refer to complaints made
in good faith that cannot be proven. (Ord. 3671, 12-11-2017)
1-25-6: VILLAGE RESPONSE:
Once the Supervisor, Department Head, Assistant Village Administrator, or
Village Attorney receives a complaint, it shall be their responsibility to
notify the Village Administrator on the date of the alleged occurrence if
reasonably possible, or on the next business day. All complaints will be taken
seriously and given a high priority. The Village Administrator will direct that
an investigation be conducted and the nature of such investigation will depend
on the circumstances of the complaint. The Village may put reasonable interim
measures in place, such as a leave of absence or a transfer, to diminish the
potential for further harassment while the investigation takes place. The
Village will take further appropriate action once the complaints have been
thoroughly investigated. That action may be a conclusion that a violation
occurred, as explained immediately below. The Village might also conclude,
depending on the circumstances, either that no violation of policy occurred or
that the Village cannot conclude whether or not a violation occurred.
If an investigation reveals that a violation of this policy or other
inappropriate conduct has occurred then the Village will take corrective
action, including discipline up to and including dismissal, as is appropriate
under the circumstances, regardless of the job positions of the parties
involved. The Village may discipline an employee for any inappropriate conduct
discovered in investigating reports made under this policy, regardless of
whether the conduct amounts to a violation of law. If the person who engaged in
harassment is not employed by the Village, then the Village will take whatever
corrective action is reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord.
3671, 12-11-2017)
1-25-7: FEDERAL AND STATE REMEDIES:
   A.   The Village prefers to resolve any complaints regarding unlawful
harassment or discrimination in violation of this policy internally, but also
recognizes the employee's right to file administrative claims with the
following Federal and State agencies:
1. United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
  500 W. Madison Street, Suite 2800
  Chicago, IL 60661
  Chicago: 800-669-4000
  Chicago TTY: 800-869-8001
  Charges must be filed within 300 days of the incident.
   
2. State of Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR)
  100 W. Randolph Street, 10th Floor
  Chicago, IL 60601
  Chicago: 312-814-6200 or 800-662-3942
  Chicago TTY: 866-740-3953
  Charges must be filed within 180 days of the incident.
 
(Ord. 3671, 12-11-2017)
1-25-8: POLICY AGAINST RETALIATION:
The Village forbids retaliation toward or against any individual who makes a
good-faith complaint of harassment; assists or cooperates in an investigation
of a complaint by someone else, whether internally or with an external agency;
or files a charge of discrimination or harassment; or otherwise provides
information in a proceeding, including in a court, administrative or
legislative hearing, related to violations of discrimination or harassment
laws. Examples of the types of retaliation that are prohibited include
intimidation; discrimination; verbal or physical abuse; adverse actions with
respect to pay, work assignments, and other terms of employment; termination of
employment; or threats of any such action. Retaliation is a serious violation
of this policy that may result in discipline up to and including dismissal. All
employees who experience or witness any conduct they believe to be retaliatory
should immediately follow the complaint procedures stated above. (Ord. 3671,
12-11-2017)
1-25-9: CONFIDENTIALITY:
In investigating and in imposing any discipline, the Village will attempt to
preserve confidentiality to the extent that the needs of the situation permit.
(Ord. 3671, 12-11-2017)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Creation And Membership
2-1-2: Meetings
2-1-3: Secretary
2-1-1: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP:
A zoning board of appeals consisting of seven members to be appointed by the
president by and with the consent of the board is hereby established to serve
respectively for the following terms: one for one year, one for two years, one
for three years, one for four years, one for five years, one for six years, and
one for seven years, the successor to each member so appointed to serve for a
term of five years. The president shall, with the consent of the board, appoint
a member of the zoning board of appeals as chairman. Such chairman, or in his
absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. The president shall have the power to remove any member of said
board of appeals for cause and after a public hearing. Vacancies upon said
board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has
become vacant in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such member.
All members shall be residents of the village. (Ord. 3596, 4-25-2016)
2-1-2: MEETINGS:
   A.   All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call
of the chairman or at the request of a majority of the members of said board.
All hearings conducted by the zoning board of appeals shall be open to the
public.
   B.   The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and
other official action. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of
each case of a requested variation, and the reasons for recommending or denying
such variation shall be specified.
   C.   Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal and every order,
requirement, decision or determination of the zoning board of appeals shall be
filed immediately in its office and shall be a public record. The zoning board
of appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with the
Illinois Compiled Statutes in such case made and provided 1 .
   D.   No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the board being
present, which shall consist of a majority of all the members. Any absent
member who certifies that he has read the transcript of the proceedings before
the board may vote upon any question before the board. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-3.
2-1-3: SECRETARY:
The village administrator shall be secretary of the zoning board of appeals. He
shall keep all records pertaining to the activities of the zoning board of
appeals, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the
zoning board of appeals or by law or ordinance. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-2-1: Establishment; Composition
2-2-2: Meetings Of The Board
2-2-3: General Duties
2-2-4: Records Kept
2-2-5: Compensation
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby established a Board of Local Improvements for the Village,
which shall consist of the President and other such members provided by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes. The President shall be president of the Board of
Local Improvements 1 .
The Village Administrator shall be secretary of the Board of Local
Improvements. He shall keep all records pertaining to the activities of the
Board of Local Improvements, and shall perform such other duties as may be
required of him by the Board of Local Improvements or by law or ordinance.
(1981 Code)
 
Notes
  1. See Section
1 1-11-4 of this Code, Village Attorney to act as attorney for Board of Local
  Improvements.
2-2-2: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
The meetings of the Board of Local Improvements shall be held prior to the
regular meetings of the Village Board at any time on written call of the
President; such call shall specify the business that will come before the
meetings and the Village Clerk shall give two days' previous notice thereof to
each member of the Board. Said notice may be waived. (1981 Code)
2-2-3: GENERAL DUTIES:
The Board of Local Improvements shall have the powers and perform the duties
assigned to it by Illinois Compiled Statutes, or ordinances of the Village.
(1981 Code)
2-2-4: RECORDS KEPT:
The Board of Local Improvements shall keep records of all work undertaken by
it, showing in addition the work accomplished, the expenditures made and the
amount of money received. (1981 Code)
2-2-5: COMPENSATION:
The members of the Board of Local Improvements shall receive no compensation
for their services as members of such Board. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF LIBRARY DIRECTORS
SECTION:
2-3-1: Board Established
2-3-2: Library Established; Name
2-3-3: Prohibited Acts
2-3-4: Reports
2-3-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
The public library shall be under the supervision and management of a board of
seven Directors, to be elected in accordance with the provisions of 75 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., relating to public libraries. The Directors so
elected shall have all the powers, authority and duties conferred by law. (1981
Code)
2-3-2: LIBRARY ESTABLISHED; NAME:
There is hereby established a public library for the use of the inhabitants of
the Village, which shall be known as the "River Forest Public Library". (1981
Code)
2-3-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Injuring Books: Any person who shall wilfully or maliciously cut, write
upon, injure, deface, tear or destroy any book, newspaper, plate, picture,
engraving or statue belonging to, in the possession of or under the control of
the public library shall be punished as provided in Section
 1-4-1 of this Code.
   B.   Injuring Furniture: Any person who shall wilfully or maliciously commit
any injury upon the grounds, buildings, furniture or fixtures, or other
property belonging to or under the control of the public library shall be
punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   C.   Failure to Return Books: Any person who shall fail to return any book
belonging to the River Forest Public Library, according to the requirements of
the bylaws duly made and adopted by the Directors of such library for the
government thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1981 Code)
2-3-4: REPORTS:
The Library Board of Directors shall make a report of the financial condition
of the library within fifteen days after the termination of each fiscal year 1
of the Village, as is provided by statute. The Board of Directors shall also
make such other reports as may be requested by the Village Board. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. Fiscal year defined in Section
  1-3-2 of this Code.
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Creation, Terms
2-4-2: Qualification and Removal of Members
2-4-3: Organization of the Board
2-4-4: Compensation of Members
2-4-5: Annual Report
2-4-6: Appointments to Fire and Police Departments
2-4-7: Compliance With Laws
2-4-1: CREATION, TERMS:
There is hereby created for the Village a Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, which Board shall function in conformity with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1 et seq. Said Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall consist of three members, all of whom shall be appointed by
the President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees.
Any vacancies on the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners for the unexpired
remainder of the term of any member whose place has become vacant shall be
filled by appointment by the President, by and with the consent and approval of
the Village Board. (1981 Code)
2-4-2: QUALIFICATION AND REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
Of the three members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, all shall
be residents of the Village, and shall be considered officers of the
Municipality, and shall file an oath and a fidelity bond in such amount as may
be required by the President and Board of Trustees.
No person holding an office under the Municipality shall be a member of the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners or the secretary thereof. The acceptance
of any such lucrative office by a member of the Board shall be treated as a
resignation of his office as a member of the Board or the secretary thereof. No
person shall be appointed a member of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners who is related, either by blood or marriage up to the degree of
first cousin, to any elected official of the Village. No more than two members
of said Board shall belong to the same political party existing in the Village
at the time of such appointments and as defined in section 10-2 of the State
Election Code. If only one or no political party exists in the Village at the
time of such appointments, then State or national political party affiliations
shall be considered in making such appointments. Party affiliation shall be
determined by affidavit of the person appointed as a member of the Board.
Members shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written
charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within thirty days in his or
their own defense, before a regular meeting of the governing body of the
Village for which they have been appointed. A majority vote of the elected
members of such governing body shall be required to remove any such member from
office. (1981 Code)
2-4-3: ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD:
   A.   Chairman: At the first meeting in May of each and every year, the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners shall elect one of its members as Chairman of
the Board for a one-year term, or until his successor shall have been appointed
and qualified.
   B.   Secretary: The said Board may employ a secretary or may designate one
of its own members to act as such. The secretary shall keep the minutes of the
board's proceedings, shall be custodian of all papers pertaining to the
business of the board, shall keep a record of all examinations held and shall
perform such other duties as the board shall prescribe. The secretary shall
receive as compensation for services a sum of money as determined by the
president and board of trustees. (1981 Code)
2-4-4: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS:
No member of the board of fire and police commissioners, except its secretary,
shall be paid any compensation by the village for his services. (1981 Code)
2-4-5: ANNUAL REPORT:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall submit to the president a
report on its activities and of its rules in force, and any suggestions which
the board believes would result in greater efficiency in the fire and police
departments, annually prior to the month of May of each and every year. (1981
Code)
2-4-6: APPOINTMENTS TO FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS:
Appointments of the chief of police and chief of the fire department 1  shall
be made by the president and board of trustees pursuant to authority granted by
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-4. The chief of police pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-4 shall make appointments to the deputy
chief of police positions. The board of fire and police commissioners shall
make all other appointments in the fire and police departments 2  pursuant to
said 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-4. (Ord. 2967, 5-13-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapters 18 and 19 of this code.
2 1. See title 7, chapter 1, "Fire Department", and title 8, chapter 1, "Police
  Department", of this code.
2-4-7: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall be conducted in accordance
with all applicable statutes of the state of Illinois now in force or hereafter
enacted by the legislature, as well as the police training act and the fire
protection training act 1 . (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq., 740/1 et seq., respectively.
CHAPTER 5
TRAFFIC AND SAFETY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-5-1: Members, Terms
2-5-2: Organization Of Commission, Vacancies
2-5-3: Compensation Of Members
2-5-4: General Powers And Duties
2-5-1: MEMBERS, TERMS:
There is hereby established a commission of the village to be known as the
traffic and safety commission, to consist of seven members, residents of the
village, to serve for a term of four years on a staggered basis and until his
or her successor is appointed and qualified. (Ord. 3489, 6-24-2013)
2-5-2: ORGANIZATION OF COMMISSION, VACANCIES:
The chairman of the traffic and safety commission shall be appointed by the
village president. The commission may employ a secretary or may designate one
of its members to act as secretary. Any vacancies on the commission shall be
filled by appointment of the president, with the consent of the board for the
unexpired remainder of the term of any member whose place has become vacant.
(Ord. 3489, 6-24-2013)
2-5-3: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS:
The members of said commission shall not receive any compensation for their
services as members of said commission, either for their attendance upon the
meetings of said commission or their performance of any duty or thing connected
with said office, except its secretary. (Ord. 3489, 6-24-2013)
2-5-4: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The traffic and safety commission shall have power to act in an advisory
capacity to the president and board and to the chief of police and other
officials of the village in all traffic and safety matters which are referred
to the commission. (Ord. 3489, 6-24-2013)
CHAPTER 6
BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
(Rep. by Ord. 3353, 1-10-2011)
CHAPTER 7
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-7-1: Creation Of Commission
2-7-2: Membership, Removal And Compensation
2-7-3: Organization
2-7-4: Meetings And Minutes
2-7-5: Powers And Duties
2-7-6: Annual Report
2-7-1: CREATION OF COMMISSION:
There is hereby created a plan commission in conformity with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-4 et seq., which shall be advisory to the village
board. (Ord. 2105, 10-11-1982)
2-7-2: MEMBERSHIP, REMOVAL AND COMPENSATION:
   A.   Membership: The plan commission shall consist of seven voting members
appointed by the president with the approval of a majority of the board of
trustees. To be qualified, a voting member shall be a resident of the village.
The village president shall name one of the members chairman, at the time of
appointment, to serve in such capacity for a term of two years.
Appointment of initial terms shall be as follows: one member for one year, two
members for two years, two members for three years, and two members for four
years. Members may succeed themselves.
All subsequent terms shall be for a term of four years expiring at the end of
April.
Appointments to fill a vacancy shall be for the remainder of the unexpired
term. Members shall serve until their successors have been appointed.
In addition to the seven voting members, there shall be included as ex officio
members of the plan commission a member of the village board of trustees, a
member of the River Forest park district, a member of the board of education of
school district 90, and a member of the Oak Park-River Forest chamber of
commerce who is a resident of River Forest. The ex officio members shall be
appointed by their respective boards for a term of one year and shall have no
vote. (Ord. 3596, 4-25-2016)
   B.   Removal: The village board of trustees may remove any member of the
commission from office for cause.
   C.   Compensation: All members of the plan commission shall serve without
compensation for their services as members of the commission. (Ord. 2105, 10-
11-1982)
2-7-3: ORGANIZATION:
Within a reasonable time after its initial appointment, the commission shall
organize by the election of a vice chairman, secretary and such other officers
as it deems necessary. Such officers shall hold office for a term of one year
expiring at the end of April and may succeed themselves. No ex officio member
shall be eligible for election to the office of vice chairman. The secretary
may be a nonmember of the commission and if so shall have no vote. (Ord. 2105,
10-11-1982)
2-7-4: MEETINGS AND MINUTES:
The commission shall hold regular meetings monthly or at such other times as
deemed necessary by the chairman, a majority of the plan commission, the
village president or a majority of the village board of trustees. Additional
meetings may be scheduled with three days' prior written notice.
The minutes shall be kept and published and shall be open to public inspection
during regular business hours. When the minutes have been approved, the
secretary shall submit a copy to the village administrator for distribution to
the president and board. (Ord. 2105, 10-11-1982)
2-7-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall prepare and recommend for consideration by the board of
trustees the following:
   A.   A statement of goals and objectives to help guide growth, development,
unity and consistency in the village and any contiguous territory not more than
one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any
municipality.
   B.   A comprehensive plan for the present and future development and
redevelopment of the village. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate
geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted by the board of
trustees shall be the official comprehensive plan, or part thereof.
   C.   Such amendments to the plan as may be deemed necessary.
   D.   An official map of the village and such later revisions in such map as
may be deemed necessary by the board of trustees or by the commission.
   E.   Plans for specific improvements pursuant to the provisions of the
official map.
In connection with the foregoing, the commission shall also:
   A.   Review and make recommendations for neighborhood or area renewal,
conservation, redevelopment, urban aesthetics, civic design and zoning.
   B.   Call upon any officials of the village for aid and advice upon any
matter properly within the scope of interest of the commission and give aid to
the officials of the village and other governmental agencies charged with the
direction of projects for improvements and to promote generally the realization
of the official comprehensive plan. If the commission deems it advisable to
secure technical assistance or service, it may do so upon authorization from
and within appropriations made by the board of trustees.
   C.   Exercise such other powers authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-12-5 as may, from time to time, be conferred on the commission by the
board of trustees. (Ord. 2105, 10-11-1982)
2-7-6: ANNUAL REPORT:
The commission shall submit a written annual report to the board of trustees
not later than April 1 of each year. (Ord. 2105, 10-11-1982)
CHAPTER 8
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD
SECTION:
2-8-1: Creation Of Board
2-8-2: Intent And Purpose
2-8-3: Membership, Removal And Compensation
2-8-4: Meetings
2-8-1: CREATION OF BOARD:
There is hereby created a development review board, which shall be advisory to
the village board. (Ord. 2636, 4-24-1995)
2-8-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It shall be the intent and purpose of the development review board to provide a
hearing body for site plan reviews, planned developments, and amendments or
alterations to approved planned developments and to advise the village board
regarding all development matters. (Ord. 2636, 4-24-1995)
2-8-3: MEMBERSHIP, REMOVAL AND COMPENSATION:
   A.   Appointment: The development review board shall consist of seven
members (each of whom must serve as a current member of the plan commission or
zoning board of appeals), as appointed by the village president, with the
approval of the board of trustees, to serve without compensation. The board
shall consist of at least three plan commission members and at least three
zoning board of appeals members. The chairman shall be selected from either the
members appointed from the zoning board of appeals or plan commission. All
appointments shall begin May 1 and end on April 30, or until such time as a
successor is appointed. All members shall be residents of the village. (Ord.
3596, 4-25-2016)
   B.   Terms: All terms shall be two years. (Ord. 3433, 5-14-2012)
   C.   Vacancies: Vacancies on said board shall be filled for the unexpired
term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which
original appointments are required to be made.
   D.   Removal: A board member may be removed for cause by a majority vote of
the president and board.
   E.   Chairman: The president, with the advice and consent of a majority of
the village board, shall designate one of the members of the board to be
chairman.
   F.   Secretary: The board secretary shall be the village administrator or
designee. (Ord. 2636, 4-24-1995)
   G.   Ex Officio Member: The president with the advice and consent of a
majority of the village board shall appoint one village resident who is a
licensed architect or certified planner to serve as an ex officio member of the
development review board. The ex officio member shall serve for a term of one
year and shall have no vote. (Ord. 2798, 11-23-1998)
2-8-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Notice: Meetings of the board may be called by the chairman from time
to time. Members of the board must receive notice not less than forty eight
hours prior to a meeting.
   B.   Quorum: The presence of four board members shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum to transact any board business at any meeting of the board.
   C.   Manner Of Acting: The act of a majority of members present at a meeting
at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the members.
   D.   Rules Of Procedure: The board shall enact rules of procedure not
inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purposes of
the board. (Ord. 2636, 4-24-1995)
CHAPTER 9
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-9-1: Members; Terms
2-9-2: Organization Of The Commission; Vacancies
2-9-3: Compensation Of Members
2-9-4: Meetings
2-9-5: General Powers And Duties
2-9-1: MEMBERS; TERMS:
There is hereby established a commission of the village to be known as the
economic development commission to consist of seven members, to serve for a
term of four years on a staggered basis and until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified. Provided however, three members of the initial
commission shall serve two year terms with their successive terms being four
years. All members shall be residents of the village, except that one member
may be a nonvillage resident who is an owner or manager of a business located
in the village.
The village administrator or his designee, and a representative from the Oak
Park-River Forest chamber of commerce, shall be included as ex officio members.
The ex officio members shall have no vote, and need not be village residents.
(Ord. 3596, 4-25-2016)
2-9-2: ORGANIZATION OF THE COMMISSION; VACANCIES:
The members of the commission, including the chairperson, shall be appointed by
the village president with the advice and consent of the village board of
trustees. Any vacancies on the commission shall be filled by appointment of the
president, with the consent of the village board, for the unexpired remainder
of the term of any member whose place has become vacant. (Ord. 3496, 9-23-2013)
2-9-3: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS:
The members of said commission shall not receive any compensation for their
services of said commission, either for their attendance upon the meetings of
said commission or their performance of any duty or thing connected with said
office. (Ord. 3496, 9-23-2013)
2-9-4: MEETINGS:
Meetings of the board may be established by the commission and called by the
chairman from time to time. Members of the board must receive notice not less
than forty eight hours prior to a meeting. (Ord. 3496, 9-23-2013)
2-9-5: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The commission shall:
      1.   Advise the board of trustees on the economic and community impact of
potential developments including developments involving changes in land use,
use of vacant property and adaptive reuse of existing structures.
      2.   Identify and assess underutilized properties to develop strategies
for their highest and best use.
      3.   Encourage and support development within the village in conjunction
with existing corridors plans, land uses, and the village's development goals.
      4.   Investigate and recommend incentives to facilitate economic growth.
      5.   Maintain relationships with existing businesses and make
recommendations to retain, enhance and market.
      6.   Receive direction from the board of trustees and provide feedback
and recommendation as directed.
      7.   Coordinate economic development outreach to surrounding units of
local government. (Ord. 3496, 9-23-2013)
CHAPTER 10
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD
SECTION:
2-10-1: Members; Terms
2-10-1: MEMBERS; TERMS:
There is hereby established a board of trustees of the police pension fund that
shall operate under the provision of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, whose
members shall be qualified and serve terms as set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes. The village president shall appoint two members to the board
of trustees of the police pension fund, who shall either both be residents of
the village, or one of the members appointed by the village president may be
the village's finance director, in which case the residency requirement shall
not apply. The other members of the board of trustees of the police pension
fund shall be appointed as set forth in the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord.
3596, 4-25-2016)
CHAPTER 11
FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND BOARD
SECTION:
2-11-1: Members; Terms
2-11-1: MEMBERS; TERMS:
There is hereby established a board of trustees of the firefighters' pension
fund that shall operate under the provision of the Illinois Compiled Statutes,
whose members shall be qualified and serve terms as set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes. The village president shall appoint two members to the board
of trustees of the firefighters' pension fund, who shall either both be
residents of the village, or one of the members appointed by the village
president may be the village's finance director, in which case the residency
requirement shall not apply. The other members of the board of trustees of the
firefighters' pension fund shall be appointed as set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 3596, 4-25-2016)
CHAPTER 12
SUSTAINABILITY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-12-1: Members; Terms
2-12-2: Organization Of The Commission; Vacancies
2-12-3: Compensation Of Members
2-12-4: Meetings
2-12-5: General Powers And Duties
2-12-1: MEMBERS; TERMS:
There is hereby established a commission of the village to be known as the
sustainability commission which shall consist of seven members, to each serve
for terms of four years on a staggered basis and until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified. Three members of the commission appointed for initial
terms shall serve two year terms with their successive terms being four years.
All commission members shall be residents of the village, except that one
member may be a nonvillage resident who is an owner or manager of a business
located in the village.
The village administrator, or his or her designee, and a member of the village
board of trustees, shall be ex officio commission members. Ex officio
commission members shall have no vote. (Ord. 3640, 2-13-2017)
2-12-2: ORGANIZATION OF THE COMMISSION; VACANCIES:
Commission members, including the chairperson or two co-chairpersons, shall be
appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the village
board of trustees. Any vacancies on the commission shall be filled by
appointment of the president, with the advice and consent of the village board
of trustees, for the unexpired remainder of the term of any member whose place
has become vacant. With the advice and consent of the village board of
trustees, the village president may appoint either a single chairpersons or two
co-chairpersons. (Ord. 3640, 2-13-2017; amd. Ord. 3920, 2-12-2024)
2-12-3: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS:
Commission members shall not receive any compensation for their services on the
commission, either for their attendance upon the meetings of said commission or
their performance of any duty or thing connected with said office. (Ord. 3640,
2-13-2017)
2-12-4: MEETINGS:
Meetings of the commission may be established by the commission and called by
the chairperson from time to time. Members of the commission shall receive
notice of meetings not less than forty eight hours prior to a meeting. (Ord.
3640, 2-13-2017)
2-12-5: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The intent and purpose of the commission shall be to:
      1.   Promote the protection of the public's health, safety and welfare as
it relates to environmental sustainability;
      2.   Promote the conservation of natural resources and protection of the
environment; and
      3.   Acquire and disseminate technical information relative to the
environment and natural resources.
   B.   The duties of the commission shall be to:
      1.   Collect general environmental and/or technical information as may
pertain to the quality of life within the village as it relates to
environmental sustainability and to make such material available to the
president and board of trustees;
      2.   Alert the president and board of trustees to state and federal laws
and regulations relative to environmental sustainability which may require
attention and/or action on the part of the village;
      3.   Make recommendations to the president and board of trustees for
adoption of policies, programs and/or goals which would improve or sustain the
environment of the village and which would not conflict with state or federal
laws or regulations; and
      4.   Perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by
the president and board of trustees which are within or reasonably related to
the commission's general powers and duties. (Ord. 3640, 2-13-2017)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING AND REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Purpose; Jurisdiction
3-1-2: License And/Or Registration Required; Registration Fee
3-1-3: Application For Business License
3-1-4: Investigation Of Applicant
3-1-5: Term, Transferability
3-1-6: Granting Of License; Approval Of Bond
3-1-7: Building And Premises To Conform
3-1-8: All Licenses To Be Signed By Village Administrator
3-1-9: Authority Of Village To Make Inspections; Reinspection Fee
3-1-10: License To Be Posted
3-1-11: Denial, Suspension, And Revocation Procedure; Hearing
3-1-12: Appeal To The Village Board
3-1-13: Sunday And Holiday Restrictions
3-1-14: Regulation Of Hours Of Operation Of Certain Retail Premises
3-1-15: Penalty For Violations Of This Title
3-1-16: Exemptions
3-1-17: Outdoor Donation Boxes
3-1-1: PURPOSE; JURISDICTION:
   A.   General: Because each commercial establishment located in the village
is a basic part of and affects the physical and economic well being of the
village, thereby necessitating special services from the village in the form of
fire, health, sanitation, building, and police inspections and services, these
commercial establishments shall in all respects comply with the provisions of
this chapter. This chapter is designed to provide for the means whereby the
village may render the necessary inspections and services to commercial
establishments and commercial areas in order to promote, protect, and safeguard
the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the village, and such
establishments and areas, and to enable the effecting of an accurate record of
commercial establishments located and carrying on commercial activities or
commerce within the village.
   B.   Principal Place Of Business: The commercial establishments licensed or
registered as provided herein may or may not have their principal place of
business located within the village.
   C.   Persons Subject To License: A license is hereby required for the
maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for
doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, from a location
within the village. Any person shall be subject to the requirement if directly
or through an agent, employee, or partner, such person, firm or corporation,
holds itself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or attempts to perform any part of a
business or occupation in the village. All of the above activities are included
when this chapter refers to "engaging in or carrying on any business,
occupation or trade" or similar provisions.
   D.   License For The Sale Of Liquor: The issuance of licenses for the sale
of liquor shall be governed by
title 8, chapter 5 of this code. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-1-2: LICENSE AND/OR REGISTRATION REQUIRED; REGISTRATION FEE:
Except as may be prohibited by law or otherwise expressly exempted herein, it
shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business,
occupation or trade within the village without first having registered and
having obtained a village license therefor. When the term "license" is used
herein it shall include licenses in either written or sticker format.
Registration shall be required of all businesses located within the village,
whether licensed or not licensed by the village, with the exception of
contractors (see list in section
3-3-1 of this title). In addition to any license fee set forth in section
3-2-3 of this title, there shall be a registration fee of ten dollars to defray
the cost of maintaining the village's database. Registration shall be on the
form prepared by the office of the village administrator and shall be completed
and registration fee paid no later than March 31 of each year. (Ord. 2668, 2-
12-1996)
3-1-3: APPLICATION FOR BUSINESS LICENSE:
   A.   General: Applications shall be made in writing to the office of the
village administrator, in the absence of a provision to the contrary. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant (and in the case of a
partnership, the name and address of all partners; and in the case of a
corporation: the name of its president, secretary, and registered agent, and
manager or other principal employee who will be principally in charge of the
day to day operations of the business), the license desired, the location to be
used, if any, the time period the license is to cover, and the fees to be paid.
Each application shall contain any additional information as may be needed for
the proper guidance of village officials in the issuance of the license applied
for. Forms for all licenses and applications therefor shall be prepared and
kept on file by the village clerk.
   B.   Fraud; Deceit Or Other Misrepresentations: It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly give false information or falsely swear to any matter in
the application for a license or obtain a license by fraudulent means, or to
display a fictitious or fraudulently altered license or permit, or otherwise to
misuse any license. The corporate authorities shall deny, suspend or revoke the
license of any person, firm, or corporation who violates the provisions of this
section and any suspension or revocation shall be in addition to any and all
other penalties hereinafter provided and shall be in accordance with the
procedures set forth in section
3-1-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-1-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
   A.   Referral Of Application To Proper Inspecting Body: Where the provisions
of this Code or other ordinances necessitate an inspection or investigation
before the issuance of such license, the Village Administrator shall, upon
receipt of the application for a license, refer such application to the proper
officer for making such inspection and/or investigation.
   B.   Report From Inspection: The officer charged with the duty of making the
investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon within ten days after
receiving the application or copy thereof and return the application with a
recommendation to either grant or deny the request for the license, or grant it
with appropriate conditions, if any. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-1-5: TERM, TRANSFERABILITY:
   A.   Expiration Of License: All annual licenses shall terminate on March 31
unless otherwise provided herein.
   B.   Requirements For Valid Transfer Of License: Any person to whom any
license may have been issued may, with the written permission of the Village
Administrator, assign and transfer the same unless otherwise prohibited by this
Code or any other ordinances of the Village, to any other person; provided,
that in all cases where a bond is required, the person applying for such
license shall furnish a similar bond. Not more than one transfer of any license
shall be allowed within any license year.
   C.   Fee For Transfer: The fee for the transfer of a license shall be twenty
five percent of the annual fee originally paid and there shall be no refund
made to the transferor for the license fee originally paid.
   D.   Prohibited Transfers: It shall be unlawful to transfer any license of
any peddler, itinerant vendor or canvasser, nor any liquor license (see
Title 8, Chapter 5). (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-1-6: GRANTING OF LICENSE; APPROVAL OF BOND:
Except as otherwise provided by this Code or any other ordinance of the
Village, all licenses shall be granted by the Village Administrator, and he is
hereby authorized to approve the security and surety in cases where bond is
required before such license shall issue, and said bond, when so approved,
shall be filed in the office of the Village Administrator. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-
1996)
3-1-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES TO CONFORM:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business or for the
performance of any act, if the building and the premises to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the ordinances of the
Village relating thereto. No license shall be issued for the conduct of any
business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the
zoning regulations of the Village. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-1-8: ALL LICENSES TO BE SIGNED BY VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
Except when otherwise designated by the Village Administrator, every valid
business license shall bear the written or facsimile signature of the Village
Administrator, or the Village Administrator's authorized representative, in the
absence of any provision to the contrary. Any business license not bearing the
signature of said official shall be deemed invalid unless the Village
Administrator, in his discretion, determines to issue a license sticker without
his signature. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-1-9: AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE TO MAKE INSPECTIONS; REINSPECTION FEE:
   A.   Inspections Of Premises; Reinspection Fee: Whenever inspections of the
premises used for or in connection with the operation of a business or
occupation are provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably
necessary thereto to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to
detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the business, or the person
in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of
making the inspection any officer or employee of the Village who is authorized
or directed to make an inspection at any reasonable time that admission is
requested. If a reinspection for public health purposes as required by Title 6
of this Code, is performed for any premises there shall be a reinspection fee
of one hundred dollars that must be paid to the Village.
   B.   Analysis/Examination Of Materials; Production Upon Request: Whenever an
analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure
conformance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it
shall be the duty of the licensee or business whose business is governed by the
provision to give any authorized officer or employee of the Village requesting
the same, sufficient samples of any materials or commodity for an analysis upon
request.
   C.   Revocation For Refusal To Permit Inspection/Analysis: In addition to
any other penalty which may be provided, the President and Board may revoke the
license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business within the Village
who refuses to permit any officer or employee who is authorized to make an
inspection or to obtain samples, or to take a sample of the commodity, or who
interferes with an officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in
making an inspection or obtaining samples, provided that no license shall be
revoked for any cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person
that the inspection be made and/or that the sample is desired at the time when
it is sought to make the inspection or to obtain the sample. Revocation
proceedings under this Section shall be conducted in the manner set forth in
Section
3-1-11 of this Code. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-1-10: LICENSE TO BE POSTED:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business within the
Village to keep the license posted at all times in a prominent place on the
premises used for such business. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-1-11: DENIAL, SUSPENSION, AND REVOCATION PROCEDURE; HEARING:
Any application for a license may be denied or an existing license may be
suspended or revoked in accordance with this Section for the violation by the
applicant or licensee of any ordinance provision relating, directly or
indirectly, to the license or the premises occupied. The denial, suspension or
revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed and shall be in accordance
with the procedures set forth below. However, in any situation where the public
health, safety, morals, or welfare is immediately threatened by the continued
operation of any business, the President shall be and is hereby authorized to
order the immediate cessation of business and/or the closing of the premises,
and the immediate suspension of any business license, for a period not to
exceed twenty one days pending the hearing procedure set forth below. If the
President finds any cause listed in subsection C below to exist upon review of
the evidence brought forth at the denial/suspension/revocation hearing, the
President shall recommend to the Board of Trustees the denial, suspension, or
revocation of the business license at issue.
   A.   Notice Of Denial, Suspension, Or Revocation:
      1.   Within three days after the denial of an application for a business
license, the Village Administrator shall notify the applicant by mail. Such
notice is deemed received by the applicant three days after mailing. If the
applicant desires a hearing on the denial, he must then notify the Village
President by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, within
seven days of the mailing of the notice sent by the Village Administrator.
      2.   Whenever the Village President receives a request for or deems
suspension or revocation of a business license appropriate, the licensee shall
be notified by mail, by the Village Administrator. Such notice shall be deemed
received by the licensee three days after mailing. Such notice shall indicate
the alleged basis for the suspension and/or revocation and may be combined with
the hearing notice provided in subsection
3-1-11D below.
   B.   Hearing: Within eight days after the Village President has received a
proper request for a hearing on the denial, suspension and/or revocation of a
business license, the President shall schedule a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether or not the business license should be denied, suspended,
and/or revoked.
   C.   Causes For Denial, Suspension, Or Revocation: Business licenses unless
otherwise provided, may be revoked by the President after notice and hearing as
provided in this Section for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the business license;
      2.   Any violation by the licensee of ordinance provisions relating to
the license, the subject matter of the license, or the premises occupied;
      3.   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or a misdemeanor set forth
in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-6, 5/11-7, 5/11-9, 5/11-14, 5/11-15, 5/
11-17, 5/11-18, 5/11-19, 5/12-2, 5/12-6, 5/12-15, 5/14-4, 5/16-1, 5/24-1, 5/24-
3.1, 5/24-5, 5/25-1, 5/28-3, 5/31-1, 5/31-4, 5/31-7, 5/32-1, 5/32-2, 5/32-3 and
5/32-8;
      4.   Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the
Village;
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference
with a duly authorized Village officer or employee while in the performance of
his duties in making such inspections; and/or
      6.   Failure to comply with the Village Building Codes or any other
ordinances of the Village.
Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of
any other penalties provided for the violation of applicable provisions of this
Code or other ordinances of the Village.
   D.   Notice Of Hearing For Denial, Suspension, Or Revocation: Notice of the
hearing on the denial, suspension or revocation of a business license shall be
given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and
the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail
(return receipt requested) to the applicant or licensee at his last known
address as set forth in the application for the then current license period at
least five days prior to the date set for the hearing, or may be served by
personal service at least two days prior to the date set for hearing.
   E.   Representation At Hearing: At the hearing the Village Attorney shall
present the complaint and shall represent the Village. The applicant or
licensee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence
and cross-examine witnesses. The President shall preside and shall render the
decision.
   F.   President's Decision To Remain In Effect Until After Appeal: The
decision of the President upon hearing the evidence of both sides at the
denial/suspension/revocation hearing shall remain in full force and effect
unless and until the decision is reversed or modified by the Village Board.
   G.   Reapplication For License Or Permit: If an application for a license
has been denied, or a license has been revoked, the applicant or holder may not
seek another license from the Village earlier than twelve months after the
final denial or revocation. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-1-12: APPEAL TO THE VILLAGE BOARD:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the President in regard to the denial
of an application for a business license, as provided in this Chapter, or in
connection with the suspension or revocation of a business license as provided
in Section
3-1-11 above, shall have the right to appeal any such decision to the Village
Board. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Administrator,
within two days after notice of a denial, suspension or revocation of a
business license, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the
grounds for appeal. The Village Board shall thereupon set the time and place
for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant or licensee in the same manner as provided in subsection
3-1-11D hereof. The decision of the Village Board on such appeal shall be
final. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-1-13: SUNDAY AND HOLIDAY RESTRICTIONS:
The following activities are prohibited on Sunday and holidays:
   A.   Manufacturing And Construction Work: It shall be unlawful for any
person to engage in the business of manufacturing, constructing, producing or
processing tangible personal property of any kind or description, on Sundays,
New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or
Christmas Day; provided however, that this provision shall not be applicable to
works of charity or to the manufacturing or construction work necessary to meet
any emergency needs of the village. (Ord. 3041, 8-11-2003)
3-1-14: REGULATION OF HOURS OF OPERATION OF CERTAIN RETAIL PREMISES:
Any business primarily devoted to the sale at retail of grocery food,
beverages, pharmaceuticals, or sundries, commonly known as supermarkets or
pharmacies, consisting of fourteen thousand gross square feet or more, shall be
permitted to be in operation only between the hours of seven o'clock A.M. and
twelve o'clock midnight. Regulations pertaining to any premises with a liquor
license shall also be governed by the provisions of title 8, chapter 5 of this
code. Regulations pertaining to any premises selling cannabis shall be governed
by the provisions of title 10 of this code. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996; amd. Ord.
3789, 12-9-2019)
3-1-15: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS OF THIS TITLE:
In addition to (and not precluded by) any possible denial, suspension or
revocation of a license, any person, firm, or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be
punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day such violation is committed or permitted to continue, and shall be
punishable hereunder as such. In addition to the monetary penalty set forth
herein, the village may seek injunctive relief to compel compliance with this
chapter and the codes incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 3041, 8-11-2003)
3-1-16: EXEMPTIONS:
No provision in this title shall be interpreted in a way that would contradict
express licensing or permit exemptions provided for by state law. (Ord. 2668,
2-12-1996)
3-1-17: OUTDOOR DONATION BOXES:
   A.   Businesses are prohibited from having outdoor donation boxes unless the
outdoor donation box is owned, maintained, and operated by the owner of the
business.
   B.   Outdoor donation boxes shall not exceed six and one-half feet in
height.
   C.   Outdoor donation boxes shall not possess a footprint exceeding twenty
square feet.
   D.   No business shall be permitted to have more than one outdoor donation
box per lot.
   E.   Donation boxes may only be located in the side or rear portion of the
lot.
   F.   Outdoor donation boxes shall be maintained in good condition and
appearance with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust and shall be free
of graffiti. All boxes shall be serviced regularly so as to prevent overflow of
collections or the accumulation of junk, debris or other material. (Ord. 3448,
7-9-2012)
CHAPTER 2
BUSINESS LICENSING FEE; ENUMERATION
SECTION:
3-2-1: Payment Of License Fee; Partial Payment For Half Year License
3-2-2: Payment Of Fee Required; Multiple Business/Occupation Licenses
3-2-3: Fee For Business License
3-2-1: PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE; PARTIAL PAYMENT FOR HALF YEAR LICENSE:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses shall be paid in advance to the village administrator at the time
application therefor is made. When application for an annual license for any
new business is made after expiration of six months of the current license
year, the license for the remainder of the year shall be issued upon payment of
one-half the annual fee, unless otherwise provided; but no license shall be
issued for less than one-half the annual fee and no license fee shall be abated
for more than one-half year. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-2-2: PAYMENT OF FEE REQUIRED; MULTIPLE BUSINESS/OCCUPATION LICENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any business, trade or
occupation named herein without first obtaining a license therefor and paying
the annual license fee listed in this chapter, except as otherwise indicated.
All (i.e., multiple) license fees shall be paid where two or more businesses or
occupations are combined. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-2-3: FEE FOR BUSINESS LICENSE:
The business license fee, to be paid by all parties conducting business from a
location(s) within the village or otherwise required to be licensed by the
village, shall be as indicated below. This fee is not exclusive and shall be in
addition to any additional fees, including the registration fee provided in
section
3-1-2 of this title, owed for the purpose of special inspections or
investigations to be carried out by officers of the village or its
representatives. The business license fees are as follows (this list shall not
be construed to be all inclusive):
Amusements and amusement events         $ 25.00
Animal care, grooming service and/or    125.00
sales
Child daycare centers1                  275.00
Child daycare homes                      
Financial institutions                  100.00
Food/drug establishments - retail:       
     Under 3,000 sq. ft.            125.00
     3,001 to 10,000 sq. ft.        175.00
     10,001 sq. ft. or greater       225.00
Food establishments - temporary/mobile  125.00
Food service establishments              
(restaurants/deli)1:
     Low risk                       95.00
     Medium risk                   150.00
     High risk                      225.00
   There shall be an additional fee of $25.00 for any such food service
establishments that have outdoor restaurant seating plus $0.50 per square
foot of public space used (if applicable).
Manufacturing operations                $ 25.00
Peddlers (transient, merchant or        75.00
itinerant vendor)
Recreational establishments             25.00
Retail sales and/or service             50.00
establishments
Taxicabs/livery vehicle operations      500.00
Use of public sidewalks - outside        $25.00 plus $0.50 per sq. ft. of
sales or service (when otherwise        public sidewalk used
permitted)
Vending machine operators               $30.00 per machine
Veterinary hospitals                    $125.00
 
Note:
   1.   If a public institution directly provides either child daycare centers
or serves food through its own employees, it shall be exempt from paying any
fees hereunder; however, if it uses third party providers, it shall not be
exempt.
All other commercial establishments, businesses or activities, except
contractors and those exempt by operation of state law, not specifically
enumerated herein or in another section of this chapter shall pay a business
license fee of twenty five dollars. (Ord. 3267, 2-9-2009)
CHAPTER 3
CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-3-0: Requirements
3-3-1: Contractors' Businesses And Occupations
3-3-2: Fees
3-3-3: License Duration; Bond; Insurance
3-3-4: Sheet Metal Contractor
3-3-5: Lawn Maintenance/Landscaping
3-3-6: Snow Removal
3-3-7: Hours Of Work
3-3-0: REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall engage in the businesses and occupations hereinafter described
without first having obtained a license therefor and furnishing a bond in the
amounts hereinafter stated, and paying the required annual license fee as set
forth in section
3-3-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-3-1: CONTRACTORS' BUSINESSES AND OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   The term "contractor" or "contractors" in this Chapter 3-3 include all
of the following:
   Carpenter contractor
   Catch basin cleaner
   Cement or concrete contractor
   Combined landscape/lawn maintenance contractor and snow removal contractor
   Demolition contractor
   Electrical contractor
   Elevator contractor
   Excavating contractor
   Fence contractor
   Fireplace and chimney contractor
   Forester contractor
   Glazing contractor
   Heating, ventilating and air conditioning contractor
   Landscape/lawn maintenance contractor
   Mason contractor
   Paving contractor
   Plastering and lathing contractor
   Roofer contractor
   Sewer and drain laying contractor
   Sheet metal contractor
   Siding and gutter contractor
   Sign contractor
   Snow removal contractor
   Structural ironwork contractor
   Swimming pool contractor
   Tile, marble and mosaic contractor
   Tuckpointing and building contractor
   Waste disposal firms (recyclables only)
   Waste disposal firms (all other materials)
   B.   The term "contractor" or "contractors" in this Chapter 3-3 exclude all
of the following:
   Plumbers with an active State of Illinois license
   Plumbing contractors with an active State of Illinois license
   Irrigation contractors with an active State of Illinois license (Ord. 3517,
4-15-2014; amd. Ord. 3827, 1-11-2021)
3-3-2: FEES:
For each of the contractors’ businesses and occupations set forth in section
3-3-1 of this chapter, there shall be a contractor’s license fee (in lieu of a
registration fee) of one hundred and twenty-five dollars except the following:
 
Combined landscape/lawn maintenance contractor and snow removal $ 187.50
contractor
Waste disposal firms (all other materials)                      1,000.00
 
All (i.e., multiple) other contractor fees shall be paid where two or more such
businesses or occupations are combined, except for the combined landscape/lawn
maintenance contractor and snow removal contractor which shall be treated as a
single license in this chapter (i.e., if a contractor performs multiple
contractor functions, multiple fees shall be paid). (Ord. 3517, 4-15-2014; amd.
Ord. 3835, 4-26-2021)
3-3-3: LICENSE DURATION; BOND; INSURANCE:
   A.   Duration: Any license issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of
twelve months from the date of issuance.
   B.   Bond: The requisite bond shall conform to the requirements of the
Illinois contractor unified license and permit bond act. The bond shall be in
such form as approved by the village, shall be issued by a company authorized
by law to issue such bonds in Illinois, and shall be valid for a period of at
least twelve months. The bond amount shall be a minimum of twenty five thousand
dollars. Such bond shall include a provision that it cannot be revoked,
modified or nonrenewed by the company issuing the bond without at least thirty
days' prior written notice to the village.
   C.   Insurance Statement: Every application for a license pursuant to this
chapter shall contain a statement of whether or not the contractor has
liability and workers' compensation insurance coverage. If the contractor has
such coverage, the application shall contain the name and address of the
company or agent and the policy number. Such information shall be provided to
the resident or property owner for whom the work is being performed.
   D.   Insurance Coverage: The contractors listed in section
3-3-1 of this chapter shall be required to maintain general liability and
workers' compensation insurance as a condition of receiving a license. Such
insurance shall be evidenced by a certificate filed with the director of public
works and shall have the following minimum limits: general liability coverage
of one million dollars per occurrence; two million dollars general aggregate;
and workers' compensation coverage in an amount in accordance with current
state statute. Such insurance shall be issued by a company licensed in
Illinois, shall be valid for a period of at least twelve months and shall
include a provision that it cannot be revoked, modified or nonrenewed without
at least thirty days' prior written notice to the village. The village shall be
named as an additional insured in any liability policy. (Ord. 3041, 8-11-2003)
3-3-4: SHEET METAL CONTRACTOR:
   A.   Compliance With Building Regulations: Any person conducting the
business of sheet metal work or hot air furnace shall comply with the
provisions of the ordinances of the village relating to buildings and any other
ordinances applying to the conduct of the business.
   B.   Removal Of Wastes: Any person conducting the business of sheet metal
work or hot air furnace shall, upon completion of each job, remove all old or
surplus metal or other material and debris within three days, and the metal,
material and debris shall not be placed on vacant lots, streets or alleys but
shall be disposed of in accordance with law, including all Federal, State and
local environmental laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-3-5: LAWN MAINTENANCE/LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, certain words and
phrases are defined as follows:
   ELECTRIC LEAF BLOWER: A leaf blower which is powered by an electric motor.
   GAS-POWERED LEAFBLOWER: A leaf blower which is powered by gasoline or
propane, including an electric leaf blower powered by stand-alone fossil fuel
powered generators powered by vehicle engines.
   LAWN MAINTENANCE CONTRACTOR: Any person who makes a business of mowing,
trimming, raking or fertilizing lawns, or other landscape work, and who employs
two or more persons in the business, and shall include a landscape contractor.
   B.   Removal Of Wastes: Any person conducting the business of lawn
maintenance shall, upon completion of each job, remove and legally dispose off
site all clippings, trimmings or other yard refuse and materials or shall
ensure that the materials are properly bagged, tagged, and placed for
collection by the Village's waste disposal contractor or otherwise removed and
disposed of in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local
environmental laws, rules and regulations. Such yard refuse shall not be
allowed to accumulate on site nor shall it be placed on vacant lots, streets or
alleys.
   C.   Beginning calendar year 2026 and for each subsequent year through 2029,
a lawn maintenance contractor who commits to using only electric leaf blowers
year-round shall receive a reimbursement of one hundred twenty-five dollars
($125.00) for the fees set forth in section
3-3-2 and be listed on the village website as a landscape contract committed to
utilizing exclusively electric leaf blowers. A lawn maintenance contractor who
makes said commitment and is found to be using a gas-powered leaf blower shall
be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and be removed from the list of
contractors utilizing exclusively electric leaf blowers. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996;
amd. Ord. 3962, 7-14-2025)
3-3-6: SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, the term "snow removal
contractor" is hereby defined to mean any person who makes a business of
plowing, blowing or removing snow or ice from driveways, sidewalks or streets,
and who employs two or more persons in the business.
   B.   Placement Of Wastes: No person conducting the business of snow removal
shall place snow or ice or cause the same to be deposited on any street, alley,
sidewalk, public way or public grounds in the Village nor on any private
property other than the person for whom they are doing the removal. (Ord. 2668,
2-12-1996)
3-3-7: HOURS OF WORK:
Any person performing work as a contractor listed in section
3-3-1,
3-3-4 or
3-3-5 of this chapter, and any homeowner, tenant or person performing any work
under a Village-issued permit, shall only be allowed to perform said work
between the hours of seven o'clock A.M. and six o'clock P.M. Monday through
Friday, and between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M. on
Saturdays. No work shall be allowed on Sundays, New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day.
No person performing work covered by this section shall engage in any such work
or activity at times other than those set forth above unless a permit for such
work has first been issued. Application for such permits shall be made in
writing to the Director of Public Works, and shall state the name of the
applicant and his business address, the location of the proposed work, and the
reason for seeking a permit to do such work at times other than those set forth
above, as well as the estimated time of the proposed operations. No such
special permit shall be issued excepting where the public welfare will be
enhanced by such issuance or will be harmed by failure to perform the work at
the time indicated. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any
work necessary to prevent injury to persons or property at any time.
Contractors engaged in snow removal activities shall not be subject to hourly
work restrictions except that the use of snowblowers shall be prohibited
between the hours of one o'clock A.M. and five o'clock A.M. on residential
properties. (Ord. 3727, 2-11-2019; amd. Ord. 3774, 8-26-2019)
CHAPTER 4
TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Compliance Required
3-4-2: Number Of Passengers Limited
3-4-3: Public Stands
3-4-4: Cruising
3-4-5: Taxicab Licenses Required
3-4-6: Taximeters
3-4-7: Taxicab Drivers
3-4-8: Rates
3-4-9: Compliance With Traffic Regulations
3-4-10: Taxicab Service
3-4-11: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-4-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any taxicab along or
upon any street or public way within the Village for the carriage of passengers
for hire unless such person shall first have furnished satisfactory evidence to
the Chief of Police that there has been compliance with all of the provisions
of the Illinois Vehicle Code and ordinances relating to the qualifications for
the driving and operation of such taxicab. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-4-2: NUMBER OF PASSENGERS LIMITED:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to convey more than that
number of persons for which such vehicle has seating accommodations (exclusive
of the driver's seat), and in any event not more than five passengers of the
age of twelve years or more at the same time. After any driver has been hired
by one or more persons traveling together, such driver shall not pick up other
persons along or upon any street or highway in the Village, except only upon
the express request of the person or persons first engaging said taxicab, and
it shall be unlawful for the driver of any such taxicab to solicit the
permission of the passenger or passengers first hiring the taxicab to pick up
any additional passenger or passengers.
No person driving any taxicab shall permit any person to ride on the front seat
with the driver thereof, provided that the rear compartment of the taxicab has
a capacity to accommodate five passengers. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-4-3: PUBLIC STANDS:
Subject to the approval of the Board, the President may establish and designate
taxicab stands on such streets, in such places and in such manner as he shall
determine. Such stands, if any, shall be marked with the appropriate signs.
   A.   Record Kept: A record of each stand shall be kept by the Chief of
Police or his agent, and such record shall contain the number of the stand and
the exact location thereof and its vehicle capacity.
   B.   Parking: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to stop,
stand or park such taxicab upon any business street or in any block of any
other street at any place other than a taxicab stand, except for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic sign or signal. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-4-4: CRUISING:
No driver of a taxicab licensed under the provisions of this Code shall seek
passengers by repeatedly or persistently driving his vehicle to and fro in a
short space before any place of public gathering, or by otherwise interfering
with traffic or the proper and orderly access to or egress from any such place;
but any driver of such taxicab may solicit passengers by driving through any
public street, without stops (other than those due to traffic and traffic signs
and signals and directions of police officers), at such speed as not to
interfere with traffic or violate Village ordinances. No driver of any taxicab
licensed as aforesaid shall solicit any passenger or passengers upon or along
any of the streets or public ways of the Village, orally or by a signal, sign
or sounding of a horn. It shall also be unlawful for any such driver of any
such taxicab, unless hailed, to pick up any passenger or passengers standing at
or upon any designated bus or loading zone. No operator or driver of a taxicab
shall habitually cruise along or upon the certificated routes of any duly
licensed utility, for the purpose of soliciting passengers along such routes.
Every driver of a taxicab shall remain in his cab while the same is parked or
standing at a designated taxicab stand. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-4-5: TAXICAB LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required: No motor vehicle, other than taxicabs licensed and
operated under the terms and provisions of this Chapter, shall be operated
along or upon any street or public way of the Village for the carriage of
passengers for hire, indiscriminately accepting and discharging such persons as
may offer themselves for transportation.
   B.   Application: Application for a license to operate and conduct a taxicab
business shall be made by the owner or operator upon forms furnished by the
Village. Such application shall be filed with the Village Administrator and
shall contain the full name and address of the owner and operator; the officers
thereof if corporation or partners thereof if a partnership; information as to
the applicant's financial responsibility; names of sureties signing bonds of
the applicant or name of the company issuing public liability and property
damage policies; a complete description of the vehicle or vehicles for which
the license is desired, including kind and make of vehicle, motor and serial
number, seating capacity (excluding driver's seat or any part thereof); State
license number, cab number, color of vehicle and horsepower; and such other
data as the President may prescribe. If the vehicle is to be leased or rented
to the driver, a copy of the leasing contract must accompany such application;
provided, however, that no license shall hereafter be issued originally or in
the annual renewal of such license unless the applicant shall have accepted the
provisions of this Chapter and agreed to observe and abide by this schedule of
fares and charges and all other regulations contained herein or as may be
hereafter adopted by the President and Board from time to time.
   C.   Bond: Before any license to conduct and operate a taxicab business
shall be issued as herein provided, the person applying therefor shall file
with the Village Administrator satisfactory evidence that a bond or insurance
policy covering property damage in the amount of one thousand five hundred
dollars has been issued and is in force covering each vehicle used or operated
as a taxicab. Said policy shall be issued by a solvent and responsible company
authorized to do such insurance business in the State and shall be in a form
and substance satisfactory to the Village. The company issuing any such policy
shall agree, in writing, to notify the Village Clerk in writing of the
cancellation or expiration of such policy at least thirty days prior to such
cancellation or expiration. The aforesaid bond or insurance policy covering
property damage is in addition to the bond or insurance policy covering
liability for personal injury or wrongful death in the amount as prescribed by
the laws of the State pertaining to the operation of licensed taxicabs and
public vehicles. Proof of compliance with the State law in respect to insurance
shall at all times be on file with the Village Clerk and such evidence shall
cover all licenses held by any person.
   D.   Issuance Of License: The Village Administrator is hereby authorized and
empowered to issue licenses to operate and conduct a taxicab business in the
Village in the manner herein provided, upon compliance with the requirements of
this Chapter. No taxicab business shall be conducted by any person with less
than a minimum of five taxicabs. The fee for such license shall be as set forth
in Section
 3-2-3 of this Title.
   E.   Register: It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep a register
of the names of persons to whom such licenses are granted, the date or dates
when issued, the number of license or licenses and the description of the
taxicab or taxicabs so licensed.
   F.   Inspection: No taxicab shall be licensed until it has been inspected
under the direction of the Chief of Police and found to be in safe condition
for the transportation of passengers, clean, of good appearance and well
painted, and a certificate of inspection for its taximeter issued as herein
provided. Provided, further, that each such taxicab shall carry outside on both
the left and right side in lettering not less than two inches in height the
name of the person owning or operating such taxicab and the number of such
taxicab. No taxicab shall be equipped with or display any lights other than
white or amber on the front and other than red on the rear of such taxicab.
Such license for a particular taxicab shall be transferable to a different
taxicab only by authority of the Chief of Police.
No taxicab so licensed shall be operated or driven in the Village unless it is
inspected and approved at least once in every six months under the direction of
the Chief of Police. Such inspection shall be made at such time and place, and
in such manner, as determined by the Chief of Police.
   G.   Certificate Of Registration: Upon the proper payment of the required
license fee, a decalcomania transfer certificate of registration shall be
issued by the Village Clerk. Such certificate shall be affixed to the
windshield of the taxicab in the lower right-hand corner.
   H.   Transfer: It shall be unlawful to transfer any license to operate and
conduct a taxicab business from one person to another person.
   I.   Suspension: If any licensed taxicab shall become unsafe for the
transportation of passengers or shall become unclean or unsightly in
appearance, as determined by the Chief of Police, such license for such
particular taxicab shall be suspended by the Chief of Police until the said
taxicab and all its appurtenances shall, in the opinion of the Chief of Police
be put in fit condition for public use. Failure to keep such taxicabs in a safe
and clean condition may also be grounds for suspension or revocation of the
business license. Any such suspension or revocation shall be governed by the
procedures set forth in Sections
 3-1-11 and
3-1-12 of this Title. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-4-6: TAXIMETERS:
   A.   Taximeters Required: Each taxicab shall be provided with a taximeter or
instrument so devised as to register, in plain view of the passenger, the fares
as accumulated while said cab is in operation.
   B.   Operation: Taximeters shall be connected with and operated from the
front wheel or the transmission of the taxicab to which they are attached. No
taxicab shall operate while engaged, unless such taximeter shall be accurately
recording the fare to be charged, except where the taxicab is hired on an
hourly or flat-rate basis.
Each taximeter shall be equipped with a flag at least three inches by two
inches in size, either painted red or bearing thereon in letters at least one
inch in height the word "vacant" or the words "for hire". The flag post of such
flag shall be up or towards a vertical position when the taxicab is for hire,
and said flag shall be immediately pulled down and kept in a horizontal
position when such taxicab is engaged. The taximeter shall register either the
minimum or flat-rate fare at the beginning of each trip.
   C.   Additional Passengers; Rates Of Fares: Each taximeter shall be provided
with a suitable mechanism to register the fare for all additional passengers
and also be equipped with a suitable registering device to be specified and
approved by the Chief of Police for the purpose of indicating and registering
all flat-rate fares, which device may be a part of the taximeter.
The taximeter shall have a dial which shall register the tariff in accordance
with the legal rates of fare. Each taxicab shall be equipped with a light
which, during the period between sunset and sunrise, shall be so reflected upon
the dial of the taximeter as to enable the passenger to read the figures
registered thereon.
   D.   Inspection: At least once every six months the Chief of Police or his
agent shall inspect, test and seal all taximeters in use in the Village. In
addition thereto, whenever complaint is made to the Chief of Police that any
taximeter registers inaccurately, it shall be his duty to cause immediately an
inspection and test of such taximeter. If said taximeter does not properly and
accurately register, it shall be unlawful to operate the taxicab until it is
equipped with a taximeter approved by the Chief of Police or his agent. The
owner or operator of any taxicab shall, upon demand, deliver to the Chief of
Police or his agent the taxicab, together with the taximeter, or the taximeter
detached therefrom, for inspection and test. Said owner or operator may be
present or represented at the time such inspection and test are made.
Every taximeter shall be tested to determine the accuracy of its recording
mechanism with respect to distance traveled, either by running the taxicab to
which it is attached over a course, a standard mile in length, or by a
mechanical test. Both or either of the foregoing tests may be made at the
discretion of the Chief of Police or his agent. To determine whether a
taximeter correctly registers waiting time, such taximeter shall be tested by
comparing the time recorded as shown by the fare computed on the dial with the
standard time. When a test shows that a taximeter correctly records the charge
of fare measured by distance traveled, waiting time and extra passengers, it
shall be sealed and a certificate of the test shall be issued to the owner or
operator by the Chief of Police.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his agent to seal all taximeters
found accurate and correct, and to keep a record of the numbers of each
taximeter and the date of the inspection thereof in the books of his office and
to furnish a copy of such inspections to the President. The fee to be charged
for the regular inspection every six months of each taximeter is hereby fixed
at the sum of two dollars fifty cents with no charge for additional inspections
unless the taximeter registers inaccurately, in which case the inspection fee
for each additional inspection shall likewise be two dollars fifty cents.
   E.   Listing Of Fares: There shall be affixed on the inside of each taxicab
in a conspicuous place and in such manner that the same may be easily and
conveniently read by any person riding in such taxicab, a card in a frame
covered by glass, upon which card shall be printed in plain and legible type
the rates of fare as prescribed by this Code.
   F.   Collection Of Fares: It shall be the duty of the driver of each taxicab
at the termination of each trip to throw the flag to the non-recording position
on the taximeter and call the passenger's attention to the fare registered. The
taximeter shall not be changed until the fare has been paid or a charge ticket
made out and handed the person hiring such taxicab. Any passenger shall be
entitled to receive, upon request, a receipt for the fare paid.
   G.   Transfer: No person owning, controlling or driving any taxicab shall
transfer the taximeter to any other taxicab without having had, prior thereto,
a new inspection and certification of such taximeter. No person shall tamper
with, break or mutilate any taximeter, cable or seal thereof. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-
1996)
3-4-7: TAXICAB DRIVERS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
taxicab, which is licensed under this Code, without first having obtained a
taxicab driver's license from the Village. No person owning, controlling or
operating any such taxicab shall employ or permit any person other than a
driver legally licensed by the State and as a taxicab driver licensed by the
Village to operate such taxicab upon the streets of the Village.
   B.   Application For License: Any person desiring to secure a license as a
driver of any taxicab licensed hereunder and used for the carriage of
passengers for hire shall make application in writing therefor to the Chief of
Police upon a form provided for such purpose. Such application shall set forth
the name of the applicant and his residence and occupation. Every applicant
shall hold a valid State driver's license. The Chief of Police shall make a
detailed and diligent inquiry as to the character and record of the applicant,
as to the applicant's driving record status and any criminal history. If the
applicant is found to have been convicted of driving while intoxicated or
reckless driving or has a criminal history reflecting a conviction(s) of 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-6, 5/11-7, 5/11-9, 5/11-14, 5/11-15, 5/11-17,
5/11-18 5/11-19, 5/12-2, 5/12-6, 5/12-15, 5/14-4, 5/16-1, 5/24-1, 5/24-3.1, 5/
24-5, 5/25-1, 5/28-3, 5/31-1, 5/31-4, 5/31-7, 5/32-1, 5/32-2, 5/32-3 and 5/32-
8, then the applicant shall be refused a license. Otherwise such application
shall be issued by the Chief of Police. Such license shall have affixed thereon
a photograph of the licensee and shall contain such other descriptive data of
the licensee, if any, as may be prescribed by the Board of Trustees.
   C.   Fee; Display: The license fee for a taxicab driver shall be six dollars
per year and such license shall expire on April 30 following the date of
issuance. Every person licensed as a driver under the provisions of this Code
shall, at all times while acting as a driver of any taxicab licensed under the
provisions hereof, have such license displayed in the taxicab in plain view of
the passenger.
   D.   Record: The Chief of Police shall keep at his office a record in which
shall be kept the name and residence address of each licensed driver, together
with the names of the persons endorsing his application, and shall carefully
note opposite each such driver's name such information as he may gain
concerning him and as may be necessary to provide a complete record of his
conduct and qualifications as a driver.
   E.   Transfer Of Driver's License: It shall be unlawful to transfer any
driver's license or badge from one person to another. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-4-8: RATES:
The Board may, from time to time, establish by ordinance just and reasonable
rates and charges, which shall be uniform as to all taxicabs operated within
the village. No licensee, whether owner, operator or driver, shall charge,
collect or receive greater or less or different rates of compensation for the
use of taxicabs than those established herein or fixed hereafter from time to
time by ordinance. Every person shall be entitled to the services of taxicabs
at the established rates and charges. The following schedule of rates and
charges is hereby declared to be just and reasonable, computable according to
the distance traveled and the time consumed as indicated by the taximeter
attached to each taxicab: (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
 
For the first 2/19 mile or fraction thereof              $2.25
For each succeeding 2/19 mile or fraction thereof        0.20
For each additional passenger over 12 years of age       0.75
For each 36 seconds of waiting time, or fraction thereof 0.20
 
(Ord. 3143, 1-9-2006)
Such waiting time shall include the time beginning five minutes after the call
time at the place to which the taxicab has been called, while it is not in
motion, and the time consumed while standing at the direction of a passenger.
Passengers shall be entitled to the transportation of their ordinary hand
baggage without charge.
Every owner or operator of any taxicab business in the village shall pay any
judgment or award rendered against such owner or operator by any court or
commission of competent jurisdiction which relate to operations in the village
within thirty days after such judgment or award shall become final and not
appealable. No owner or operator of any taxicab business shall work, or allow
to work or employ any person to work as a driver of a taxicab for more than
twelve out of any twenty four consecutive hours. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-4-9: COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
The owner, operator and driver of any taxicab shall obey all laws, ordinances
and regulations relating to the operation of motor vehicles and taxicabs, and
all traffic regulations. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-4-10: TAXICAB SERVICE:
Every taxicab shall be operated regularly to the extent reasonably necessary to
meet the public demand for taxicab service. In the event that the service of
any taxicab is discontinued (except due to strike, acts of God or causes beyond
the control of the licensee), the chief of police shall give written notice to
the licensee to restore such taxicab to service, and if the same is not so
restored within five days after such notice, the chief of police may, within
his discretion, revoke the license for such taxicab. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-4-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In the event the president, after investigation and hearing, shall determine
that any license to conduct and operate a taxicab business has been obtained by
fraud or false representation made before the issuance of such license, the
president may, in his discretion, suspend or revoke any such license previously
issued.
In the event any owner or operator shall default in the performance of any of
the conditions or obligations imposed upon such licensee by this code or any
other ordinance applicable to such licensee, and if such default or violation
shall continue for a period of ten days after written notice thereof from the
village clerk citing said default or violation, then in such case the president
may suspend or revoke the license to conduct and operate said taxicab business
and all licenses for taxicabs held by such licensee.
The procedures for the suspension or revocation of a license hereunder shall be
as set forth in sections
3-1-11 and
3-1-12 of this title. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
CHAPTER 5
PEDDLERS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Peddler's License Required; No Fee
3-5-3: Application For License; Bond Required
3-5-4: Failure To Obtain A License
3-5-5: Inspections
3-5-6: Protection Against Contamination
3-5-7: Display Of License
3-5-8: Limitations On Peddling
3-5-9: Revocation Of License
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person who transports personal property for retail sale
within this State who does not maintain in this State an established office,
distribution house, sales house, warehouse, service center or residence from
which business is conducted. However, this does not include any person who
delivers tangible personal property within this State who is fulfilling an
order for such property which was solicited or placed by mail or other means.
PEDDLER: Anyone who is either a "Transient Merchant" or an "Itinerant Vendor".
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale of
goods, wares or merchandise in this State, who, for the purpose of conducting
such business, occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of any kind or
vacant lot. However, this does not include any person selling goods, wares, or
merchandise which are raised, produced, or manufactured by him, to any person
also in the business of selling vegetables, fruits, or perishable farm products
at an established City or Village market, or any person operating a stand or
booth on or adjacent to property owned by him or upon which he resides. (Ord.
2668, 2-12-1996)
3-5-2: PEDDLER'S LICENSE REQUIRED; NO FEE:
No person shall engage in or conduct the business of a peddler in this Village
without first having obtained a special peddler's license to do so as
hereinafter provided. There shall be no fee charged for issuance of such
license. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-5-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; BOND REQUIRED:
Every person who desires a license as a peddler shall make application in
writing to the Village Police Chief stating:
   A.   The name of the applicant;
   B.   The applicant's permanent business address;
   C.   The applicant's residence address (or main corporate offices, if
applicant is a corporation);
   D.   The intended business location;
   E.   The nature of the applicant's business;
   F.   A complete inventory of goods intended for sale;
   G.   A list of all licenses for transient merchants acquired by applicant
and issued in Illinois within the last twelve months; and
   H.   A copy of the applicant's certificate of registration under the
Retailers Occupation Tax Act.
The applicant shall file with the Village Police Chief a surety bond or shall
make a cash deposit. The amount of the bond or deposit shall be equal to fifty
percent of the wholesale value of the merchandise that the applicant intends to
offer for sale; however, the amount of the bond or deposit shall not be less
than one thousand dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars. Said deposit
shall be returned after the expiration of the license.
The Police Department shall transmit said deposit or bond to the Attorney
General of the State of Illinois within fourteen days after the applicant
ceases to do business in its jurisdiction, and the Attorney General shall hold
said deposit or bond for two years for the benefit of any person who suffers
loss or damage as a result of the purchase of merchandise from said person
licensed under this Chapter or as a result of the negligence or intentionally
tortious act of the person licensed under this Chapter. The Attorney General
shall pay any portion of the bond or deposit to any person in accord with the
order of a court without making an independent finding as to the amount of the
bond or deposit that is payable to that person. Any balance of said deposit
held by the Attorney General two years after the expiration of a license under
this Chapter shall be refunded to the person.
Upon receipt of this application and the surety bond and/or cash deposit, any
further certificate required hereunder, and the payment by such applicant of a
license fee as herein set forth in Section
3-2-3 of this Title, the Village Police Chief shall issue a license authorizing
the applicant to engage in the business of a transient merchant or itinerant
vendor. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-5-4: FAILURE TO OBTAIN A LICENSE:
If any person makes retail sales as a transient merchant or itinerant vendor
without first having obtained a license, the Village may hold the inventory,
truck or other personal property of the person until he obtains a license to
conduct business as a transient merchant or itinerant vendor. If the property
has been held by the Village for more than sixty days and the person whose
property is being held has not obtained a license as required under this
Chapter, the Village may petition the Circuit Court for an order for the sale
of the property being held. If the Court finds that the person whose property
is being held has not obtained a license as required by this Chapter, the Court
may order the Village to sell the property. Proceeds of the sale of the
property, less reimbursement for the expenses of storage and sale of the
property, shall be deposited in the Treasury of the Village.
It shall be prima facie evidence that a person is a transient merchant or
itinerant vendor under this Chapter, if the person does not transact business
from a fixed location or if the person does not own, or does not lease for a
period of at least six months, the property from which the business is
conducted. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-5-5: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Preliminary Inspection: Before any license shall be issued to a peddler
of fish, fruit, vegetables, ice cream, frozen confections, bakery goods,
sandwiches, meats or other food products or beverages, the Health Officer must
conduct an inspection and be satisfied from such inspection that the said
premises, vehicles, and containers are in a sanitary condition and fit to be
used for the purposes intended and that all provisions of this Code and of the
Village regulating the production, transportation and sale of food have been
complied with. If he finds them to be so, he shall approve the application and
certify his approval to the Village Administrator.
   B.   Periodic Inspection: The Health Officer shall make periodic inspection
of the source of supply and the methods of carrying on the business of all
licensed peddlers of food products or beverages for the purpose of determining
whether all the requirements of the law and the regulations of the Village
relating to the business conducted by the licensee have been fully complied
with. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-5-6: PROTECTION AGAINST CONTAMINATION:
All food and beverages dealt in by any peddler shall have adequate protection
against contamination, dust, dirt, flies, vermin, dogs, cats, and other
animals, and from promiscuous handling and all other contaminations of any
kind. Where necessary, adequate refrigeration shall be provided. No food
products or beverages shall be sold by any peddler unless produced, packed,
stored and transported under proper sanitary conditions approved by the Health
Officer. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-5-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every vehicle used by a licensed peddler while engaged in the business of
peddling, shall have the name of the owner and address legibly printed on the
right side of such vehicle, and shall also have firmly attached to such vehicle
in a conspicuous place a card, sticker or plate to be furnished by the Police
Department containing the words "Licensed Peddler" and stating the date of
expiration of the license.
In a fixed location, the peddler's license shall be displayed in a prominent
location within the premises. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-5-8: LIMITATIONS ON PEDDLING:
No peddler shall stop or stand or permit any vehicle owned or controlled by him
and being used in his business of peddling, to stop or stand in any street or
public place for a period longer than is necessary to make a sale to a then
present customer. No person shall carry on the business of peddling in any
street within twenty five feet of any corner of the curb; or in any street or
public place within five hundred feet of any public market or within five
hundred feet of any building where goods, wares or merchandise similar to the
kinds of products offered for sale by said peddler are sold; or within five
hundred feet of any school building while school is in session, or in any
street or public place where the carrying on of such business would result in
the obstruction of traffic and the prevention of the proper public use of the
street or public place where such business is carried on. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-
1996)
3-5-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked for the violation of
any of the provisions hereof or other provisions of law relating to the
business carried on by the licensee. Any such suspension or revocation shall
take place in accordance with the provisions of Sections
3-1-11 and
 3-1-12 of this Title. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
CHAPTER 6
FLORISTS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definition
3-6-2: Sanitary And Safety Requirements
3-6-3: Use Of Public Sidewalks; Special License Required
3-6-1: DEFINITION:
The term "florist" refers to any person who operates an establishment for the
sale, at wholesale or retail, of any flowers, plants, trees or shrubs, of all
varieties and descriptions. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-6-2: SANITARY AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
Every establishment where the business of a florist is operated shall be kept
in a sanitary condition. No decayed, unwholesome, contaminated or diseased
flowers, plants or other things shall be allowed to remain in or about the
establishment and the establishment shall be kept clear of rubbish and
inflammable matter.
Every florist's establishment shall comply with all State laws governing the
sale, possession, growing and disposition of noxious, diseased or infected
plants, trees or shrubs. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-6-3: USE OF PUBLIC SIDEWALKS; SPECIAL LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall maintain floral displays on a public sidewalk without first
having obtained a special license therefor. Such special license shall be
issued for one year, ending on March 31. The special license fee shall be as
set out in Section
3-2-3 of this Code. This special license shall be required in addition to a
regular business license. Such special license shall be subject to the
following provisions:
   A.   Open Sidewalk: It shall be unlawful for the open portion of any
sidewalk to be reduced to less than five feet in width.
   B.   Maintenance Of Sidewalk: It shall be unlawful to maintain the sidewalk
area in an unclean or unsafe condition.
   C.   Application: Every person who desires a special license for floral
displays on a public sidewalk shall make application in writing to the Village
Clerk stating:
      1.   The name of the applicant;
      2.   The name of the business;
      3.   The address of the business;
      4.   The telephone number of the business;
      5.   A diagram of the sidewalk area to be used which specifies the area
dimensions;
      6.   Evidence of public liability insurance including the Village as a
party insured and insuring the Village against any liability resulting from the
uses permitted pursuant to this Section. The coverage shall not be less than
one million dollars per occurrence;
      7.   A signed hold harmless and indemnification agreement the text of
which shall be determined by the Village.
   D.   Application Review: The application for special license shall be
reviewed by the Director of Public Works and no special license shall be issued
unless the Director of Public Works reports that the proposed use will not
unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-
1996)
CHAPTER 7
RESTAURANTS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Outdoor Restaurant Seating On Privately Owned Property
3-7-2: Outdoor Restaurant Seating On Public Sidewalks
3-7-1: OUTDOOR RESTAURANT SEATING ON PRIVATELY OWNED PROPERTY:
The operation of any outdoor restaurant seating shall be subject to the
following conditions:
   A.   Outdoor Food Preparation: It shall be unlawful to prepare, store, or
display food outdoors.
   B.   Clearing Tables: It shall be unlawful to allow outdoor tables to remain
uncleared immediately after their use.
   C.   Storage Of Tables And Chairs: It shall be unlawful to store tables and
chairs outdoors overnight.
   D.   Hours Of Operation:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to operate outdoor restaurant seating between
the hours of ten o'clock P.M. and six o'clock A.M. on Sunday through Thursday.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to operate outdoor restaurant seating between
the hours of eleven o'clock P.M. and six o'clock A.M. on Friday and Saturday.
   E.   Number Of Chairs: It shall be unlawful to maintain more than one chair
for every ten square feet of area devoted to outdoor seating.
   F.   Application: Every person who desires a special license for outdoor
restaurant seating shall make application in writing to the Village Clerk
stating:
      1.   The name of the applicant;
      2.   The name of the business;
      3.   The address of the business;
      4.   The telephone number of the business;
      5.   A diagram of the outdoor seating area which specifies:
         a.   The dimensions of the total area to be used;
         b.   The number of the tables and chairs to be used;
         c.   The location of the tables and chairs within the area.
   G.   Application Review: The application for special license shall be
reviewed by the Director of Public Works and no special license shall be issued
unless the Director of Public Works reports that the proposed use will not
unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The application
shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Health and no special license shall
be issued unless the Director of Public Health reports that all food operations
are in accordance with applicable food service sanitation regulations. (Ord.
2512, 8-10-1992; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-7-2: OUTDOOR RESTAURANT SEATING ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS:
The operation of outdoor restaurant seating on public sidewalks shall be
subject to the following conditions in addition to those put forth in Section
3-7-1:
   A.   Open Sidewalk: It shall be unlawful for the open portion of any
sidewalk to be reduced to less than five feet in width.
   B.   Maintenance Of Sidewalk: It shall be unlawful to maintain the sidewalk
area in an unclean or unsafe condition.
   C.   Application: Every person who desires a special license for outdoor
restaurant seating shall provide the following information in addition to that
required in subsection
3-7-1F of this Chapter.
      1.   Evidence of public liability insurance including the Village as a
party insured and insuring the Village against any liability resulting from the
uses permitted pursuant to this Chapter. The coverage shall not be less than
one million dollars per occurrence;
      2.   A signed hold harmless and indemnification agreement the text of
which shall be determined by the Village. (Ord. 2512, 8-10-1992; amd. Ord.
2668, 2-12-1996)
CHAPTER 8
MUNICIPAL TAXES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-8-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-8-3: Municipal Use Tax
3-8-4: Municipal Utility Tax
3-8-5: Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
3-8-6: Municipal Automobile Renting Use Tax
3-8-7: Telecommunications Tax
3-8-8: Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
3-8-9: Municipal Electric Utility Tax
3-8-10: Locally Imposed And Administered Tax Rights And Responsibilities
3-8-11: Tax On The Gross Receipts Of Places For Eating
3-8-12: Municipal Occupation Tax And Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-8-13: Municipal Use Tax
3-8-14: Motor Fuel Tax
3-8-15: Municipal Cannabis Retailer’s Occupation Tax
3-8-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail in the village at the rate of one
percent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business while this tax is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code.
   B.   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on
or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the state
department of revenue required by section 3 of "an act in relation to a tax
upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to
purchasers for use or consumption", approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
   C.   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state
department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
   D.   The exclusion contained in section 2(d) of the "retailers' occupation
tax act" approved June 28, 1933, as amended, shall not apply to property within
the village. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-8-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent of the cost
price of all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either
in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an
incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5 of the Illinois municipal code.
   B.   Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of the village shall file, on or before the last
day of each calendar month the report to the state department of revenue
required by section 9 of the "service occupation tax act", approved July 10,
1961, as amended.
   C.   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state
department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
   D.   The exclusion contained in section 2(e) of the "service occupation tax
act", approved July 10, 1961, as amended, shall not apply to property within
the village. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-8-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code upon the
privilege of using in the village any item of tangible personal property which
is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or
registered with an agency of Illinois government. The rate shall be at a rate
of one percent of the selling price of such tangible property with the selling
price to have the meaning as defined in the use tax act, approved July 14,
1955, as amended.
   B.   Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue and
shall be paid before the title or certificate of registration for the personal
property is issued. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-8-4: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX:
   A.   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges: (Ord. 2569, 11-23-1993; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
      1.   Gas:
         a.   Effective for services billed on or after February 1, 2001,
through and including September 30, 2001, persons engaging in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption
within the corporate limits of the village and not for resale, at the rate of
three and one-half percent of the gross receipts therefrom.
Notwithstanding the amendment to this subsection A1a, amounts due or payable
for any tax periods ending prior to February 1, 2001, are nevertheless to
remain payable as if this subsection A1a had not been adopted.
         b.   Effective with respect to gross receipts actually paid to the
taxpayer for services billed on or after October 1, 2001, persons engaged in
the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or
consumption within the corporate limits of the village and not for resale, at
the rate of five percent of the gross receipts therefrom.
Notwithstanding the amendment to this subsection A1b, amounts due or payable
for any tax periods ending prior to October 1, 2001, are nevertheless to remain
payable as if this subsection A1b had not been adopted. (Ord. 2914, 1-22-2001)
      2.   Electricity: Persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the village and not for resale, at the rate of five percent
of the gross receipts therefrom. The tax imposed under this section shall not
apply with respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution,
supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the
electricity is subject to the tax imposed under section
3-8-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2777, 7-27-1998)
   B.   No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not,
under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas, or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting
messages be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for such
transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act" authorized by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code, approved July 25,
1961, as amended.
   C.   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of
products or services furnished to the village by the taxpayer as compensation
for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and
maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (1981 Code; amd.
Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
   D.   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
   GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, and the
consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
electricity for use or consumption and not for resale and for all services
rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or
otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and
material and for all services rendered therewith, and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or
commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any
other expenses whatsoever.
   PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, joint stock
company, joint venture, corporation, municipal corporation or political
subdivision of this state, or receiver trustee, conservator or other
representative appointed by order of any court. (Ord. 2569, 11-23-1993; amd.
Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
   E.   On or before January 31, 1976, each utility taxpayer shall make a
return to the village for the months of November and December 1975, stating:
      1.   His name.
      2.   His principal place of business.
      3.   His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed.
      4.   Amount of tax.
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a
like return to the village collector, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided, that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects,
report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to
the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any
amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon
any difference between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. (Ord.
2253, 8-10-1987; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
   F.   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this section, whether as a result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due
or to become due under this section from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior
to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. If a taxpayer under
this chapter is unable to use a credit authorized by this section solely
because the tax imposed by this chapter has been replaced by the tax imposed
under section
3-8-9 of this chapter then the taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax
due under section
3-8-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2777, 7-27-1998)
   G.   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
section shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such
amount. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-8-5: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
renting automobiles in the village at the rate of one percent of the gross
receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this
section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-7.
   B.   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on
or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state
department of revenue required by sections 2 and 3 of "An Act in Relation to a
Tax Upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property
to Purchasers for Use or Consumption", approved June 29, 1933, as amended.
   C.   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state
department of revenue, the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (Ord. 2087, 1-11-1982; amd.
Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-8-6: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using, in the village, an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled
or registered with an agency of this state's government in the village at the
rate of one percent of the rental price of such automobile while this section
is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-8.
   B.   The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the
persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as
being in the village.
   C.   The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois
department of revenue. (Ord. 2087, 1-11-1982; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-8-7: TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed on the following acts or privileges:
      1.   The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in
the village intrastate telecommunications by a person at the rate of five
percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail
from a retailer by such person. However, such tax is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution
of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by municipalities in this
state.
      2.   The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in
the village interstate telecommunications by a person at the rate of five
percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail
from a retailer by such person. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the
act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection A, any
taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such
event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to this
subsection to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in
such other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
state or local tax in this State. However, such tax is not imposed on the act
or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the
Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation
by municipalities in this State.
   B.   Collection:
      1.   The tax authorized by this Section shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this State and making
or effectuating the sale at retail and shall be remitted by such retailer to
the Village. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this Section and any
such tax collected by such retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
retailer to the Village. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by
adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications when sold for use. The tax shall constitute a debt
of the purchaser to the retailer who provides such taxable services until paid,
and if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge
for such taxable services. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
Village. Whenever possible, the tax shall, when collected, be stated as a
distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications.
      2.   Beginning January 1, 1994, retailers shall pay the tax less a
commission of one and seventy five one-hundredths percent to reimburse the
retailer for expenses in keeping records, billing the customer, preparing and
filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the Village upon
request; however, no commission may be claimed for taxes not timely remitted.
   C.   Definitions: For the purposes of the taxes authorized by this Section:
   AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the
Village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
   GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the Village and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and
shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such
telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or
any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof
shall be included only as and when paid. However, "gross charge" shall not
include:
      1.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: a) the tax imposed by this Section, b) additional charges added to
a purchaser's bill pursuant to section 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, c)
the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, or d) the tax imposed
by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
      2.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunications received outside of
the Village;
      3.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
      4.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      5.   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of
the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period
of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs;
      6.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this Section has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
      7.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to
a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made); or
      8.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside this State.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this State.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by
order of any court, public and private colleges and universities, including
State universities created by statute, Federal and State governments or any
city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this State.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined in this Section. The Village may, upon application,
authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not
maintaining a place of business within this State, who to the satisfaction of
the Village, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of
the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the Village in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within the Village.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this State,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this State under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, and
irrespective of whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this State.
   SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the Federal and State governments, and
State universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the tax has already been paid to a retailer and the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. If this is not a defined location, as in
the case of mobile phones, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunication equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his agents, employees, or
permittees engages in an act or privilege of originating in the Village or
receiving in the Village telecommunications and who incurs a tax liability
under this Section.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS:
      1.   In addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes but is not
limited to messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and
wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services,
teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, cellular mobile
telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio services, paging service,
or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite or similar facilities.
      2.   The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form,
content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission.
      3.   "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him to the ultimate retail consumer
who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
      4.   Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold and subsequently
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale.
   VILLAGE: The Village of River Forest, Illinois, a Municipal corporation.
   D.   Resale Number:
      1.   If a person, who originates or receives telecommunications in the
Village claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall
apply to the Village for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts
which will show the Village why such applicant is not liable for tax under this
Section on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information
as the Village may reasonably require.
      2.   Upon approval of the application, the Village shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
Village may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or
which is used to send or receive such telecommunications tax-free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
      3.   Except as provided hereinabove in this Section, the act or privilege
of sending or receiving telecommunications in this State shall not be made tax-
free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active
resale number from the Village and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is
nontaxable because of being for resale.
   E.   Returns, Filing, Contents, Payment Of Tax: On or before the last day of
December of 1993, each retailer shall make a return to the Village Collector
for that month stating:
      1.   Retailer's name;
      2.   Retailer's principal place of business;
      3.   The gross charges during that month upon the basis of which the tax
is imposed;
      4.   Amount of tax;
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the Village may
require.
   F.   Monthly Returns: On or before the last day of each month thereafter,
each retailer shall make a like return to the Village Collector for each one
month period; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if
he or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon the total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any difference between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts.
   G.   Payment Included: The retailer making the return herein provided for
shall, at the time of making such return pay to the Village the amount of tax
herein imposed.
   H.   Erroneous Payment: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been
paid which was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether as the
result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Section from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so
credited.
   I.   Books And Records Of Retailer: Every retailer under this Section shall
keep books, records and other documents which are adequate to reflect that the
tax imposed by this Section is being collected in the proper amount. All books
and records and other papers and documents required by this Section to be kept
shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject to inspection
by the Village or its duly authorized agents and employees. Books and records
reflecting gross charges during any period with respect to which the tax is
imposed shall be preserved until the expiration of three years following the
period the tax was incurred, unless the Village, in writing, authorizes their
destruction or disposal at an earlier date.
   J.   Failure To Make Return Or Fraudulent Return: Any retailer who fails to
make a return, or to pay the tax in a timely manner, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this Section is guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars and in addition shall be
liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 2569, 11-23-1993;
amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
3-8-8: TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this Section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
   GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act
or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the Village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the Village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel
provided within the Village. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
      1.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under: a) the fee imposed by this Section, b) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, c)
amounts collected under section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code, d) the
tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, e) 911 surcharges, or f)
the tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
      2.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
Village;
      3.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
      4.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      5.   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of
the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period
of time specified by the Village;
      6.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than required profit for
the corporation rendering such services;
      7.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to
a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
      8.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications
devices; or
      9.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the Village.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any Municipal street, alley, water or public right of
way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the Village has acquired the right and authority to locate or
permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal Village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include Village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right of way.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this State.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to- end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: 1) Any telecommunications retailer; and 2) any
person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates
or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail
as defined in this Section. The Village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction
of the Village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the Village.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)
(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services.
   B.   Registration Of Telecommunications Providers:
      1.   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this Section shall
register with the Village within thirty days after the effective date of this
Section or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a
form to be provided by the Village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection D3
of this Section shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this
subsection B1.
      2.   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the
Village pursuant to subsection B of this Section has an affirmative duty to
submit an amended registration form or current return as required by subsection
D3 of this Section, as the case may be, to the Village within thirty days from
the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the
telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on
file with the Village.
   C.   Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee:
      1.   A Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is
hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one
percent of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to
service addresses within the Village for telecommunications originating or
received in the Village.
      2.   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this Section, the Village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights of way within the Village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Section
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
      3.   The Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this Section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in subsection D of this Section.
   D.   Collection, Enforcement, And Administration:
      1.   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the Village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
      2.   Unless otherwise approved by the Village Administrator the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the Village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to
the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent
of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
      3.   Remittance of the Municipal infrastructure fee to the Village shall
be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village
Administrator, which shall contain such information as the Village
Administrator may reasonably require.
      4.   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this Section and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village. The charge imposed under subsection
D1 of this Section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Section
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
      5.   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this Section, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the Village Administrator may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless: a) the credit is used only to
offset a claim of underpayment made by the Village within the applicable
statutory period of limitations, and b) the credit derives from an overpayment
made by the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory
period of limitations.
      6.   Amounts paid under this Section by telecommunications retailers
shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as
described immediately below:
         a.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
         b.   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in section
 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
         c.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications
tax as prescribed in section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
         d.   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue
of public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
      7.   The Village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this Section
to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to
the Village for the Village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of
the amount of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the Village by
the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the village plus five percent
of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs
incurred by the village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed
five percent of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit.
Said sum shall be paid to the village within twenty one days after the date of
issuance of an invoice for same.
      8.   The village administrator, or his or her designee, may promulgate
such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and
enforcement of this section, consistent with its provisions, as may be required
from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are
registered pursuant to subsection B of this section of such regulations. (Ord.
2739, 10-27-1997)
   E.   Compliance With Other Laws: Nothing in this section shall excuse any
person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Generally applicable taxes; and
      2.   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as
provided in title 5, chapter 14 of this code; and
      3.   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way as provided in title 5,
chapter 14 of this code; and
      4.   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way. (Ord.
2900, 11-13-2000)
   F.   Existing Franchises And Licenses: Any franchise, license, or similar
agreements between telecommunications retailers and the village entered into
before the effective date of this section regarding the use of public rights of
way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any
fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived.
   G.   Penalties: Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of
this code.
   H.   Enforcement: Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of
this section.
   I.   Severability: If any paragraph, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.
   J.   Conflict: This section supersedes all sections or parts of sections
adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such
conflict.
   K.   Waiver And Fee Implementation:
      1.   The village hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation
that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing village franchise,
license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the
time the village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee.
This waiver shall only be effective during the time infrastructure maintenance
fee provided for in this section is subject to being lawfully imposed on the
telecommunications retailer and collected by the telecommunications retailer
from the customer.
      2.   The village clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom
the village has a franchise.
      3.   The village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
section shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not
less than ninety days after the village provides written notice by certified
mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the village has an existing
franchise, license, or similar agreement that the village waives all
compensation under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement
during such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected
by the retailer and remitted to the village. The infrastructure maintenance fee
shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as
established in the preceding sentence. (Ord. 2739, 10-27-1997)
3-8-9: MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section
8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code 1 , directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
   PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
   TAX COLLECTOR: Person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
   VILLAGE: The village of River Forest.
   B.   Tax Imposed:
      1.   Pursuant to section
 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code 1  and any and all other applicable
authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser: (Ord. 2777, 7-27-1998)
Kilowatt Hours Used Or Consumed In A Cost Per Kilowatt Hour (Effective June 1,
Month                                2010)
Kilowatt Hours Used Or Consumed In A Cost Per Kilowatt Hour (Effective June 1,
Month                                2010)
First 2,000                          $0.61
Next 48,000                          0.40
Next 50,000                          0.36
Next 400,000                         0.35
Next 500,000                         0.34
Next 2,000,000                       0.32
Next 2,000,000                       0.315
Next 5,000,000                       0.31
Next 10,000,000                      0.305
All in excess of 20,000,000          0.30
 
(Ord. 3328, 4-26-2010)
      2.   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the village, the state or any other political subdivision of the
state.
      3.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the tax shall
not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax
would violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the
constitution or statutes of the state of Illinois.
      4.   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after September 1, 1998, and with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to
such customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the
public utilities act 3 , or the first bill issued to such customers on or after
January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
   C.   Collection Of Tax:
      1.   Subject to the provisions of subsection E of this section regarding
the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this section
shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of
business in this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the
same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
      2.   Any tax required to be collected by this section, and any tax in
fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person
delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that
if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be
obligated to remit such tax.
      3.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to three percent of the tax they collect to
reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the village upon request. For purposes of this section, any partial payment
of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed
to be for the delivery of electricity. (Ord. 2777, 7-27-1998)
   D.   Tax Remittance And Return:
      1.   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form
prescribed by the village finance director. The return and accompanying
remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the
month during which the tax is collected.
      2.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from
the purchaser, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by
the village finance director and pay the tax directly to the village on or
before the last day of the month following the month during which the
electricity is used or consumed. (Ord. 3362, 2-28-2011)
   E.   Resales:
      1.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in this village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the village and
furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies
to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a
sale for resale.
      2.   If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the village for
a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable
for the tax imposed by this section on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the village may reasonably require.
      3.   Upon approval of the application, the village shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
      4.   The village may cancel the resale number of any person if the person
fails to pay any tax payable under this section for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number: a) was obtained through
misrepresentation, or b) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
      5.   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption
and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this section
directly to the village pursuant to subsection D2 of this section on the amount
of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax
pursuant to subsection C of this section and remit the tax pursuant to
subsection D1 of this section on the amount of electricity delivered by the
reseller to a purchaser.
      6.   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the village the
total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the village may reasonably require.
   F.   Books And Records: Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to
pay the tax imposed by this section, shall keep accurate books and records of
its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting
the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this section. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
   G.   Credits And Refunds: Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village,
no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under
this section unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one
year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the village. (Ord.
2777, 7-27-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
3 2. 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
3-8-10: LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Short Title: This section shall be known as, and may be cited as, the
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE.
   B.   Scope: The provisions of this section shall apply to the village's
procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes. (Ord. 2913, 12-11-2000)
   C.   Definitions: Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as follows:
   ACT: The "local government taxpayers' bill of rights act".
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's finance director is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
section to give full effect to this section. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this section and the
act.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency or department
of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under
the property tax code or fees collected by the village other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.
   NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice of
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER: Any person or entity required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes included the
business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the village.
   VILLAGE: The village of River Forest. (Ord. 2913, 12-11-2000; amd. Ord.
3362, 2-28-2011)
   D.   Notices: Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven days prior to
the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the
local tax administrator. Any notice shall be mailed first class and/or
delivered, except in the case of a notice of tax assessment due which shall be
sent by certified or registered mail.
   E.   Late Payment: Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required
to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered
late unless it is: 1) physically received by the village on or before the due
date, or 2) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the village, with adequate postage prepaid.
   F.   Payment: Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be
applied in the following order: 1) first to the tax due for the applicable
period; 2) second to the interest due for the applicable period; and 3) third
to the penalty for the applicable period.
   G.   Certain Credits And Refunds:
      1.   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
      2.   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
      3.   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
         a.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in
writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
            (1)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject
to the claim;
            (2)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
            (3)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt of the payment;
            (4)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
            (5)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with
the claim to be applied to the amount owed, and, as applicable, related
interest and penalties; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and
only a credit given in the event the taxpayer otherwise owes money to the
village.
         b.   Within fourteen days of the receipt by the local tax
administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator
shall either:
            (1)   Grant the claim; or
            (2)   Deny the claim, in whole or part, and provide the taxpayer
with a written statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant
and    denial.
         c.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of four percent per annum, based on a
year of three hundred sixty five days and the number of days elapsed, from the
date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant
of a credit.
   H.   Audit Procedure: The tax administrator shall have the right to audit
any taxpayer. Any request for the proposed audit pursuant to any local
administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this section.
      1.   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
         a.   The tax;
         b.   The time period of the audit; and
         c.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
      2.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
days after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
      3.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more than
thirty days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the tax
administrator agree to some other time. After receipt of an audit notice and
upon two days' prior notice to the tax administrator, a taxpayer may request an
extension of time to have an audit conducted. Extensions may be granted by the
tax administrator in the exercise of his/her discretion upon request and a
showing of good cause. Any extension shall be conditioned upon the taxpayer's
agreement to pay any cancellation or similar charges to the village from any
outside auditor imposed by reason of the rescheduling of the audit.
      4.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transaction which had given use or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by
the village.
      5.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided,
the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based
on the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
      6.   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty days of the
village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
      7.   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
government entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
government entity imposing such tax.
   I.   Appeal And Hearing Process:
      1.   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
         a.   The reason for the assessment;
         b.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
         c.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
         d.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund
and collection process.
      2.   A taxpayer or other person or entity who received a final
determination of tax due, assessment or other financial decision of the tax
administrator may file an appeal with the village administrator, setting forth
specifically and in detail the basis of the appeal. The appeal must be in
writing and filed with the village administrator within forty five days of
receipt of the written notice of the determination of tax due, assessment or
other final decision.
      3.   If a timely appeal is filed, the village administrator shall fix the
time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The
hearing shall be scheduled for a date within thirty days of receipt of the
appeal unless the taxpayer requests a later date and the village administrator
agrees. All appeals pursuant to this section shall be heard by the village
administrator. Within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing, the village
administrator shall prepare a written decision based upon the evidence
presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with
a copy of the written decision.
      4.   If an appeal is not filed within the forty five day period, the
final determination of tax due, assessment or other final decision of the tax
administrator shall become final and conclusive without further notice.
      5.   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety days after the expiration of the forty five day
period.
   J.   Interest And Penalties:
      1.   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to
be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be
eighteen percent per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five days
and the number of days elapsed.
      2.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed
within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late
filing penalty of five percent of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent of the
tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner
provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a
notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file
penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent of the total tax due for
the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed.
A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty
is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
   K.   Abatement: The local tax administrator shall have the authority to
waive or abate any late filing penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing.
   L.   Installment Contracts: The village may enter into an installment
contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes, penalty and/or interest
due under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not
cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any
amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax administrator that
the payment is thirty days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen days to
cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the
fourteen day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the
installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract
shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer.
   M.   Statute Of Limitations: Unless otherwise provided in this code or any
agreement with the village, a taxpayer or other person or entity claiming or
owing taxes shall have thirty days after receiving a notice or statement to
make any request for refund or provide any tax due and owing.
      1.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
      2.   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village,
the tax paid was less than seventy five percent of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years after the end of the calendar year in which
return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which
the return for the applicable period was filed.
      3.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer.
   N.   Voluntary Disclosure: For any locally imposed and administered tax for
which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation,
or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file
an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of
the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to
pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent per month, for
all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four years
before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary
disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or
penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if
the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the
taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the
underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of
the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void.
The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety days after
the filing of the voluntary disclosure application of the date agreed to by the
local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be
paid within ninety days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all
appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer.
   O.   Publication Of Tax Ordinances: Any locally administered tax ordinance
shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting
of a tax ordinance on the internet shall satisfy the publication requirement.
Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request
at the village clerk's office.
   P.   Review Of Lien: The local tax administrator shall establish an internal
review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid
taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is
valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is
determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall:
      1.   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
      2.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
      3.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
   Q.   Application: This section shall be liberally construed and administered
to supplement all of the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this section, this section
shall be controlling. (Ord. 2913, 12-11-2000)
3-8-11: TAX ON THE GROSS RECEIPTS OF PLACES FOR EATING:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
   GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received, valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, property and services,
at a place for eating of prepared food furnished at the place for eating. Gross
receipts do not include amounts paid for federal, state and local taxes,
including the tax levied by this section, and do not include amounts paid as
gratuities for the employees of the place for eating.
   OWNER: Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the
operation of a place for eating.
   PERSON OR PERSONS: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited
liability company, club, fraternal organization, or a receiver, executor,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PLACES FOR EATING OR PLACE FOR EATING: All premises located within the
corporate limits of the village of River Forest where prepared food is sold at
retail for immediate consumption, with seating provided for consumption of said
prepared food on the premises, whether consumed on premises or not, and whether
or not such places for eating use is conducted along with any other use(s) in a
common premises or business establishment.
Includes, but is not limited to, those establishments commonly called a
restaurant, eating place, drive-in restaurant, buffet, bakery, banquet
facility, cafeteria, cafe, lunch counter, fast food outlet, catering service,
coffee shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, bar, cocktail lounge, soft
drink parlor, ice cream parlor, tearoom, delicatessen, hotel, motel, or club,
or any other establishment which sells at retail prepared food for immediate
consumption.
   PREPARED FOOD: Means and includes any solid, liquid (including both
alcoholic and nonalcoholic liquid), powder or item used or intended to be used
for human internal consumption, whether simple, compound or mixed, and which
has been prepared for immediate consumption.
   SOLD AT RETAIL: To sell for use or consumption in exchange for a
consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other
nature, and not for resale, with said transaction being subject to either the
Illinois retailers' occupation tax 1  or the Illinois service occupation tax 2
.
   B.   Tax Imposed:
      1.   There is hereby levied and imposed upon owners of places for eating
a tax at the rate of one percent of gross receipts received for prepared food
sold at retail by the owner on or after June 1, 2009.
      2.   The owner of a place for eating may collect an amount from persons
who purchase prepared food at the place for eating which shall reimburse the
owner for the tax imposed on the owner by this section.
      3.   The tax levied by this section shall be paid in addition to any and
all other taxes and charges.
      4.   In the event the prepared food is sold at retail on credit, an owner
shall not be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this section on such a
sale until he/she/they/it receives payment for the sale. (Ord. 3282, 4-27-2009)
   C.   Books And Records/Inspections/Contents: The village finance director or
any person designated by her/him as deputy or representative, may enter the
premises of any place for eating for inspection, examination, copying and
auditing of books and records including, but not limited to, Illinois
retailers' occupation tax and Illinois service occupation tax returns filed
with the Illinois department of revenue, in order to effectuate the proper
administration of this section, and to assure the enforcement of the collection
of the tax imposed by this section. To the extent reasonably possible, said
entry shall be done in a manner that is least disruptive to the business of the
place for eating. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or
interfere with the village finance director or her/his deputies or
representatives in the discharge of their duties in the performance of this
subsection. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete
books and records to which the village finance director or her/his deputies or
representatives shall at all times have full access, which records shall
include a daily sheet showing the amount of gross receipts received during that
day.
   D.   Transmittal Of Tax Revenue By Owner; Delinquency:
      1.   The owner or owners of each place for eating shall file tax returns
showing the gross receipts received during each calendar month period upon
forms prescribed by the village finance director. Returns for each calendar
month shall be due on or before the twentieth day of the next calendar month
(e.g., the return for January shall be due on or before February 20; the return
for February shall be due on or before March 20; etc.). Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in the event that the owner of the place for eating is allowed to
file Illinois retailers' occupation tax and Illinois service occupation tax
returns with the Illinois department of revenue at intervals which are greater
than monthly, said owner shall be allowed to file tax returns relative to the
tax imposed by this section with the village at said greater intervals. At the
time of the filing of said tax returns, the owner shall pay to the village all
taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.
      2.   If, for any reason, any tax due pursuant to this section is not paid
when due, interest in the amount of one and a half percent per month on the
outstanding balance shall be paid to the village until the tax is paid in full.
      3.   Owners filing tax returns pursuant to this section shall, at the
time of filing such return, pay to the village the amount of the tax imposed by
this section, less a commission of one percent of the amount of the tax, which
is allowed to reimburse the owners for the expenses incurred in keeping
records, billing, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying
data to the village upon request. No commission may be claimed by an owner for
taxes not timely remitted to the village. (Ord. 3362, 2-28-2011)
   E.   Transmittal Of Excess Tax Collections: If any person collects an amount
upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed hereby, but which amount is
purported to be the collection of said tax, or if a person collects an amount
upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax so imposed herein and does not
for any reason return the same to the purchaser who paid the same before filing
the return for the period in which such occurred, said person shall account for
and pay over those amounts to the village along with the tax properly
collected.
   F.   Registration: Every owner maintaining a place for eating in the village
shall register with the finance department by June 1, 2009, or the date of
becoming such an owner, whichever is later.
   G.   Collection: Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax imposed by
this section, the village attorney or village prosecutor shall, upon request of
the village administrator, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce
the payment of said tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
   H.   Suspension Of License: If the village administrator, after a hearing
held by her/him or for her/him by her/his designee, shall find that any owner
has wilfully avoided the payment of any tax imposed by this section, she/he may
suspend or revoke all village licenses held by such tax evader. The owner shall
have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than ten
days after being mailed notice of the time when and the place where the hearing
is to be held, addressed to him at his last known place of business. Any
suspension or revocation of any license(s) shall not release or discharge the
owner from his civil liability for the payment of the tax nor from prosecution
for such offense.
   I.   Penalties:
      1.   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with or unlawfully resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this section, except when otherwise
specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of
not less than two hundred dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars for
the first offense, and not less than five hundred dollars nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars for the second and each subsequent offense in any one
hundred eighty day period.
      2.   Each day upon which a person shall continue any violation of this
section, or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof,
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
      3.   Any owner subjected to the penalties provided for by this subsection
shall not be discharged or released from the payment of any tax due. (Ord.
3282, 4-27-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
2 2. 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
3-8-12: MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village of
River Forest in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than
those items of tangible personal property which are exempt from said tax
pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.3, at retail in the village
of River Forest at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts from such
sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect; and
a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village of River Forest
in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of one percent of the
selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such persons as
an incident to a sale of service, other than the sale/transfer of those items
of tangible personal property which are exempt from said tax pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.4.
The imposition of these taxes is in accordance with the provisions of sections
8-11-1.3 and
8-11-1.4, respectively, of the Illinois municipal code 1 .
   B.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the department of
revenue of the state of Illinois in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.3 and 5/8-11-1.4. The department of revenue
shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 3346, 12-13-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3, 5/8-11-1.4.
3-8-13: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using within the village of River
Forest any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside of
Illinois, at retail, from a retailer, and which is required to be either titled
or registered with an agency of the state of Illinois, at the rate of one
percent of the selling price of such tangible personal property, as "selling
price" is defined in the use tax act 1 . Such tax shall be collected from those
persons whose address for titling or registration purposes is within the
corporate boundaries of the village of River Forest. (Ord. 3346, 12-13-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
3-8-14:  MOTOR FUEL TAX:
   A.   Whenever used herein, unless the context requires otherwise, the phrase
"motor fuel" used herein shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois
Motor Fuel Tax Law, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 505/1 et seq., as amended.
   B.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the Village of
River Forest in the business of selling motor fuel, as defined in the Motor
Fuel Tax Law, 35 llinois Compiled Statutes 505/1 et seq., as amended, at retail
for the operation of motor vehicles upon public highways, or for the operation
of recreational watercraft upon waterways, at the rate of three cents ($0.03)
per gallon of motor fuel sold at retail within the Village of River Forest for
the purpose of use or consumption and not for the purpose of resale. This tax
is not imposed on aviation fuel, as defined in section 3 of the Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/3, as amended. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-2.3
of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2.3, as
amended, which is incorporated as though fully set forth herein. The tax levied
herein is in addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
   C.   Persons subject to any tax imposed under this section may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with state tax which sellers are required to collect under the
Use Tax Act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/1, et seq., as amended, pursuant
to such bracket schedules as the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois
may prescribe.
   D.   The tax imposed under this section, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereof, shall be administered, collected, and enforced
by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois in the same manner as the
tax imposed under the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, 35 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 120/1, et seq., as amended, insofar as may be practicable. The
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois shall have full power to
administer and enforce this section, collect all taxes and penalties due
hereunder, dispose of taxes and penalties so collected in the manner
hereinafter provided, and determine all rights to credit memoranda arising on
account of the erroneous payment of tax or penalty hereunder. (Ord. 3773, 7-22-
2019; amd. Ord. 3793, 1-13-2020; Ord. 3801, 3-16-2020)
3-8-15: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILER’S OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Whenever used herein, unless the context requires otherwise, the words,
terms and phrases used herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the
Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 705/1,
et seq., as amended.
   B.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Illinois
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 130/1, et seq., at retail in the Village at the rate of three percent
(3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that
business. Retailers may reimburse themselves for their tax liability hereunder
by separately stating the tax as an additional charge, which charge may be
stated in combination, in a single amount, with any state tax that retailers
are required to collect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the
provisions of section 8-11-23 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-23, as amended, which is incorporated as though fully
set forth herein. The tax levied herein is in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges.
   C.   The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as
an incident thereto, shall be remitted to, collected by and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois in accordance with the
provisions of section 8-11-23 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-23, as amended. The Department of Revenue of the State
of Illinois shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of
this section. The failure to timely collect or remit all taxes due hereunder is
a violation of the River Forest Village Code, and may be subject to the
penalties hereunder. (Ord. 3778, 9-23-2019; amd. Ord. 3792, 1-13-2020)
CHAPTER 9
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
SECTION:
3-9-1: Tax Imposed
3-9-1: TAX IMPOSED:
Every corporation, company and association not incorporated under the laws of
this state and which is engaged in the village in effecting fire insurance,
shall pay to the village finance director annually, on July 15 of each year, a
sum equal to two percent of the gross receipts of premiums received by such
corporation, company or association, or its agency or agents, for business
effected or transacted for fire insurance within the village for the preceding
year ending July 1. Said sum shall be a tax or license fee upon all such
corporations, companies or associations transacting such business within the
village. The tax or license fee due herein shall be paid and collected as set
forth in title 7, chapter 9 of this code. (Ord. 3416, 4-9-2012)
CHAPTER 10
MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS; MASSAGE THERAPIST
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definitions
3-10-2: License Required
3-10-3: Exemptions
3-10-4: Application For Massage Therapy Establishment License
3-10-5: Fingerprinting Requirements
3-10-6: Posting Of License
3-10-7: Limitation, Denial, And Restriction On The Issuance And Renewal Of
License
3-10-8: Transfer; Changes In Ownership Or Management
3-10-9: Facility Requirements
3-10-10: General Regulations
3-10-11: Inspections
3-10-12: Outcall Massage Service
3-10-13: Suspension, Revocation Of License; Penalty And Appeal
3-10-14: Public Nuisance
3-10-15: Penalty
3-10-16: Severability
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
   DESIGNATED MANAGER: Any person, whether employed by the massage therapy
establishment full or part time, who is charged with the administration of the
massage therapy establishment. Such person may be a massage therapist. If the
designated manager conducts massage therapy then such person must be a licensed
massage therapist.
   EMPLOYEE: Any and all persons other than a masseur or masseuse who render
any service for the licensee and who receives compensation directly from the
licensee but has no physical contact with patrons, customers or clients.
   LICENSED MASSAGE THERAPIST: A person who holds a valid, current, state of
Illinois license as a massage therapist to practice massage/massage therapy as
defined herein and who is thereby entitled to exclusive use of the terms
"massage", "massage therapy", and "massage therapist" in advertising and
printed promotional material.
   LICENSEE: The person to whom a license has been issued to operate a "massage
therapy establishment" as defined herein.
   MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external
soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical
electrical apparatus or appliances with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar
preparations commonly used in this practice.
   MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having its primary source
of income or compensation derived from the practice of "massage" as defined
herein, and which has a fixed place of business in the village of River Forest
where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on any
of the activities described above by one or more persons licensed by the state
of Illinois as massage therapists.
   MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE: Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever,
engages in the practice of massage.
   OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE: Any business, the function of which is to engage in
or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or client rather
than at a "massage therapy establishment" as defined in this section.
   PATRON: Any person who receives a massage in the village under such
circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or
give other consideration therefor.
   PERSON: Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, corporation, or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: Genitals, buttocks, pubic area, anus or perineum of
any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall engage in the business of operating a massage therapy
establishment in the village without a valid and current license therefor
issued by the village pursuant to the terms of this chapter. A separate license
shall be required for each massage therapy establishment location regardless of
whether such multiple establishments are operated by the same person.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to engage in, conduct, operate, carry on or permit
to be engaged in or upon any premises in the village, the business of a massage
therapy establishment without having at least one licensed massage therapist
employed at each licensed location.
   C.   Massage therapy establishments shall be only in locations as permitted
by the village of River Forest zoning ordinance. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-3: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Where massage is actually performed at the patron's premises, including
the patron's place of business or residence, a massage therapy establishment
license shall not be required for such patron's premises.
   B.   No license shall be required for any business establishment which is
permitted by the zoning code and which offers massage only as an ancillary
service to their primary business.
   C.   A massage therapy establishment license shall not be required of
establishments where persons engage in massage, massage therapy or similar
practices but are not required to obtain a massage therapist license under
Illinois law. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-4: APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE:
   A.   Application for massage therapy establishment license shall be made in
conformance with the general license requirements relating to business
licenses, as set forth in this chapter, and shall be renewed annually, and also
shall include the following information:
      1.   The name (including any nicknames or aliases) and address, telephone
number, social security number, and age of each applicant, the registered agent
of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation or a limited liability
company and the general or managing partners if the applicant is a partnership.
         a.   If the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence
addresses of each of the officers and directors of said corporation and of each
stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation and
the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the
massage therapy establishment.
         b.   If the applicant is a limited liability company, names and
residence addresses of each of the managers and of each member having greater
than a ten percent interest in the limited liability company, and the address
of the limited liability company itself, if different from the address of the
massage therapy establishment.
         c.   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence
addresses of each of the partners including limited partners and the address of
the partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage therapy
establishment.
         d.   If the applicant is a corporation, the total percentage of all
stock held by all persons with a ten percent or less interest in the
corporation.
         e.   If the applicant is a limited liability company, the total
percentage of interest of those members with a ten percent or less interest in
the limited liability company.
      2.   A description of the premises, the location of the massage therapy
establishment and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted.
      3.   The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address
of the applicant.
      4.   Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age.
      5.   Copy of identification such as driver's license and social security
card.
      6.   Business occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application.
      7.   The massage or similar business license history of the applicant;
whether such person has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason
therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of
suspension or revocation.
      8.   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations
and all municipal ordinance violations, including the dates of convictions,
nature of the crimes or violations, jurisdiction where convicted and the
sentence and/or fine imposed.
      9.   The name and address of each masseur and/or masseuse who is or will
be employed in said establishment and a copy of diploma or certificate of
graduation for each masseur and/or masseuse from an accredited institution.
      10.   A description of any other business to be operated on the same
premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant.
      11.   Authorization for the village, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and the qualifications of applicants for a license.
      12.   Permission for investigation of the premises by the village by its
designated representative to investigate the premises named in said application
to determine whether the provisions of all village ordinances applicable
thereto have been complied with.
      13.   Fingerprint requirements as set forth in section
3-10-5 of this chapter.
      14.   Payment of fee for a massage therapy establishment license as set
forth in this chapter.
      15.   Compliance with all applicable requirements of the village building
codes and zoning ordinance.
      16.   The names of all licensed massage therapists who are employed to
provide massage therapy at the massage therapy establishment. The application
shall include copies of the licenses issued to said massage therapists.
   B.   Massage therapy establishment licenses are issued annually and shall be
operative for the municipal license year commencing on April 1 of each year.
Each license may be renewed upon proper application, conformance with
applicable requirements, and payment of the required fee.
   C.   In the event applicant is made aware that any information or document
submitted as part of this application process is inaccurate or incomplete,
applicant shall immediately notify the village and provide appropriate
corrections. Failure to accurately and completely provide or as necessary
update, required information may delay the processing of such application or
result in its denial.
   D.   The applicant has a continuing obligation, even after the village has
issued a license for a massage therapy establishment, to notify the village in
writing of any change affecting any of the required information required to be
provided by this chapter. Such new information must be provided to the village
within thirty days of any such change. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-5: FINGERPRINTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   In addition to the requirements of section
3-10-4 of this chapter, applicants shall submit their fingerprints to be used
in completing the investigation. Applicants are required to present themselves
for fingerprinting by the River Forest police department. If applicant is a
corporation, fingerprints shall be required of applicant's officers, directors
and any stockholder(s) owning in aggregate more than ten percent of the stock
of such corporation. If the applicant is a limited liability company,
fingerprints shall be required of all of the members of the limited liability
company having more than a ten percent interest in the limited liability
company. If the applicant is a partnership, fingerprints shall be required of
all general partners and any limited partner owning more than ten percent of
the aggregate limited partner interest in such partnership. In the case of a
renewal application, the requirement for fingerprints may be waived at the
village's discretion if the village fingerprinted the applicant within three
years of the renewal date and the applicant's fingerprints are on file with the
village.
   B.   Applicant fingerprints will be kept on file with the village of River
Forest police department.
   C.   The fee for each set of fingerprints required by this section is fifty
dollars.
   D.   All applicants for renewal of a license under this chapter shall
present their current massage therapy establishment license to the River Forest
police department at the time of renewal. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-6: POSTING OF LICENSE:
Every person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or
association licensed as a massage therapy establishment under this chapter
shall display such license in a prominent place in the massage therapy
establishment. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-7: LIMITATION, DENIAL, AND RESTRICTION ON THE ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF
LICENSE:
   A.   The village may deny a massage therapy establishment license for
failure to comply with any of the requirements set forth in any sections of
this chapter.
   B.   No massage therapy establishment license shall be issued or renewed:
      1.   To an applicant who has been convicted of the following offenses:
         a.   Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other
sex offenses as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes.
         b.   A felony based upon conduct or involvement in such related
business activity or similar business activity within the past ten years.
         c.   A felony unrelated to conduct to involvement in such related
business activity or similar business activity, but which felony involved the
use of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against another
person, including rape or other sexual misconduct, within the past ten years.
         d.   A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation from any
jurisdiction, based upon conduct or involvement in such related business
activity or similar business.
         e.   A crime of moral turpitude.
      2.   To an applicant whose massage therapy establishment license issued
under this chapter's predecessor has been revoked for cause.
      3.   To an applicant who at the time of application for renewal of any
massage therapy establishment license issued hereunder would not be eligible
for such license upon a first application.
      4.   To an applicant under the age of eighteen years of age.
      5.   To an applicant where grounds for revocation exist as provided in
section
3-10-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-8: TRANSFER; CHANGES IN OWNERSHIP OR MANAGEMENT:
   A.   No license for the operation of a massage therapy establishment issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be sold, transferred or
otherwise assigned. A transfer in the ownership or control of a massage therapy
establishment shall constitute a change in the licensee and the existing
license shall be deemed surrendered and extinguished. A new application and
license shall be filed and processed as provided in section
3-10-4 of this chapter prior to such transfer taking effect.
   B.   Notice shall be provided prior to any change of the designated manager
conducting business for the massage therapy establishment licensee. The new
manager must be qualified to operate the massage therapy establishment as
provided in section
3-10-4 of this chapter. The licensee shall, not less than ten business days
before such change is to take effect, give the appropriate village officer
notice of such change. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-9: FACILITY REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued to a massage therapy establishment unless an
inspection discloses that it complies with each of the following minimum
requirements:
   A.   Hot and cold running water shall be provided.
   B.   Adequate privacy shall be provided for clients while they are dressing.
   C.   Adequate toilet and sink facilities shall be provided and installed in
accordance with the village plumbing code.
   D.   All walls, ceilings, floors, steam rooms, and other physical facilities
in the massage therapy establishment shall be kept in good repair, and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   E.   Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each client
receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be
permitted.
   F.   The massage therapy establishment premises shall be in compliance with
applicable codes and ordinances of the village, including, but not limited to,
zoning, building, and life safety codes.
   G.   The doors to the individual massage rooms shall not be locked, blocked
or obstructed from either side during a massage.
   H.   Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets and shall be
dispensed in unit doses so that bulk containers are not contaminated between
clients. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-10: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall be applicable to holders of any massage therapy
establishment license issued in the village:
   A.   Every portion of the massage therapy establishment, including
appliances and apparatuses therein, shall be kept clean and operated in a
sanitary condition.
   B.   No massage therapy establishment shall open for business before seven
o'clock A.M. nor remain open for business after ten o'clock P.M.
   C.   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted or provided in
brochures in the reception area in a location available to all prospective
customers.
   D.   No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be
sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the
premises of any massage therapy establishment.
   E.   Eating and/or drinking, other than water, in the massage work areas
shall not be permitted.
   F.   Animals, except for seeing eye dogs or other registered assistance
dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work areas.
   G.   At all times during the hours of operation of a massage therapy
establishment there shall be present a manager or other employee of the
licensee, and a licensed massage therapist.
   H.   No person shall permit any person under the age of eighteen years to
come or remain on the premises of any massage therapy establishment as a
masseur and/or masseuse, employee, or patron, unless such person is on the
premises on lawful business.
   I.   Masseurs and/or masseuses and massage therapy establishment employees
and agents, must wear clean, nontransparent clothing covering the sexual and
genital areas.
   J.   The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered by towels,
cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or masseur and/or
masseuse.
   K.   No masseur and/or masseuse, massage therapy establishment employee, or
agent or licensee, shall knowingly place his or her hand upon or touch with any
part of his or her body, or use any instrument or implement, with intent to
fondle in any manner, a sexual or genital area of any other person.
   L.   No masseur and/or masseuse, massage therapy establishment employee,
agent or licensee shall perform, offer or agree to perform any act which shall
require the touching of the patron's genital area.
   M.   No masseur and/or masseuse, or massage therapy establishment employee,
or agent or licensee, shall administer a massage to any part of a patron's body
which exhibits any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin
eruption, unless a physician duly licensed by the state certifies in writing
that such persons may be safely massaged, prescribing the conditions thereof.
   N.   Massage may be practiced only for the purposes of physical fitness,
relaxation, or medical therapy. The practice of massage for any other purpose
is prohibited.
   O.   Each masseur and/or masseuse shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering any massage to
any patron. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-11: INSPECTIONS:
Every massage therapy establishment shall at all times be held open for
inspection by duly authorized representatives of village departments concerned
with the licensing and supervision of such establishments. Such inspections
shall be conducted at a reasonable time and in a reasonable manner. The
appropriate village representative shall have general sanitary supervision
thereof, and shall cause inspections of such establishments to be made
periodically to determine whether the health and sanitary provisions of this
chapter are complied with. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-12: OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE:
A masseur or masseuse may provide any of the services listed in this chapter
only at a permanent residence or place of business, except a place of business
which is in the business of providing temporary residence, that is, hotel,
motel, or the equivalent. No "outcall massage service" may be operated other
than by a licensed massage therapist. All massages performed by an "outcall
massage service" must be performed in the manner prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-13: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE; PENALTY AND APPEAL:
   A.   The village president may suspend a massage therapy establishment
license for a period not to exceed ten days if it is determined that a
violation of this chapter exists, or occurred.
   B.   In addition to those grounds for revocation set forth in this chapter
the village president may revoke a massage therapy establishment license if it
is determined that any of the following occurred:
      1.   A licensee has made false statements on an application for a massage
therapy establishment license.
      2.   A licensee or any employee of the licensee, including a masseur and/
or masseuse or other employee is engaged in any conduct which violates any of
the state or local laws or ordinances at the licensee's place of business and
the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge thereof.
      3.   A licensee or masseur and/or masseuse knowingly conducted massage
activities in the village during a period of time when his/her license was
suspended.
      4.   A licensee fails to allow a village appointed inspection officer
access to the premises or hinders such officer in any way.
      5.   A licensee whose license has been suspended twice within a twenty
four month period is found in violation of this chapter for a third offense
within that twenty four month period.
      6.   A licensee who has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, bestiality, prostitution or flagellation
to occur in or on the licensed premises.
      7.   Upon recommendation of the designated village inspector that the
licensee is managing, conducting, or maintaining the massage therapy
establishment without regard for the public health or the health of patrons or
customers or without due regard to proper sanitation or hygiene.
      8.   A licensee has been convicted of:
         a.   Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other
sex offenses as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes.
         b.   A felony based upon conduct or involvement in such related
business activity or similar business activity within the past ten years.
         c.   A felony unrelated to conduct to involvement in such related
business activity or similar business activity, but which felony involved the
use of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against another
person, including rape or other sexual misconduct, within the past ten years.
         d.   A crime of moral turpitude.
   C.   Suspension and revocation procedures shall be as set forth in this
chapter and section
3-1-11 of this title.
   D.   Procedures for appeal of any person aggrieved by the decision of the
village president shall be as set forth in section
3-1-12 of this title. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-14: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any building used as a massage therapy establishment in violation of this
chapter with the intentional knowing, reckless, or negligent permission of the
owner thereof, or the agent of the owner managing the building, together with
all fixtures and other property used in violation of this chapter are hereby
declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-15: PENALTY:
In addition to suspension or revocation of a license as provided hereunder, any
person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than fifty dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the
violation occurs or is permitted to continue. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
3-10-16: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are severable and the invalidity of any phrase,
clause or part of this chapter shall not affect the validity or effectiveness
of the remainder of this chapter. (Ord. 3450, 7-9-2012)
CHAPTER 11
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-11-3: Applicable Principles
3-11-4: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-11-5: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-11-6: Late Fees/Payments
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
   COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
   GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers
and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 3233, 4-28-2008)
3-11-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village of River Forest.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent of the holder's gross revenues.
   C.   Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten
days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty days after receipt of
the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-401(b)(6) to the village.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 3233, 4-28-2008)
3-11-3: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 3233, 4-28-2008)
3-11-4: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 3233, 4-
28-2008)
3-11-5: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty days after the village's submission of an invoice for the
sum. (Ord. 3233, 4-28-2008)
3-11-6: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 3233, 4-28-2008)
CHAPTER 12
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
3-12-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
3-12-2: Enforcement
3-12-3: Penalties
3-12-4: Customer Credits
3-12-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   A.   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village of River Forest corporate
boundaries.
   B.   Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection
law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 3234, 4-28-
2008)
3-12-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
village. (Ord. 3234, 4-28-2008)
3-12-3: PENALTIES:
The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does
hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable
and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the
penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand
dollars for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
   A.   "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   B.   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least
thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.
   C.   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 3234, 4-28-2008)
3-12-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the
customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the
discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for
providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the
credit. (Ord. 3234, 4-28-2008)
CHAPTER 13
FILM AND PHOTO PRODUCTIONS
SECTION:
3-13-1: Permit Required
3-13-2: Permit Location And Duration
3-13-3: Life-Safety Requirements
3-13-4: Fee Schedule
3-13-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
All film and photo productions must submit a completed application to the
police department’s detail coordinator at least five (5) days before the
proposed filming date, and pay the appropriate fees as designated in section
3-13-4 of this chapter. Applicants must forward a hold harmless waiver and
current certificate of insurance to the police department's detail coordinator
with their application before the application will be approved. Once a complete
application is received, village staff will provide a notice for the applicant
to distribute to all properties within one (1) block in each direction of the
filming location at least two (2) days prior to setup beginning. The village
may expand this area based on the production’s size or impact. Exceptions to
specific provisions of this section may be granted at the discretion of the
River Forest police department or the village administrator. (Ord. 3294, 6-22-
2009; amd. Ord. 3967, 8-8-2025)
3-13-2: PERMIT LOCATION AND DURATION:
Permits for film or photo productions will be issued for one address only. If a
production is taking place at more than one address, a permit must be obtained
for each address separately. A film or photo production permit granted under
this chapter will expire five days after the date production starts.
Additionally, no permit shall be issued for more than three (3) consecutive
days of filming or for more than twelve (12) total filming days per calendar
year at the same lot or property. All filming shall only take place between the
hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. Exceptions to
specific provisions of this section may be granted at the discretion of the
village police department or village administrator. (Ord. 3294, 6-22-2009; amd.
Ord. 3967, 8-8-2025)
3-13-3: LIFE-SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The discharge of weapons or explosives is prohibited as part of any
film or photo production. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to,
discharges of “blanks” and simulated ammunition. Prior to issuance of a film or
photo production permit by the village, the applicant shall verify, in writing
to the police department, that the film or photo production shall comply with
this requirement and that this prohibition has been communicated to all persons
working on the film or photo production.
   B.   All film and photo productions are required to have security present
during setup, actual production, and removal of all equipment and personnel.
The chief of police is authorized to require film and photo production
companies to hire a police officer or officers in an extra duty capacity at a
rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour. An additional daily fee of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) is required for any police vehicles needed, per
vehicle. Each assigned officer shall be compensated for the full duration of
their originally scheduled shift. The chief of police or his designee is
permitted to waive the requirements of this section under certain conditions.
(Ord. 3294, 6-22-2009; amd. Ord. 3847, 12-6-2021; Ord. 3967, 8-8-2025)
3-13-4: FEE SCHEDULE:
Permit for film and photo production: Three hundred dollars ($300.00).
Filming productions shall be charged an additional five hundred dollars
($500.00) per day for each day of filming.
Daily police vehicle fee: Two hundred dollars ($200.00).
Police staff hourly rate: One hundred dollars ($100) per hour.
Police staff overtime rate (over eight (8) hours): One hundred fifty dollars
per hours (1.5x standard rate).
In the event that a scheduled film permit is canceled, notice of such
cancellation must be provided to the village’s police department liaison no
less than twelve (12) hours in advance of the event’s scheduled start time. If
cancellation notice is provided at least twelve (12) hours in advance, each
assigned officer shall be compensated for four (4) hours of work. If
cancellation occurs after the twelve (12) hour notice deadline, each assigned
officer shall be compensated for the full duration of their originally
scheduled shift. (Ord. 3593, 4-25-2016; amd. Ord. 3967, 8-8-2025)
CHAPTER 14
CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULE COUNTY ORDINANCES
SECTION:
3-14-1: Payment Of Minimum Hourly Wages And Paid Sick Leave
3-14-1: PAYMENT OF MINIMUM HOURLY WAGES AND PAID SICK LEAVE:
   A.   Employers located within the village shall comply with all applicable
federal and/or state laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may
exist from time to time with regard to both the payment of minimum hourly wages
and paid sick leave. Employee eligibility for paid sick leave and minimum
hourly wages shall be in compliance with all applicable federal and/or state
laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time.
   B.   No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave or minimum
hourly wages imposed by any ordinance adopted by the county of Cook board of
commissioners shall apply to any employer located within the village, the
village opts out of any such ordinance(s) adopted by the county of Cook board
of commissioners, and this chapter conflicts with any such ordinance(s) adopted
by the county of Cook board of commissioners that imposes additional
obligations with regard to paid sick leave or minimum hourly wages.
   C.   For the purposes of this section, the term "employee" means an
individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of persons
the employer employs, and the term "employer" means any person employing one or
more employees, or seeking to employ one or more employees, if the person has
its principal place of business within the village or does business within the
village.
   D.   For the purposes of this section, the term "employer" does not mean:
      1.   The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by
the government of the United States;
      2.   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
      3.   The government of the state or any agency or department thereof; or
      4.   Any unit of government. (Ord. 3645, 3-13-2017)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Intent And Purpose
4-1-2: [Reserved]
4-1-3: International Building Code, 2018 Edition
4-1-4: International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition
4-1-5: International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition
4-1-6: International Fire Code, 2018 Edition
4-1-7: Plumbing Code
4-1-8: National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition
4-1-9: International Residential Code, 2018 Edition
4-1-10: International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition
4-1-11: International Wildland Urban-Interface Code, 2018 Edition
4-1-12: Illinois Accessibility Code, 2019 Edition
4-1-13: Illinois Energy Conservation Code
4-1-14: International Swimming Pool And Spa Code, 2018 Edition
4-1-15: International Solar Energy Provisions, 2018 Edition
4-1-16: International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition
4-1-17: Violation Notices
4-1-18: Penalty
4-1-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The Village wishes to provide modern, safe and generally accepted building
codes. As such, the building codes as adopted herein provide for use of
nationally accepted codes with minimal modifications. These building codes
include performance based regulations which make possible the acceptance of new
materials and methods of construction that may not be specifically recognized
in the most recently adopted editions of these national codes, provided such
materials and methods satisfy nationally recognized standards as the criteria
for evaluation of minimum safe practice and further provided that such use of
alternative materials or practices are recognized and approved by a licensed
professional architect, engineer or structural engineer in the state.
The village recognizes that alterations and repairs to existing structures
represent the overwhelming majority of building activity within the village and
that such activity may occur without requiring the existing structure to comply
with all the requirements of the code, providing the existing structure is
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. (Ord. 2503, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord.
3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-2: [RESERVED]:
4-1-3: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE, 2018 EDITION:
   A.   The 2018 Edition of the International Building Code is hereby adopted
by reference as the building code of the village, except for such additions,
insertions, deletions or changes as hereinafter prescribed in subsection B of
this section.
   B.   The following are amendments to the International Building Code, 2018
Edition:
   101.1 Title. Insert "the Village of River Forest".
   101.4.3 Plumbing. Delete the words "International Plumbing Code" from this
section and substitute "current edition of the State of Illinois Plumbing
Code".
   Add the following sections:
      101.4.8 NFPA 101 Life Safety Code. For all buildings and structures which
are subject to this code, the means of egress must also comply with the
requirements of the Life Safety Code, the same edition as currently enforced by
the Illinois Office of the State Fire Marshal.
      103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Delete the entire section and
replace with the following: The Department of Public Works and Development
Services shall be the enforcement agency of this code and the official in
charge shall be known as the Building Official.
   Add the following section:
      104.10.1 Areas Prone to Flooding. Construction within areas prone to
flooding shall be in accordance with Sections
4-12-1  through
4-12-13  of this title.
   105.1.1 And 105.1.2 Delete these sections in their entirety.
   105.2 Work Exempt From Permit. Delete the entire list following the
subsection entitled "Building" and replace with the following list:
      1.   Prefabricated sheds with a floor area less than 100 square feet.
      2.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and
similar finish work.
      3.   Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches deep.
      4.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to the residence.
   Add the following paragraph to the subsection entitled "Electrical."
      4. Replacement of Electrical Equipment: Electrical equipment may be
replaced in-kind or repaired without a permit provided that no modifications to
the system is required and that such work is performed by a qualified person as
defined by the National Electrical Code (NEC).
   Delete the entire list following the subsection entitled "Mechanical" and
replace with the following list:
      1.   Portable heating, ventilating or cooling appliances.
      2.   Replacement of mechanical equipment in-kind shall not require a
permit, provided such equipment is connected to the same electric or fuel
source that the old equipment was connected to, the replacement equipment is
the same capacity or rating as the old equipment and further provided that such
work is performed by qualified personnel.
   105.2.2 Public Service Agencies. Delete the entire paragraph after the
section heading and replace with: A permit shall not be required for the
ordinary repairs of above grade facilities and for the ordinary repairs of
below grade facilities that are located entirely on private property. Any
repair requiring an excavation within the public right of way shall require a
permit and shall be performed in accordance with the village's standards for
construction of facilities on public rights of way contained in Title 5 of the
Village Code. Any installation of new facilities regardless of location shall
require a permit.
   105.3 Application For Permit. Add the following to the list of application
requirements:
      8.   All plans for projects shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a
licensed architect in the state of Illinois except for miscellaneous permits,
detached garages, sheds, other minor accessory structures and interior
remodeling projects not involving structural modifications.
      9.   All applications shall list the name, address, email and phone
number of all contractors involved in the project.
   105.5 Expiration. Delete the entire paragraph after the section heading and
replace with: Permit expirations shall be in accordance with Section
4-2-3  of this Title.
   107.2.6. Rename this section Site, Grading and Drainage Plan and replace the
existing paragraph with: The construction documents submitted with the
application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the size and
location of all structures and paved surfaces (paved surfaces includes
driveways, sidewalks, patios, etc.) on the subject lot as well as on adjacent
lots. The setbacks to all lot lines shall be included on the plan. Included on
the site plan or on a separate plan shall be a grading plan which shows the
proposed top-of-foundation elevation for all structures, exterior grade
elevation at all structures on the subject property as well as adjacent
properties. The elevation of the public walks adjacent to the property shall be
shown. When construction within the public right-of-way is required, the plan
shall also show the specific location of parkway trees, light poles, fire
hydrants, sign poles, etc. The grading plan should also show sufficient
existing and proposed spot elevations to show direction of all surface water
flow. The Village Engineer may accept the use of a local datum elevation if a
convenient benchmark is not available. The Village Engineer shall require that
the grading plan be prepared by a registered professional engineer in
accordance with Title 4, Chapter 17 of the Village Code.
   109.2 Schedule Of Permit Fees. Delete the entire paragraph after the section
heading and replace with: A fee for each plan examination, building permit and
inspection shall be paid as set forth in the Village Code under Building
Permits Fees, Title 4, Chapter 2, Section 1.
   113 Board of Appeals. Delete the entire section and replace with: Appealing
Decisions of the Village's Building Official.
   113.1 General. A building code appeal shall be based on a claim that the
true intent of the code, or the rules legally adopted thereunder, have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the code do not fully apply, or that
an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
   113.2 Appeal Process.
      A.   The applicant shall file a written appeal addressed to the Village's
Building Official, identifying the particular condition or portion of the work,
and the applicable provision(s) of the code which have been interpreted.
      B.   The Village's Building Official shall enforce the code in accordance
with the Building Official's interpretation with regard to the applicant's
building code appeal.
      C.   The appellant has the right to appeal to the Village Administrator
first, and then to Village Board.
   114.4 Violation Penalties. Delete the words "shall be subject to penalties
as prescribed by law" from this section and substitute "shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $750.00".
   115.3 Unlawful Continuance. Delete the words "shall be subject to penalties
as prescribed by law" from
   this section and substitute "shall be liable to a fine of not less than
$100.00 or more than $750.00".
   201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes. Add the following paragraph: The
following terms as defined in Section
10-3-1  of the Village Zoning Code shall supersede the definitions in this
chapter: Accessory Structure (Building), Basement, Building, Dwelling, Grade,
Height (Of) Building, Lot, Story, Structure, Yard.
   406.3.2.1 Dwelling Unit Separation: Delete and replace as follows: The
private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and its attic area by
means of minimum 5/8 inch type X gypsum board applied to the garage side.
Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated from all habitable rooms by
not less than 5/8" type X gypsum board. Walls supporting a floor-ceiling
separation shall be protected to the same level of protection. Door openings
between a private garage and the dwelling unit shall be equipped with either
solid wood doors, or solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 13/
8 inches (34.9 mm) thick, or doors in compliance with section 715.3.3. Doors
shall be self-closing, and shall be weather-stripped. Openings from a private
garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.
   510.4 Parking Beneath Group R. Delete this section in its entirety.
   706.6 (Fire wall) Vertical Continuity. Delete Exceptions 2, 3, and 4, of
this section entirely.
   706.6.1 Stepped Buildings. Delete the Exception entirely.
   711.2.4.3 (Horizontal assemblies) Dwelling and sleeping units. Delete the
Exception entirely.
   714.4.1 Through Penetrations. Delete Exceptions 1 and 2 of this section
entirely.
   903.2, and 903.2.1 through 903.2.12. Delete these, and replace as follows:
      903.2 Where Required. An approved automatic fire suppression sprinkler
system shall be installed and maintained throughout all new buildings and
structures, and shall also be provided in every addition to or renovation of an
existing building, in accordance with the following:
   903.2.1 Definitions and Calculations:
      1.   The calculation of the areas of existing construction and new
construction shall be calculated as follows: The areas to be included in the
calculation shall include the gross area on floors of the building above grade.
The base area of the existing building shall include only those areas of the
existing building which are to remain, and the area of new construction shall
include the gross area of all additions, without deductions.
      2.   For the purpose of calculating the percentage of the addition to the
building, the area of the addition and renovation
      shall be construed to be the total area of all additions and renovations
made within any 3 year period, and the area of the existing building shall be
the existing area (as defined above) prior to that 3 year period.
      3.   The area of "substantial renovation" shall be defined to include the
total area of each room where 50% or more of the wall and ceiling finishes
(plaster, plaster board, gypsum board, suspended ceiling systems, etc.) is
being removed down to the framing.
   903.2.2 Where Required in Existing Buildings and Structures. An approved
automatic fire suppression sprinkler system shall be provided in every addition
to or renovation of an existing building, in accordance with the following:
      1.   In the newly constructed portion of any addition which adds 90% or
more square footage to the area of an existing building.
      2.   In the renovated portion of any building where 90% or more of the
existing area of the building is being substantially renovated.
      3.   In the renovated and newly constructed portions of any building
where the sum total of the area of the addition and the area of the portion
being substantially renovated exceeds 90% of the area of an existing building.
   903.2.3 Exceptions: Add the following Exceptions:
      Exception 1. Spaces and areas in telecommunications buildings used
exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power
distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or
areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system monitored by
the local jurisdiction, and separated from the remainder of the building by a
wall with a fire resistance rating of not less than 1 hour and a floor/ceiling
assembly with a fire resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
      Exception 2. Detached accessory buildings shall be exempt from the
requirement for automatic sprinkler protection subject to all of the following
conditions:
      The building is an accessory to primary building on the same site, and
the building has a gross area of 500 square feet or less, and the building is
protected with an automatic fire detection system, monitored by the local
jurisdiction, no High Hazard occupancy, no basements or below grade areas, no
sleeping or dwelling units and the primary and accessory buildings are in
compliance with Table 602 Fire Resistance Rating Requirements for Exterior
Walls Based on Fire Separation Distance.
   905.3.1 Building Height. Delete the entire paragraph after the section
heading and replace with: Standpipe systems shall be installed in all buildings
where the most distant
   occupied floor is more than 20 feet above or below the point of fire
department vehicle access, or is more than 2 stories in height. All standpipe
systems shall be installed as Class III systems.
   1010.1.9.12 Stairway Doors. Delete item 3 from the list of.
   1015.4 Opening limitations: Add the following section:
      1015.4.1 Ladder Effect. Where the guard protects an open-sided floor
surface which is 72 inches or more above the floor or grade below, the guard
shall not have an ornamental pattern that would provide a ladder effect. For
this purpose, the guard shall be considered to include all construction from
the floor surface up to the top of the required height of the guard.
   1101.1 Scope. Add the following sentence: When there is a conflict between
the Illinois Accessibility Code and this Code, the stricter of the requirements
will be required.
   1809.5 Frost Protection. Delete the three conditions for the exception and
add the following condition: 1. Single story accessory structures with an area
500 square feet or less, with non-masonry, or other non-rigid wall construction
shall not be required to be protected.
   2506.1 General. Add the following: The minimum gypsum board thickness shall
be 5/8 inch. References to thickness and application of gypsum board less than
5/8 inches thick are hereby deleted.
   Sections 3001 through 3006 (Elevators and Conveying Systems). Delete all
sections in their entirety and add new Sections 3001 and 3001.1 as follows:
      3001 General: All elevators and other conveyances in new and existing
buildings shall be designed, permitted, constructed, inspected, certified, and
maintained in accordance with the Illinois Elevator Safety and Regulation Act,
and rules promulgated in accordance with said act as may be amended from time
to time.
      3001.1 Scope. Change the text as follows: Where elevators are provided in
buildings two stories or more stories above grade or one or more stories below
grade, all elevators shall be sized, at a minimum, to allow a 24 inch x 84 inch
stretcher in a horizontal position.
   Chapter 31, Special Construction: Add the following Sections:
      3107.2 Limitations: The types and sizes of signage are regulated by Title
4, Chapter 5 of the Village Code.
      3108.1.1 General: Height restrictions and setback requirements for radio
and television towers shall be governed by the limits established for all other
structures in each zoning district as put forth in the Village Code. Refer to
Title 4, Chapter 15 for regulation of radio and television antennas.
   Chapter 33, Safeguards During Construction. Add the following Section:
      3301.3 Safety Violations:
         1.   The injury to any person or damage to any property adjacent to a
project site shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of International
Building Code, 2018 Edition, Chapter 33, Sections 3306 and 3307.
         2.   Any such injury or damage shall be reported immediately to the
Building Official.
         3.   No further work shall be performed until: (A) the Building
Official has inspected the site and is satisfied that adequate safety measures
are in place, and; (B) the contractor provides a written program, or other
assurances satisfactory to the director, that any property damage will be
repaired or replaced.
      Chapter 35 Referenced standards
         Delete all references to the International Plumbing Code and insert
the Illinois Plumbing Code 2014 edition
         Adopt the following Appendices C, D, F, G, I, J.
(Ord. 3239, 5-12-2008; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022; Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-1-4: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, 2018 EDITION:
   A.   The 2018 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code is
hereby adopted by reference as the property maintenance code of the village,
except for such additions, insertions, deletions or changes as hereinafter
prescribed in subsection B of this section.
   B.   The following are amendments to the International Property Maintenance
Code, 2018 Edition:
   101.1 Title. Insert Village of River Forest.
   103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Delete the entire section and replace
with the following: The Department of Public Works and Development Services
shall be the enforcement agency of this code and the official in charge shall
be known as the Building Official.
   106.4 Violation Penalties. Insert the following after the first sentence:
Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any provision of this code
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00
nor more than $750.00.
   Add the following sections:
   Section 111 Means of Appeal. Delete the entire section. Replace with: See
amended Section 113, Appealing Decisions of the Village's Building Official, of
the International Building Code, 2018 Edition.
   201.3.1 Conflicting Definitions. In case of conflict with definitions found
in the Village Code, such Village Code definitions shall apply.
   Section 302.4 Weeds. Insert 8 inches.
   304.14 Insect Screens. Insert "April 1" and "November 30".
   602.2 Residential Occupancies. Delete this section in its entirety and
reference Title 4 Chapter 7 of the Village Code.
   602.3 Heat Supply. Delete this section in its entirety and reference Title 4
Chapter 7 of the Village Code.
   602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Delete this section in its entirety and
reference Title 4 Chapter 7 of the Village Code.
   602.5 Room Temperature Measurement. Delete this section in its entirety and
reference Title 4, Chapter 7 of the Village Code.
   604.4 Regular Electrical Connection. Create this section and insert: "If a
premises has an electrical system, electricity shall be supplied to the
electrical system from an electric supplier, as defined in the Illinois
Electric Supplier Act, 220 ILCS 30/1, et seq., as amended.
      Exceptions:
         1.   If the village issues a building permit which allows a premises
with an electrical system to be supplied by electricity from a source other
than from an electric supplier, in which case the premises may be supplied
electricity by the source other than from an electric supplier approved by the
village in the building permit.
         2.   If the electric supplier is out of service, in which case an
electrical generator may be used to supply an electrical system with
electricity for the duration of the electric supplier outage, subject to the
noise restrictions in section
6-7-1 of the Village Code.
         3.   If a licensed contractor is performing work pursuant to a valid
and current permit issued by the village, in which case an electrical generator
may be used to supply electricity to the licensed contractor's equipment,
subject to the noise restrictions in Section
6-7-1 of the Village Code."
   Chapter 8 Referenced standards
      ICC Delete all references to the International Plumbing Code and insert
the Illinois Plumbing Code 2014 edition
      Adopt the following: Appendix A
(Ord. 3532, 10-13-2014; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-5: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE, 2018 EDITION:
   A.   The 2018 Edition of the International Mechanical Code is hereby adopted
by reference as the mechanical code of the village, except for such additions,
insertions, deletions or changes as hereinafter prescribed in subsection B of
this section.
   B.   The following are amendments to the International Mechanical Code 2018
Edition:
   101.1 Title. Insert Village of River Forest.
   103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Delete the entire section and replace
with the following: The Department of Public Works and Development Services
shall be the enforcement agency of this code and the official in charge shall
be known as the Building Official.
   106.5.2 Fee Schedule. Delete this section and reference Title 4, Chapter 2
of the Village Code.
   108.4 Violations Penalties. Insert misdemeanor as the specific offense, a
fine of $750.00 and delete the imprisonment provision.
   108.5 Stop Work Orders. Insert fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than
$750.00.
   Add the following section:
   Section 109 Means of Appeal. Delete the entire section. Replace with: See
amended Section 113, Appealing Decisions of the Village's Building Official, of
the International Building Code, 2018 Edition.
   303.6.1 Location of Equipment. Add the following section: The location of
all unitary air conditioners, air conditioning compressors,
   generators, and similar appliances and equipment in outdoor
locations,   shall be regulated by the sound pressure level they generate.
Existing installations may be replaced in the same location, provided there is
no increase in capacity or sound pressure rating. The location of new equipment
shall be subject to the requirements of the following table when installed on a
parcel adjacent to a residential use parcel:
   Side Yard Installation
 
Side Yard Setback (Feet) Maximum Sound Pressure Rating db(a)
Less than 3              Installation not allowed
3 or greater             74
 
   Rear Yard Installation
 
Side Yard Setback (Feet) Maximum Sound Pressure Rating db(a)
Less than 3              Installation not allowed
3 to 10                  78
10 or greater            82
 
   The Village Board shall have the authority to hear requests for and grant
relief from any of these location requirements.
   Chapter 15 Referenced standards
      ICC Delete all references to the International Plumbing Code and insert
the Illinois Plumbing Code 2014 edition
      Adopt the following: Appendix A
(Ord. 3239, 5-12-2008; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-6: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE, 2018 EDITION:
   A.   The 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code is hereby adopted by
reference as the fire code of the village, except for such additions,
insertions, deletions or changes as hereinafter prescribed in subsection B of
this section.
   B.   The following are amendments to the International Fire Code, 2018
Edition:
   101.1 Title. Insert Village of River Forest.
   109 Board of Appeals. Delete the entire section. Replace with amended
Section 113, Appealing Decisions of the Village's Building Official, of the
International Building Code, 2018 Edition.
   110.4 Violations Penalties. Insert misdemeanor as the specific offense, a
fine of $750.00 and delete the imprisonment provision.
   112.4 Failure To Comply. Insert fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than
$750.00.
   407.2 Safety Data Sheets. Add the following at the end of this paragraph:
material safety data sheets (MSDS) shall be stored at a location, and in a
manner, approved by the fire department for immediate emergency access.
   Hazardous material inventory statements (HMIS) shall be included. HMIS shall
be revised semi-annually unless approved by the fire department.
   Delete 903.2, and 903.2.1 through 903.2.12 in their entirety, and replace as
follows:
      903.2 Where Required. An approved automatic fire suppression sprinkler
system shall be installed and maintained throughout all new buildings and
structures, and shall also be provided in every addition to or renovation of an
existing building, in accordance with the following:
   903.2.1 Definitions And Calculations:
      1.   The calculation of the areas of existing construction and new
construction shall be calculated as follows: The areas to be included in the
calculation shall include the gross area on floors of the building above grade.
The base area of the existing building shall include only those areas of the
existing building which are to remain, and the area of new construction shall
include the gross area of all additions, without deductions.
      2.   For the purpose of calculating the percentage of the addition to the
building, the area of the addition and renovation shall be construed to be the
total area of all additions and renovations made within any 3 year period, and
the area of the existing building shall be the existing area (as defined above)
prior to that 3 year period.
      3.   The area of "substantial renovation" shall be defined to include the
total area of each room where 50% or more of the wall and ceiling finishes
(plaster, plaster board, gypsum board, suspended ceiling systems, etc.) is
being removed down to the framing.
   903.2.2 Where Required in Existing Buildings and Structures. An approved
automatic fire suppression sprinkler system shall be provided in every addition
to or renovation of an existing building, in accordance with the following:
      1.   In the newly constructed portion of any addition which adds 90% or
more square footage to the area of an existing building.
      2.   In the renovated portion of any building where 90% or more of the
existing area of the building is being substantially renovated.
      3.   In the renovated and newly constructed portions of any building
where the sum total of the area of the addition and the area of the portion
being substantially renovated exceeds 90% of the area of an existing building.
   903.2.3   Exceptions:
      Exception 1. Spaces and areas in telecommunications buildings used
exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power
distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or
areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system monitored by
the local jurisdiction, and separated from the remainder of the building by a
wall with a fire resistance rating of not less than 1 hour and a floor/ceiling
assembly with a fire resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
      Exception 2. Detached accessory buildings shall be exempt from the
requirement for automatic sprinkler protection subject to all of the following
conditions:
      The building is an accessory to primary building on the same site, and
the building has a gross area of 500 square feet or less, and the building is
protected with an automatic fire detection system, monitored by the local
jurisdiction, no High Hazard occupancy, no basements or below grade areas, no
sleeping or dwelling units and the primary and accessory buildings are in
compliance with Table 602 for fire separation distance.
      Exception 3. Single family residential structure, pursuant to Section
R313.3, Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, of the 2018 Edition of the
International Residential Code.
   905.3.1 Height. Delete the entire paragraph after the section heading and
replace with: Standpipe systems shall be installed in all buildings where the
most distant occupied floor is more than 20 feet above or below the point of
fire department vehicle access, or is more than 2 stories in height. All
standpipe systems shall be installed as a Class III system.
      5604 Explosive Materials Storage And Handling. Delete Sections 5604.1
through 5604.10.7, and replace with the following section:
      5604.1 Storage Prohibited. The storage of explosives and explosive
materials, small arms ammunition, small arms primers, propellant-actuated
cartridges and smokeless propellants in magazines is prohibited within the
village.
   Chapter 80 Referenced standards
      ICC Delete all references to the International Plumbing Code and insert
the Illinois Plumbing Code 2014 edition NFPA. Delete the listed editions and
adopt the entire 2017 Edition of the National Fire Code including all annexes
to the adopted standards.
      The following shall not be adopted NFPA 1
      Adopt the following Appendices: B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L
(Ord. 3239, 5-12-2008; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-7: PLUMBING CODE:
   A.   The current edition of the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, as
promulgated by the Illinois Department of Public Health, is hereby adopted by
reference as the plumbing code of the village, except for such additions,
insertions, deletions or changes as hereinafter prescribed in subsection B of
this section.
   B.   The following are amendments to the plumbing code:
         Add the following sections:
   890.170 e) Public Systems Available. A public water main or public sewer
system shall be considered available to a structure where the structure is
located within 200 feet of the public water main or sewer.
   Pex pipe shall be allowed for water distribution pipe in residential
buildings, above grade and covered with a minimum of a 5/8 inch thickness of
drywall or other approved protective material.
   890.1150 a)4) Water service piping shall be installed a minimum of 5 feet 0
inches below grade in the Village.
   890.1200 a) Water Service Pipe Sizing. This section shall be amended by
deleting the number "three-fourths (3/4) inch" and replacing it with the number
"one (1) inch".
   890.1310 a)1) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe with cellular core shall not be
permitted to be used in the Village
   890.1320 c)1) Sewer Depth: All building sewers shall be a minimum of 3 feet
6 inches below grade in the Village
   890.1440 g) Vent Terminal Size. This section shall be deleted in its
entirety after the section heading and replaced with the following:
   Each vent extension through a roof shall be at least 4 inches in diameter
and in no instance shall said vent extension be less than one pipe size larger
than the vent stack. The change in diameter shall be made inside the building
at least one foot below the roof with an approved fitting.
   890.1950 c) Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter or repair plumbing work in violation of the
approved construction drawings or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $750.00. Each day that
a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   890.1950 d) Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in
or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than
$750.00.
   890. Appendix A, Approved Material Standards, Table A, 12) Polyvinyl
Chloride (PVC) Pipe with Cellular Core. Delete this as an approved material.
(Ord. 3239, 5-12-2008; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-8: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE, 2017 EDITION:
   A.   The 2017 National Electrical Code (NEC), published by the National Fire
Protection Association, is hereby adopted by reference as the electrical code
of the village, except for such additions, insertions, deletions or changes as
hereinafter prescribed in subsection B of this section.
   B.   The following are amendments to the electrical code:
   Article 320 Armored Cable
   Section 320.10 Uses Permitted. Delete the entire section after the section
heading and replace with: Where necessary to pass wire through existing
partitions, cable type "AC" may be used in the Village, and to extend not more
than 3 feet beyond said partitions. All other uses are prohibited without
special permission of the Building Official.
   Article 334 Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable. Delete this article in its entirety.
Nonmetallic sheathed cable types "NM", "NMC", and "NMS" are not permitted to be
used in the village.
(Ord. 3239, 5-12-2008; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-9: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE, 2018 EDITION:
   A.   The 2018 Edition of the International Residential Code is hereby
adopted by reference as the one- and two-family dwelling code of the village,
except for such additions, insertions, deletions or changes as hereinafter
prescribed in subsection B of this section.
   B.   The following are amendments to the International Residential Code,
2018 Edition:
   R101.1 Title. Insert the Village of River Forest.
   103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Delete the entire section and replace
with the following: The Department of Public Works and Development Services
shall be the enforcement agency of this code and the official in charge shall
be known as the Building Official.
   R104.10.1 Areas Prone to Flooding. Delete the entire paragraph after the
section heading and replace with: Construction within areas prone to flooding
shall be in accordance with Sections
4-12-1  through
4-12-7  of this Title.
   R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit. Delete the entire list following the
subsection entitled "Building" and replace with the following list:
      1.   Prefabricated sheds not with a floor area less than 100 square feet.
      2.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and
similar finish work.
      3.   Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches deep.
      4.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to the residence.
      Add the following paragraph to the subsection entitled "Electrical."
      Replacement Of Electrical Equipment: Electrical equipment may be replaced
in-kind or repaired without a permit provided that no modifications to the
system is required and that such work is performed by a qualified person as
defined by the National Electrical Code.
      Delete the entire list following the subsection entitled "Mechanical" and
replace with the following list:
      1.   Portable heating, ventilating or cooling appliances.
      2.   Replacement of mechanical equipment in-kind shall not require a
permit, provided such equipment is connected to the same electric or fuel
source that the old equipment was connected to, the replacement equipment is
the same capacity or rating as the old equipment and further provided that such
work is performed by qualified personnel.
   R105.2.3 Public Service Agencies. Delete the entire paragraph after the
section heading and replace with: A permit shall not be required for the
ordinary repairs of above grade facilities and for the ordinary repairs of
below grade facilities that are located entirely on private property. Any
repair requiring an excavation within the public right of way shall require a
permit and shall be performed in accordance with the village's standards for
construction of facilities on public rights of way contained in Title 5 of the
Village Code. Any installation of new facilities regardless of location shall
require a permit.
   R105.3 Application For Permit. Add the following to the list of application
requirements:
      8.   All plans for projects shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a
licensed architect in the state of Illinois except for miscellaneous permits,
detached garages, sheds, other minor accessory structures and interior
remodeling projects not involving structural modifications.
      9.   All applications shall list the name, address, email and phone
number of all contractors involved in the project.
   R105.3.1.1 Determination of Substantially Improved or Substantially Damaged
Existing Buildings in Flood Hazard Areas. Delete this section in its entirety.
   R105.5 Expiration. Delete the entire paragraph after the section heading and
replace with: Permit expirations shall be in accordance with Section
4-2-3  of this Title.
   R106.2 Site Plan or Plat Plan. Rename this section to "Site, Grading and
Drainage Plan" and replace the existing paragraph with the following: The
construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be
accompanied by a site plan showing the size and location of all structures and
paved surfaces (paved surfaces includes driveways, sidewalks, patios, etc.) on
the subject lot as well as on adjacent lots. The setbacks to all lot lines
shall be included on the plan. Included on the site plan or on a separate plan
shall be a grading plan which shows the proposed top-of-foundation elevation
for all structures, exterior grade elevation at all structures on the subject
property as well as adjacent properties. The elevation of the public walks
adjacent to the property shall be shown. When construction within the public
right-of-way is required, the plan shall also show the specific location of
parkway trees, light poles, fire hydrants, sign poles, etc. The grading plan
should also show sufficient existing and proposed spot elevations to show
direction of all surface water flow. The Village Engineer may accept the use of
a local datum elevation if a convenient benchmark is not available. The Village
Engineer shall require that the grading plan be prepared by a registered
professional engineer.
   For new one or two family structures, a survey of the foundation must be
submitted to the village evidencing adherence with all applicable zoning
requirements prior to proceeding with above grade framing.
   R112 Board of Appeals. Delete the entire section and replace with the
following:
      A.   The applicant shall file a written appeal addressed to the Village's
Building Official, identifying the particular condition or portion of the work,
and the applicable provision(s) of the code which have been interpreted.
      B.   The Village's Building Official shall enforce the code in accordance
with the Building Official's interpretation with regard to the applicant's
building code appeal.
      C.   The appellant has the right to appeal to the Village Administrator
first and then to Village Board.
   R201.3 Terms Defined in Other Codes. Add the following paragraph: The
following terms as defined in Section
10-3-1  of the Village Zoning Code and shall supersede the definitions in this
chapter: Accessory Structure(Building), Basement, Building, Dwelling, Grade,
Height (Of) Building, Lot, Story, Structure, Yard.
   Table R301.2(1). Insert the following data:
   TABLE R301.2(1)
   CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
 
       Wind Speed (mph)                      Subject To Damage From        Ice
Ground                              Seismic                         Winter Shield          Air      Mean
Snow   Speed Topo    Special Wind   Design   Weather- Frost         Design Under-   Flood  Freezing Annual
Load   (mph) effects wind    borne  Category ing      Line  Termite Temp   layment  Hazard Index    Temp
                     region  debris                   Depth                Required

30     115                                                  Moder
p.s.f. mph   No      No      No     B        Severe   48"   ate to  -2°F  Yes      *      1700     49°F
                                                            heavy
 
   * Construction in flood prone areas shall be in accordance with Sections
4-12-1 through
4-12-7 of this Title.
   R302.1 Exterior Walls. Add the following: The fire separation distance from
a detached garage and the dwelling it is accessory to, shall not be less than
15 feet unless the garage is equipped with an approved supervised heat
detection system, in which case, the minimum fire separation distance may be
reduced to 10 feet.
   Delete in its entirety the third exception in this section pertaining to
tool, storage sheds, playhouses and similar structures.
   R302.6 Dwelling-Garage Fire Separation. Delete the entire paragraph after
the section heading and replace with: An attached garage shall be separated
from the residence and its attic area by not less than 5/8-inch type X gypsum
board or equivalent applied to the garage side. Where the separation is a
floor-ceiling assembly, the walls supporting this assembly must be similarly
protected.
   R302.7 Under Stair Protection. Replace "1/2" gypsum board" with "5/8" type X
gypsum board".
   R309.1 Floor Surface. Add the following: Attached garages shall be
continuously separated from the remainder of the building with a concrete curb,
minimum 4" high, and shall be poured integral with the floor slab.
   R309.3 Flood Hazard Areas. Delete this section and following subsections in
their entirety.
   R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Delete the paragraphs after the
section heading and replace with the following: Approved automatic fire
protection sprinkler systems shall be provided to comply with this section.
      R313.3.1 Where Required: Approved automatic fire protection sprinkler
systems shall be provided in the following:
         1.   New construction.
         2.   Existing residences where more than 90% of the area of the floor
structures of the current structure above the foundation level is demolished
and rebuild. Automatic fire protection sprinkler systems shall not be required
for additions or alterations to existing single family residences which do not
included the demolition and rebuilding of more than 90% of the area of the
floor structures of the current structure above the foundation level.
      R313.3.2 System Requirements. Add the following section: The system shall
be installed meeting the requirements of NFPA 13D, 2016 Edition and NFPA 101,
2018 Edition, Sections 9.7, 24.3.5.1 and 24.3.5.2. as modified herein.
      R313.3.3 Acceptance Requirements: Add the following section:
      All systems shall be inspected, tested, and approved by the fire
department in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 13D and NFPA 72,
including but not limited to initiating device, notification appliance, and
remote station fire alarm connection prior to scheduling final inspection for
certificate of occupancy.
      Amendments to NFPA 13 D (2016 Edition) are as follows:
         7.6 Alarms. Delete the entire paragraph after the section heading and
replace with: Water flow alarms shall be required on all approved automatic
fire protection sprinkler systems. An interior, six (6) inch water flow bell
shall be mounted to the return duct of each furnace in the structure. In lieu
of the water flow bells an audible alarm horn shall be installed adjacent to
each sleeping area, with a minimum decibel rating of 70 db at pillow level in
occupiable areas.
         A weatherproof horn/strobe audible alarm, for the approved automatic
fire protection sprinkler system, shall be mounted on the outside of the
structure at a location causing it to be heard and seen from the public
      8.3.4 Location of Sprinklers. Delete the entire paragraph after the
section heading and replace with: Sprinklers shall be installed in attached
garages, carport or any other type of attached structure used to house vehicles
to protect common walls, ceilings and openings.
      9.2 Antifreeze Systems. Delete the entire section heading and replace
with: Automatic fire protection sprinkler systems are prohibited from using
antifreeze solutions in any portion of said system.
   R314 Smoke Alarms. Rename this section: Smoke Alarms, Carbon Monoxide
Detectors and Sprinkler Systems. Delete the existing language after the section
heading in its entirety and replace with:
      R314.1 Smoke Alarms. Smoke alarms shall be installed in the following:
         1.   In each sleeping room.
         2.   Outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of
the bedrooms.
         3.   One each additional story of the dwelling, including basements
but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or
dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for
the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level.
         When more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an
individual dwelling unit the alarm devices shall be interconnected in such a
manner that the actuation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the
individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over
background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
         All smoke alarms shall be listed and installed in accordance with the
provisions of this code and the household fire warning equipment provisions of
NFPA 72.
         R314.1.1 Alterations, Repairs And Additions. When interior
alterations, repairs or additions requiring a permit occur, or when one or more
sleeping rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the individual
dwelling unit shall be provided with smoke alarms located as required for new
dwellings; the smoke alarms shall be interconnected.
         Exceptions:
            1.   Smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required to be
interconnected and hard wired where the alterations or repairs do not result in
the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless
there is an attic, crawl space, or basement available which could provide
access for hard wiring and interconnection without the removal of interior
finishes.
            2.   Repairs to the exterior surfaces of dwellings are exempt from
the requirements of this section.
   R315 Carbon Monoxide Detectors. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed
in the following locations:
      1.   Within 15 feet of each sleeping area.
      2.   On every floor on which a fossil fuel burning boiler, water heater,
furnace or appliance is located.
   R314.6 Power Source. Delete the entire paragraph after the section heading
and replace with: In new construction, the required smoke alarms and carbon
monoxide detectors shall receive their primary power from the building wiring
when such wiring is served from a commercial source, and when primary power is
interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and
without a disconnecting switch other than those required for overcurrent
protection. Smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors shall be permitted to be
battery operated when installed in buildings without commercial power or in
buildings that undergo alterations, repairs of additions regulated by Section
R313.1.1.
   R319.1 Address Identification. Add the following: Where a garage abuts a
public alley, approved house numbers shall be affixed to the face of the
garage, minimum 4" high, in a plainly visible location.
   R401.1 Application. Delete the last sentence of this section and replace
with: Wood foundations are not allowed and all subsequent references to wood
foundations in this chapter are hereby deleted.
   R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection. Delete the reference to Section R403.3 as an
acceptable method of frost protection and delete the exceptions section in its
entirety and replace with the following: Exception: Single story accessory
structures with an area 500 square feet or less with non-masonry or other non-
rigid wall construction shall not be required to be protected.
   R403.1.7.3 Foundation Elevation. Delete the entire paragraph after the
section heading and replace with: The top of any exterior foundation wall shall
extend a minimum of 8 inches above exterior finished grade adjacent to the
foundation at all points. Elevations shall be established to promote positive
drainage without adversely impacting adjoining properties. Where the foundation
elevations of adjoining lots vary greatly, the new foundation elevation on the
subject lot shall be established as approximately the average of the elevations
of the foundation of said adjoining lots. The Village Engineer shall require
the submission of a grading plan stamped by a professional engineer prior to
the issuance of a permit as well as a submission of an as-built grading
certificate prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy demonstrating
the project has been constructed in accordance with the approved grading plan.
The Village Engineer may consider unique grading conditions and has the
authority to approve a foundation elevation based on sound engineering
judgment.
   R403.3 Frost Protected Shallow Foundations. Delete this section and
following subsections in their entirety.
   R502.1.2 Prefabricated Wood I-Joists. Add the following: Wood I-joists may
not remain exposed and shall be protected with a minimum 5/8 inch type "X"
gypsum board or equivalent.
   R504 Pressure Preservative-Treated Wood Floors (On Ground). Delete this
section and following subsections in their entirety.
   R610 Structural Insulated Panel Wall Construction. Delete this section and
following subsections in their entirety.
   R702.3.4 Insulating Concrete Form Walls. Delete this section in its
entirety.
   Table R702.3.5 Minimum Thickness And Application Of Gypsum Board and Gypsum
Panel Products. Minimum gypsum board thickness to be 5/8 inch.
   References to thickness and application of gypsum board less than 5/8 inches
thick are hereby deleted.
   ICC Delete all references to the International Plumbing Code and insert the
Illinois Plumbing Code 2014 edition
   Adopt the following appendices A, B, C, D, F, H, I, J, M, O.
(Ord. 3150, 3-13-2006; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-10: INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE, 2018 EDITION:
   A.   The 2018 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code is hereby adopted
by reference as the fuel gas code of the village.
   B.   The following are amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code/2018:
   101.1 Title. Insert Village of River Forest.
   103.1 General. Delete the entire section and replace with the following: The
Department of Public Works and Development Services shall be the enforcement
agency of this code and the official in charge shall be known as the Building
Official.
   106.5.2 Fee Schedule. Delete this section and reference Title 4, Chapter 2
of the Village Code.
   108.4 Violations Penalties. Insert misdemeanor as the specific offense, a
fine of $750.00 and delete the imprisonment provision.
   108.5 Stop Work Orders. Insert fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than
$750.00.
   Section 109 Means of Appeal. Delete the entire section. Replace with: See
amended Section 113, Appealing Decisions of the Village's Building Official, of
the International Building Code, 2018 Edition.
   303.6.1 Location of Equipment. The location of all unitary air conditioners,
air conditioning compressors, generators, and similar appliances and equipment
in outdoor locations, shall be regulated by the sound pressure level they
generate. Existing installations may be replaced in the same location, provided
there is no increase in capacity or sound pressure rating. The location of new
equipment shall be subject to the requirements of the following table when
installed on a parcel adjacent to a residential use parcel:
   Side Yard Installation
 
Side Yard Setback (Feet) Maximum Sound Pressure Rating db(a)
Less than 3              Installation not allowed
3 or greater             74
 
   Rear Yard Installation
 
Side Yard Setback (Feet) Maximum Sound Pressure Rating db(a)
Less than 3              Installation not allowed
3 to 10                  78
10 or greater            82
 
   The Village Board shall have the authority to hear requests for and grant
relief from any of these location requirements.
   Chapter 8 Referenced Standards
   ICC Delete all references to the International Plumbing Code and insert the
Illinois Plumbing Code 2014 edition
   Adopt the following Appendix: A
(Ord. 3239, 5-12-2008; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-11: INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND URBAN-INTERFACE CODE, 2018 EDITION:
   A.   The 2018 Edition of the International Wildlife Urban-Interface Code, is
hereby adopted by reference as the wildlife urban interface code of the
village.
   B.   The following are amendments to the International Wildland-Urban
Interface Code/2018:
   101.1 Title. Insert Village of River Forest.
   103.1 Title. Insert Village of River Forest Administration Department.
   109.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. Delete this section and reference Title 4,
Chapter 2 of the Village Code.
   114.4 Failure to comply. Insert fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than
$750.00.
   Adopt the following: Appendix A.
(Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-12: ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE, 2019 EDITION:
   A.   The 2019 Edition of the Illinois Accessibility Code is hereby adopted
by reference as the accessibility code of the village.
   B.   The following are amendments to the Illinois Accessibility Code/2019:
   There are no additions, deletions or changes to the Illinois Accessibility
Code.
   Any conflicts between the Illinois Accessibility Code and Chapter 11 of the
International Building Code, Edition 2018, shall require the enforcement of the
strictest requirement.
(Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-13: ILLINOIS ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:
   A.   The International Energy Conservation Code referenced in the Illinois
Energy Conservation Act shall be the energy conservation code for the village.
   B.   The following are amendments to the Illinois Energy Conservation Code:
   There are no additions, deletions or changes to the Illinois Energy
Conservation Code.
(Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-14: INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE, 2018 EDITION:
   A.   The 2018 Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, is
hereby adopted by reference as the swimming pool and spa code of the village,
except for such additions, insertions, deletions or changes as hereinafter
prescribed in subsection B of this section.
   B.   The following are amendments to the International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code, 2018 Edition:
   101.1 Title. Insert Village of River Forest.
   103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Delete the entire section and replace
with the following: The Department Administration shall be the enforcement
agency of this code and the official in charge shall be known as the Building
Official.
      106.5.2 Fee Schedule. Delete this section and reference Title 4, Chapter
2 of the Village Code.
      107.4 Violations Penalties. Insert misdemeanor as the specific offense, a
fine of $750.00 and delete the imprisonment provision.
      107.5 Stop Work Orders. Insert fine of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $750.00.
   Add the following section:
   Section 108 Means of Appeal. Delete the entire section. Replace with: See
amended Section 113, Appealing Decisions of the Village's Building Official, of
the International Building Code, 2018 Edition.
   Chapter 11 Referenced standards
   ICC Delete all references to the International Plumbing Code and insert the
Illinois Plumbing Code 2014 edition.
(Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-15: INTERNATIONAL SOLAR ENERGY PROVISIONS, 2018 EDITION:
   A.   The 2018 Edition of the International Solar Energy Provisions is hereby
adopted by reference as the solar energy provisions of the village, except for
such additions, insertions, deletions or changes as hereinafter prescribed in
subsection B of this section.
   B.   The following are amendments to the International Solar Energy
Provisions 2018 Edition:
   There are no changes, additions or deletions to the International Solar
Energy Provisions, 2018 Edition.
(Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-16: INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE, 2018 EDITION:
   A.   The 2018 Edition of the International Existing Building Code, is hereby
adopted by reference as the existing building code of the village, except for
such additions, insertions, deletions or changes as hereinafter prescribed in
subsection B of this section.
   B.   The following are amendments to the International Existing Building
Code, 2018 Edition:
   101.1 Title. Insert Village of River Forest.
   103.1 General. Delete the entire section and replace with the following: The
Department of Public Works and Development Services shall be the enforcement
agency of this code and the official in charge shall be known as the Building
Official.
   108.2 Fee Schedule. Delete this section and reference Title 4, Chapter 2 of
the Village Code.
   113.4 Violations Penalties. Insert misdemeanor as the specific offense, a
fine of $750.00 and delete the imprisonment provision.
   Section 112 Board of Appeal. Delete the entire section. Replace with: See
amended Section 113, Appealing Decisions of the Village's Building Official, of
the International Building Code, 2018 Edition.
   Section 302 General Provisions. Add the following:
   302.7 Where Required in Existing Buildings and Structures. An approved
automatic fire suppression sprinkler system shall be provided in every addition
to or renovation of an existing building, in accordance with the following:
      1.   In the newly constructed portion of any addition which adds 50% or
more square footage to the area of an existing building.
      2.   In the renovated portion of any building where 50% or more of the
existing area of the building is being substantially renovated.
      3.   In the renovated and newly constructed portions of any building
where the sum total of the area of the addition and the area of the portion
being substantially renovated exceeds 50% of the area of an existing building.
   302.7.1 Exceptions:
      Exception 1. Spaces and areas in telecommunications buildings used
exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power
distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or
areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system monitored by
the local jurisdiction, and separated from the remainder of the building by a
wall with a fire resistance rating of not less than 1 hour and a floor/ceiling
assembly with a fire resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
      Exception 2. Detached accessory buildings shall be exempt from the
requirement for automatic sprinkler protection subject to all of the following
conditions:
      The building is an accessory to primary building on the same site, and
the building has a gross area of 500 square feet or less, and the building is
protected with an automatic fire detection system, monitored by the local
jurisdiction, no High Hazard occupancy, no basements or below grade areas, no
sleeping or dwelling units and the primary and accessory buildings are in
compliance with Table 602 Fire-Resistance Rating Requirements for Exterior
Walls Based on Fire Separation Distance (IBC, 2018 Edition).
      Add the following Section 1301.5.4 Sprinkler system requirements: The
local sprinkler system requirements, including local amendments, shall apply
regardless of the outcome of the performance compliance calculations.
      Chapter 16 Referenced standards
      ICC Delete all references to the International Plumbing Code and insert
the Illinois Plumbing Code 2014 edition
(Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-17: VIOLATION NOTICES:
Whenever an authorized employee of the village observes a violation of this
chapter, he or she may issue a violation notice to the person committing the
violation. The violation notice shall be signed by the employee, shall be in
writing, and shall include the following:
   A.   The name of the person violating this code, and his or her address, if
known.
   B.   The nature of the offense.
   C.   The applicable fine.
   D.   After the final notice date, appearance of the person in the Village's
administrative adjudication hearing department or the Fourth Municipal District
of the Circuit Court of Cook County at a certain time and place.
If the person so notified fails to appear in court, then a summons or warrant
for arrest shall be issued. Such notice shall be issued only by employees
authorized to do so by the Village. (Ord. 2503, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord. 3239, 5-
12-2008; Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-1-18: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars and
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue,
and shall be punishable hereunder as such. In addition to the monetary penalty
set forth herein, the village may seek injunctive relief to compel compliance
with this chapter and the codes incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 3041,
8-11-2003; amd. Ord. 3239, 5-12-2008; Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING PERMITS
SECTION:
4-2-1: Building Permit Fees
4-2-2: Application For Permits
4-2-3: Expiration
4-2-4: Responsibility To The Public
4-2-5: Penalty
4-2-1: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Payment Of Fees: No permit as required by this code shall be issued
until the fee prescribed herein shall have been paid; nor shall an amendment to
a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in
the estimated cost of the building or structure, shall have been paid.
   B.   Construction Or Alteration: For a permit for the construction or
alteration of a building or structure, the fee shall be at the rate of twenty
dollars per one thousand dollars of the estimated cost for single-family
residential construction and twenty three dollars fifty cents per one thousand
dollars of the estimated cost for all other types of construction. The minimum
fee shall be one hundred dollars. The duration of permit for single-family
construction shall be fifteen months and twelve months for all other types of
construction except that the duration of a permit for a project approved as a
site plan review or planned development shall be in accordance with the
approved schedule of development contained within the site plan review or
planned development application.
   Extensions to the permit may be granted in accordance with the following:
   1/3 of the original fee for the first 3 month extension for single-family
residential construction, and 100% of the original fee for the first 3 month
extension for all other types of construction.
   1/3 of the original fee for the second 3 month extension for single-family
residential construction, and 100% of the original fee for the second 3 month
extension for all other types of construction.
   The permit holder shall receive a rebate prorated per diem for the extension
fee in the event the work covered by the permit is completed in less time than
the maximum allowed. The project shall be considered completed upon approval of
all required final inspections and restoration, if required, of any public
right of way.
   C.   Additional Permits: In addition to other permit requirements of this
code, permits and fees shall be required for:
Permit/Certificate   Fee
Permit/Certificate                     Fee
Certificate of occupancy             $ 50.00
Gutter work                          100.00
Paving                               100.00
Placard removal: Unfit for occupancy 500.00
Removal of stop work order           200.00
Roofing                              100.00
Siding                               100.00
Temporary certificate of occupancy   50.00
 
   D.   Reinspection Fee: There shall be a reinspection fee of seventy five
dollars for each additional inspection due to failure to complete the work by
the time of the scheduled inspection or due to a failed inspection.
   E.   Plan Review Fee: In addition to the building permit fee, a plan review
fee may be imposed to defray the costs of contracting with independent
professionals to review permit applications for compliance with applicable
building codes.
   F.   Demolition Fees: The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building
or structure shall be at the rate of one dollar per square foot of floor area
with a minimum fee of two hundred dollars for accessory structures or one
thousand five hundred dollars for primary structures.
   G.   Temporary Permits: A temporary permit shall be required for the
overnight placement or storage of the following on private property:
construction equipment, construction vehicles, construction trailers, portable
toilets, portable storage containers and dumpsters. An application for a permit
shall be made to the director of public works. The application shall describe
the nature, location, type of equipment and duration of time on site, as well
as, details of any applicable protection. The fee for such permit shall be
fifty dollars for the first month or fraction thereof and fifty dollars per
month thereafter except that the fee for portable toilets stored in a front
yard shall be one hundred dollars per month. (Ord. 3447, 7-9-2012; amd. Ord.
3872, 9-12-2022)
4-2-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
   A.   The director of public works shall examine applications for permits,
within a reasonable time after filing. If, after examination and after written
approval, the director of public works finds no objections to the same and it
appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with the laws and
ordinances applicable thereto and the proposed construction or work will be
safe, he shall approve such application, obtain the approval of the fire chief
and village administrator, and issue a permit for the proposed work as soon as
practicable; provided, that the bonding and insurance requirements of section
3-3-3 of this code have been satisfied. If his examination reveals otherwise,
he shall reject such application, note his findings in a written report to be
attached to the application and deliver a copy to the applicant. (Ord. 3041, 8-
11-2003)
4-2-3: EXPIRATION:
Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced
within three months or is not completed within fifteen months after issuance of
the permit for single-family residential construction or one year for all other
types of construction except that the duration of a permit for a project
approved as a site plan review or planned development shall be in accordance
with the approved schedule of development contained within the site plan review
or planned development application, or if the authorized work is suspended or
abandoned for a period of three months after the time of commencing the work.
If a project involves the issuance of a demolition permit as well as a
construction permit, the construction permit shall become invalid if the
authorized work is not completed within fifteen months after issuance of the
demolition permit for single-family residential construction and one year for
all other types of construction. Before work can be resumed, the permit shall
be renewed. Fees for a renewed permit shall be in accordance with the extension
fees included in section
4-2-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 3278, 4-27-2009)
4-2-4: RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC:
The permit holder and his/her contractor(s) shall at all times make every
effort to minimize public inconvenience and to ensure the public health, safety
and welfare. All work shall be conducted in accordance with the village's
"rules and regulations for building construction" attached to the ordinance
codified herein and made part of this chapter. Said rules and regulations may
be amended from time to time by the board of trustees of the village of River
Forest. (Ord. 3041, 8-11-2003)
4-2-5: PENALTY 1 :
   A.   If any person shall initiate construction or alteration of any building
or structure without a permit first having been obtained for the same as
required by this chapter, no permit shall be subsequently issued for such
change or installation and no inspection of the same shall be made until double
the amount of fees otherwise provided by ordinance are paid for such permit and
inspection. The payment of the double fee, however, will not relieve said
person from other penalties for violation of this chapter.
   B.   Failure or refusal to comply with an order of the director of public
works shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Such violation shall
subject such person in charge of the premises to the punishment provided for in
this chapter, and each day such violation is permitted to remain unchanged or
unaltered after the expiration of the time given on such written notice shall
constitute a separate offense. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2809, 1-25-1999; Ord.
3041, 8-11-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-4-4 of this code for penalty provisions.
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-3-1: [Reserved]
4-3-2: Registration As Electrical Contractor
4-3-3: Permits For Work Required
4-3-4: Inspection Of Work
4-3-5: Right Of Entry Of Building Official
4-3-6: Procedure Upon Finding Defects
4-3-7: Inspection Fees
4-3-8: Poles And Wires, Permits Required
4-3-9: Dead, Defective Wires Removed
4-3-1: [RESERVED]:
4-3-2: REGISTRATION AS ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of electrical
contractor, without being registered as an electrical contractor, in the manner
hereinafter set forth; provided, however, that if such person is already
registered for the current year in another city or village within the state,
such electrical contractor shall not be required to register or to pay a
registration fee for such year, in the village.
   A.   Application; Issuance Of Certificate: Any person desiring to engage in
the business of electrical contractor shall apply for registration to the
Building Official. Upon the filing of such application in proper form and the
payment of the registration fee set out in subsection B of this section, the
Building Official shall register the applicant, if so qualified, as an
electrical contractor, and shall issue to the applicant a certificate of
registration which will authorize the applicant to engage in such business for
the year in which it is issued.
   B.   Fee For Registration: In accordance with Illinois Compiled Statutes,
the fee for registration as an electrical contractor shall be twenty five
dollars per annum, which sum shall be paid by the applicant to the village
clerk in advance upon filing the application. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-
2022)
4-3-3: PERMITS FOR WORK REQUIRED:
No electrical equipment shall be installed or altered except upon a permit
first being issued by the village. The village shall issue permits for such
installation and alteration of electrical equipment in all cases where
application for such permits shall be made in accordance with the rules and
regulations applicable thereto; provided, however, that no permit shall be
issued for installing or altering by contract electrical equipment unless the
person applying for such permit is currently registered as an electrical
contractor as required by this chapter. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-3-4: INSPECTION OF WORK:
   A.   The village shall inspect all electrical equipment installed or
altered, and shall require that it conform to the standards and specifications
applicable thereto and adopted as aforesaid, and upon completion of such
installation or alteration in compliance with such standards and
specifications, shall immediately issue a certificate of inspection covering
such installation or alteration.
   B.   The village is hereby empowered to reinspect any electrical equipment,
and when such equipment is found to be unsafe to life or property, shall notify
the person owning, using or operating the same to place the same in a safe and
secure condition and in compliance with the standards and specifications
described herein, within such time as the village shall consider just and
reasonable. Upon refusal or willful failure to comply with the requirements of
such notification, in addition to the penalties otherwise provided herein, the
village may order and compel the cutting off and stopping of such current until
such electrical equipment has been placed in a safe and secure condition and in
compliance with the standards and specifications referred to herein. There
shall be an inspection fee of seventy-five dollars for each inspection
necessary to verify compliance with applicable standards.
   C.   The village shall keep complete records of all permits issued and
inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions of this
chapter.
   D.   Whenever any electrical equipment has been installed or altered, no
electrical current shall be supplied to or used on such equipment previous to
the inspection of such equipment by the village and the issuance of a
certificate of inspection covering such installation or alteration; provided,
that the village may issue a temporary certificate for the use of electrical
current during the course of construction or alteration of buildings, which
temporary certificate shall expire when the construction or alteration of such
building is complete.
   E.   Any person installing electric wires or equipment in any building in
the village which is to be hidden from view shall notify the Building Official
in writing of such intended installation, at least twenty four hours before the
work is to be covered, and no such work shall be covered until inspection
thereof has been made as herein required. In all cases where such notice has
not been given or such work has been covered without inspection thereof as
herein provided, the Building Official is authorized to take down or remove
such portions of the building or structure as shall be necessary for the
inspection of such electric wires or equipment, as herein required, and the
cost of such taking down and replacing such work so removed by such official
shall be borne by the person who has failed to give notice of the installation
thereof, or by the person who has covered such work after such notice and
before inspection thereof as herein provided, as the case may be. (1981 Code;
amd. Ord. 3278, 4-27-2009; Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-3-5: RIGHT OF ENTRY OF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The Building Official or designee, shall have the power to enter buildings or
premises at any reasonable hour in the discharge of his duties, and it shall be
proper for him, when necessary, to remove any existing obstructions such as
laths, plastering, boarding or partitions which may prevent a perfect
inspection of the electrical equipment. It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with the Building Official in the performance of his duties.
Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Official, it shall be necessary to
call upon the police department for aid and assistance in carrying out or
enforcing any of the provisions of this chapter governing the inspection of
electrical equipment, he shall have the authority to do so, and it shall be the
duty of any member of the police department, when called upon by the Building
Official, to act according to the instructions of and to perform such duties as
may be required by the Building Official in order to enforce or put into effect
the provisions of this chapter relating to the inspection of electrical
equipment. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-3-6: PROCEDURE UPON FINDING DEFECTS:
In case the Building Official or designee, finds a defect in any electrical
apparatus or equipment, subject to inspection in the village, he shall report
the same in writing to the persons for whom the test is being made, using
blanks furnished by the village for that purpose and giving a description of
the character of the defect. If the defect is of a dangerous character,
necessitating immediate repair, the Building Official shall forthwith condemn
the apparatus or equipment for further use, or until the same is removed,
repaired or renewed.
If the defect is of a character such that the apparatus or equipment may be
safely operated for a period of some days pending repairs, the Building
Official shall so report, and name the number of days during which the same may
be operated. A duplicate of all such reports shall be promptly filed in the
office of the Village Administrator. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-3-7: INSPECTION FEES:
The fees for the inspection of wiring of any building or of any electrical
apparatus to be paid to the village shall be as follows:
   A.   Wiring: Nine dollars for each circuit or meter.
   B.   New Fixtures, Switches Or Receptacles: New fixtures, switches or
receptacles on new or existing circuits, one dollar seventy five cents each.
   C.   New Or Replaced Service:
 
Up to 200 amps  $ 75.00
201 to 399 amps 100.00
400 to 799 amps 150.00
800 amps and up 200.00
 
   D.   Signs: One hundred dollars plus five cents per square foot of sign
area, including all sides.
   E.   Base Fee For Inspection: The base fee for any inspection of electrical
equipment installed or altered shall be one hundred dollars. The base fee is in
addition to the individual component fees listed above.
   F.   Reinspection Fee: There shall be a reinspection fee of seventy-five
dollars for each additional inspection due to failure to complete the work or
for a failed inspection.
   G.   Plan Review Fee: In addition to the building permit fee, a plan review
fee may be imposed to defray the costs of contracting with independent
professionals to review permit applications for compliance with applicable
building codes. (Ord. 2309, 9-26-1988; amd. Ord. 3028, 4-28-2003; Ord. 3278, 4-
27-2009; Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-3-8: POLES AND WIRES, PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   No poles for the carrying of electricity or other poles, wires or
cables shall be erected in any village parkway, street or alley without a
permit obtained from the Building Official, and all such permits hereafter
issued shall provide that the village may use the poles to be erected for the
purpose of attaching thereto such necessary crossarms, wires or other
electrical appliances as may be deemed necessary by the village authorities for
fire and police signal service of the village.
   B.   Before any permit shall be issued for the setting or replacing of poles
for the support or accommodation of electric conductors of any description
whatever, or for the opening of any trench for underground construction on
private property, the applicant shall pay to the village clerk as a fee for
such permit ten dollars, plus ten cents per linear foot of trench proposed to
be opened for such underground construction, under the permit sought. (1981
Code; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-3-9: DEAD, DEFECTIVE WIRES REMOVED:
   A.   The Building Official shall have the right to cause all dead wires
outside and inside of buildings to be removed at the expense of the owner of
such wires, by giving the owner ten days' written notice so to do.
   B.   The Building Official shall have the right to condemn wires which are
defective and dangerous to life or property, and shall notify the owner of such
wires to remove or replace the same with new wires.
   C.   If the owner fails or neglects to remove such wires within ten days
after receipt of such notice, such person shall be subject to a fine of not
less than five dollars nor more than fifty dollars for each and every forty-
eight hours such wires are permitted to remain in place after expiration of the
time fixed in such notice for the removal of same as aforesaid. (1981 Code;
amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 4
PLUMBING REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
4-4-1: Permits Required
4-4-2: New Plumbing; Repairs
4-4-3: General Requirements
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  4-1-7 of this title.
4-4-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to install plumbing fixtures in any new building or
structure, or to make any extensions to or alterations in plumbing fixtures or
connections in any existing building or structure, before beginning any work,
shall obtain a permit and shall pay to the village, for the inspection thereof,
the following fees:
   A.   New Or Replaced Fixtures: Fifteen dollars per fixture.
   B.   Alterations, Renovations Or Replacement Of Piping Installations In
Existing Buildings: Twenty five dollars.
   C.   Lawn Sprinkling Systems, New Or Modified: One hundred fifteen dollars.
   D.   Swimming Pools:
      1.   Aboveground: Twenty five dollars plus electrical permit.
      2.   Inground: One and one-half percent of the estimated cost of
construction, minimum fee of one hundred fifty dollars plus electric permit.
   E.   Street Or Parkway Openings: One hundred dollars.
   F.   Base Fee For Inspection: The base fee for any inspection of plumbing
equipment installed or altered shall be one hundred dollars. The base fee is in
addition to the individual component fees listed above.
   G.   Reinspection Fee: There shall be a reinspection fee of seventy-five
dollars for each additional inspection due to failure to complete the work or
for a failed inspection.
   H.   Plan Review Fee: In addition to the building permit fee, a plan review
fee may be imposed to defray the costs of contracting with independent
professionals to review permit applications for compliance with applicable
building codes. (Ord. 3388, 8-15-2011; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-4-2: NEW PLUMBING; REPAIRS:
In all buildings hereafter erected, and in all existing buildings wherein any
plumbing is installed or wherein any sewer connected pipe shall be repaired or
changed, except for minor repairs, on the sewer side of the trap, the drain,
soil, downspout (when downspouts are within the building), waste pipes, or any
other pipe or pipes connected to any drain, soil or waste pipe, and all traps
shall be placed within buildings and exposed to view for ready inspection and
test, and shall remain so exposed until approved by an authorized
representative of the Public Works Department. In no case shall a trap be
inaccessible at any time. (Ord. 2358, 9-11-1989; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-4-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Remodeling Of Old Work: In remodeling work, the existing system of
soil, waste and vent pipes shall be changed to make them reasonably conform to
the provisions of this chapter and the plumbing code as provided for in section
4-1-7 of this title.
   B.   Sinks: Sinks servicing commercial food preparation areas shall be
equipped with a grease interceptor.
   C.   Overhead Plumbing Required: All new buildings with basements, floors,
rooms or occupancy areas below ground level at the building site shall have
overhead plumbing.
   D.   Plumbing Fixtures And Irrigation Controllers: Pursuant to 17 Illinois
Administrative Code 3730.307(c)(4) and subject to the Illinois Plumbing Code
(77 Ill. Adm. Code 890) and the Lawn Irrigation Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler
System Registration Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 892), be it hereby ordained that
all new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after the
effective date hereof shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense program), when such labeled
fixtures are available. (Ord. 3577, 11-23-2015; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 5
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Scope
4-5-3: Sign Permit Required
4-5-4: General Standards
4-5-5: Definitions Of Signs
4-5-6: Signs Permitted Without A Permit
4-5-7: Signs Specifically Prohibited In All Districts
4-5-8: District Regulations - C1
4-5-9: District Regulations - C2 And PRI
4-5-10: District Regulations - C3
4-5-11: District Regulations - ORIC
4-5-12: Temporary Signs
4-5-13: Nonconforming Signs
4-5-14: Construction Signs
4-5-15: Variations
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
The regulation of signs by this code is intended to promote and protect the
public health, safety and welfare by reducing the depreciation of property
values caused by signs that are incompatible with surrounding land uses; by
creating a more attractive economic and business climate within the commercial
and office areas of the village; by enhancing and protecting the physical and
aesthetic appearance of all areas of the village; and by reducing the
distractions, obstructions and hazards to pedestrian and auto traffic caused by
the indiscriminate placement and use of signs. (Ord. 3392, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord.
3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-2: SCOPE:
Any sign not expressly permitted by these regulations shall be prohibited. The
regulations of this chapter shall govern and control the erection, enlargement,
expansion, alteration, operation, maintenance, relocation and removal of all
signs within the village visible from any right-of-way, sidewalk or public or
private common open space. The regulations of this chapter relate to the
location of signs, by function and type, within zoning districts and are in
addition to provisions of this code applicable to the construction and
maintenance of signs. Regulations concerning the use and termination of
nonconforming signs are in section
4-5-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 3392, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-3: SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Sign Permit: Except as expressly provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter, no sign shall be erected, enlarged, expanded, altered,
relocated or maintained unless a sign permit evidencing the compliance of such
work with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of
this code shall have first been issued by the village in accordance with the
provisions of this section; provided, however, that routine sign maintenance
(totaling less than $500.00 annually) or changing of parts designed to be
changed shall not, standing alone, be considered an alteration of the sign
requiring the issuance of a sign permit by the village.
   B.   Additional Application Requirements: Every application for a sign
permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Plans and specifications showing the location on the lot or building
face and the method of construction, illumination and support of such sign;
      2.   A scale drawing showing sign faces, exposed surfaces and the
proposed design, accurately represented as to size, area, proportion and color;
      3.   Photographs of the right-of-way sides of the property in question,
showing all existing signs on the property;
      4.   A calculation of the total amount of sign area presently existing on
the property;
      5.   The applicant's attestation that the sum of the areas of the
requested sign or signs and the existing signs does not exceed the maximum
allowed by the provisions of this chapter;
      6.   Evidence of a valid village business license, when required, issued
for any business to which the sign is accessory;
      7.   A letter from a licensed architect, structural engineer or sign
manufacturer/installation company verifying the structural integrity, safety
and overall soundness of the sign design and installation; and
      8.   Such other information or materials as the village requests. (Ord.
3392, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-4: GENERAL STANDARDS:
The following general standards shall apply to all signs:
   A.   Sign: A sign is defined as any visual device or representation designed
or used for the purpose of communicating a message or identifying a product,
service, person, organization, business or event, with the use of words or
characters, visible from outside the premises on which such device is located.
   B.   Illumination:
      1.   Location and Design of Light Source: Whenever an external artificial
light source is used for a sign, such source shall be located, shielded and
directed so as not to be directly visible from any right-of-way or private
residence. No receptacle or device housing a permitted light source for a sign
shall protrude more than twelve inches from the face of the sign or building to
which it is attached; provided, however, that a receptacle or device housing a
permitted light source for a sign may be located more than twelve inches from
the face of the sign if such light source is ground mounted, locked in place
and cannot be redirected.
      2.   Level of Illumination: In no event shall the illumination of any
sign, resulting from any internal or external artificial light source, exceed
one hundred twenty foot- candles when measured with a standard light meter held
perpendicular to the sign face at a distance equal to the narrowest dimension
of such sign face. All artificial illumination shall be so designed, located,
shielded and directed as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon
adjacent property or rights-of-way.
      3.   Signs Adjacent To Residential Areas: Any illuminated sign located on
a lot abutting or across a right-of-way from, and visible from, any
residentially zoned area shall not be illuminated between the hours of eleven
o'clock P.M. and seven o'clock A.M. except that such sign may remain
illuminated during such time as the activity to which the sign pertains is open
for business so long as such sign is not a public or private nuisance.
      4.   Flashing Lights Prohibited: No flashing, blinking or intermittent
lights shall be permitted.
   C.   Electrical Elements: All wiring, fittings and materials used in the
construction, connection and operation of artificially illuminated signs shall
be in accordance with the provisions of this code. No metal sign illuminated by
any means requiring internal wiring and no electrical fixtures attached to any
sign shall be lower than nine feet from grade unless it is grounded by the use
of a grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors and is also grounded
by being bonded to a grounding electrode at the sign site.
   D.   Structural Elements: The construction and structural components of all
signs shall be in accordance with the standards and regulations of this code.
All permanent signs shall be constructed of fire-resistant materials and shall
be capable of withstanding wind pressures of at least thirty pounds per square
foot of surface area and of receiving dead loads based on the actual weight of
the structure.
   E.   Minimum Elevation of Certain Signs: The bottom of every awning, canopy,
marquee, wall and pylon sign shall be elevated at least eight feet above grade.
Whenever possible wall signs on the same facade shall maintain the same top and
bottom elevations above grade.
   F.   Obstruction of Accessways: No sign or sign structure shall obstruct
free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other required
accessway.
   G.   Obstruction of Window Surface: No sign shall project over, occupy or
obstruct any window surface required for light or ventilation by any applicable
provision of this code.
   H.   Traffic Safety:
      1.   Confusion with Traffic Signals: No sign shall be maintained at any
location where by reason of its position, size, shape, content, color or
illumination it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of or be
confused with, any traffic control sign, sign or device or where it may
interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
      2.   Obstruction of Sight Triangles Prohibited: No sign, nor any part of
a sign other than a supporting pole or brace no greater than eighteen inches in
width or diameter shall be located lower than eight feet from grade within the
area of any sight triangle as defined in this code.
   I.   Signs in Rights-of-Way: Except as provided in this subsection, no sign
except governmental signs authorized in this chapter shall be placed in or
extend into or over any public property or right-of-way.
   J.   Sign Identification: All signs shall be plainly marked with the name of
the person, firm or corporation hanging or erecting the sign and the sign
permit number.
   K.   Sign Maintenance: The owner of a sign and the owner of the premises on
which such sign is located shall be jointly and severally liable to maintain
such sign, including its illumination sources, in compliance with this code and
all applicable laws, in a safe and secure condition, and in a neat and orderly
condition and good working order at all times, and to prevent the development
of any rust, corrosion, rotting or other deterioration in the physical
appearance or safety of such sign. The premises around ground and pylon signs
shall be kept clean and free of all rubbish and weeds.
   L.   Sign Measurement:
      1.   Sign Area: Unless otherwise defined, sign area is determined by the
total area enclosed by a continuous perimeter along the edges of a sign,
including any sign area backing. The area of a sign composed of individually
affixed letters is determined by total area of the smallest geometric shape
enclosing the letters. A maximum of two geometric shapes may be utilized. The
calculation for a double-faced sign shall be the area of one face only.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2773.png]
4-5-4(L)(1): Sign Area Measurement
      2.   Sign Height: Sign height is determined by the total distance between
the highest point on a sign, including all supporting structures or bracing, to
the crown of the right-of-way directly opposite the sign or from the natural
grade level directly below the sign, whichever is higher.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2775.png]
4-5-4(L)(2): Sign Height Measurement
   M.   Signs on Lots with Multiple Users: Where more than one user occupies a
zoning lot, the owner of the lot shall be responsible for allocating permitted
signage among such users.
   N.   General Safety: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no
sign shall be located in any area or in any manner so as to create a nuisance
or a threat to the public safety and welfare.
   O.   Violations: Erecting or maintaining a sign in a manner inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter is unlawful, is declare a nuisance and
shall constitute a violation and petty offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each day any violation of any provision of this chapter
shall continue. Liability for the violation or offense shall be with the
applicant, should the violation or offense be related to a sign erected and
maintained pursuant to a permit issued by the village. Liability for the
violation or offense shall be with the owner of the property on which the sign
exists, should the violation or offense be related to a sign erected and
maintained without a permit issued by the village. Violations of this chapter
shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3392, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-5: DEFINITIONS OF SIGNS:
   A.   Sign Types:
      1.   Attention Getting Device: A sign designed to attract attention by
means of flashing or moving parts, bright color or light or movement of any
kind. Examples of such signs include pennants hung in series, whirligigs,
spinners, streamers, flashing lights, searchlights and balloons.
      2.   Drive-Through Sign: A sign that facilitates the operation of a
drive-through facility by aiding with the pick-up, drop off, ordering or
service of such a facility. It includes, but is not limited to, such signs as
changeable copy menu boards.
      3.   Governmental Signs: A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in
discharge of any governmental function or required by any law, ordinance or
governmental regulation.
      4.   Off Premises Sign: A sign located on a property other than the
property of the primary use or business to which the sign is associated.
      5.   On Site Traffic Directional Sign: A sign that assists in the
movement of vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic on a property.
      6.   Outline Lighting: An arrangement of incandescent lamps, light
emitting diodes (LEDs) or other electrically powered light sources, in a
string, rope, or similar configuration that calls attention to the outline or
decoration of a window or outlines other architectural features.
      7.   Awning, Canopy or Marquee Sign: A sign that is mounted or painted on
or attached to an awning, canopy or marquee that is otherwise permitted by this
chapter. No such sign shall project above, below or beyond the physical
dimensions of such awning, canopy or marquee.
      8.   Banner Sign: A temporary sign made of fabric or other similar
nonrigid material with no enclosing framework or electrical components that is
supported or anchored on two or more edges or at all four corners.
      9.   Box Sign: A sign that is self-enclosed in a typically square or
rectangular structure with or without internal lighting. A box sign can be
single or double sided.
      10.   Freestanding Sign: A sign on a frame, pole or other support
structure not attached to any building.
      11.   Monument Sign: A freestanding sign supported primarily by an
internal structural framework or integrated into landscaping or other solid
structural features other than support poles.
      12.   Moving or Animated Sign: Any sign or part of a sign that changes
physical position by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual
impression of such movement or rotation.
      13.   Paint on Wall Sign: A sign painted on the wall of a building or
structure with the exposed face of the sign in a place parallel to the face of
the wall.
      14.   Post Sign: A freestanding, moveable sign affixed to the ground with
one or no more than two wood stakes or poles with an arm from which the sign
hangs.
      15.   Portable Sign: A sign that is not permanently affixed to a
building, a structure or the ground, but not including customary identification
lettering on vehicles and advertising posters on buses and taxicabs.
      16.   Projecting Sign: A sign that is wholly or partially dependent upon
a building for support, that projects more than twelve inches from such
building, and whose face is perpendicular to the façade of the building upon
which it is attached.
      17.   Pylon Sign: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other
supports.
      18.   Reader Board/Changeable Copy/Video Sign: A sign or portion of a
sign designed to accommodate frequent message changes composed of characters,
or letters, or illustrations and that can be changed or rearranged, either
manually or electronically, without altering the face or surface of such sign.
      19.   Roof Sign: A sign that is mounted or painted on the roof of a
building, or that is wholly dependent upon a building for support and that
projects above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line
of a building with gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building
with a mansard roof.
      20.   Sandwich Board Sign: A movable sign not secured or attached to the
ground or surface upon which it is located.
      21.   Temporary Sign: A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth,
canvas, fabric, paper, plywood or other light material and intended to be
displayed for a short period of time.
      22.   Vehicle/Trailer Sign: A sign that is attached to or painted on a
vehicle that is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of
which is to attract attention to a product sold or business located on the
property, not including signs on service or delivery vehicles operating on
public streets.
      23.   Wall Sign: A sign fastened to the wall of a building or structure
in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms
the background surface of, the sign, that does not project more than twelve
inches from such building or structure, and whose face is parallel to the
façade of the building upon which it is attached.
      24.   Window Sign: A sign that is applied or attached to the exterior or
interior of a window or located within the interior of a structure so that its
message can be read from the exterior of the structure. Window signs shall
include window film, decals and clings which are more than fifty percent opaque
and / or contain sign copy.
      25.   Yard Sign: A freestanding, moveable sign on a wire or plastic
frame, wood stake or similar support. (Ord. 3392, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 3781, 9-
23-2019; Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-6: SIGNS PERMITTED WITHOUT A PERMIT:
Except as regulated by section
4-5-4 of this chapter and except as expressly prohibited in section
4-5-7 of this chapter, and notwithstanding any other contrary provisions of
this chapter, the following signs may, subject to the following limitations, be
erected and maintained in any district without obtaining a village sign permit.
   A.   Governmental signs: The size of any such sign shall not exceed the
requirements of the law, ordinance or regulation pursuant to which such sign is
erected.
   B.   On site traffic directional signs: Such signs shall be limited to wall
or freestanding signs of not more than six square feet in area; shall be, if a
freestanding sign, not more than four feet in height; and shall be illuminated
only as necessary to accomplish their intended purpose.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2777.png]
4-5-6(B): OnSite Directional Signs
   C.   Post signs. Such signs shall be limited to free standing signs mounted
in the ground with one, or no more than two, poles or stakes. Post signs shall
be a maximum of six square feet in area and six feet in height. Illumination of
such signs is prohibited. A maximum of one post sign may be displayed at any
time for a period not to exceed 180 days in a calendar year. Display period
extensions may be granted by the Zoning Administrator.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2779.png]
   D.   Sandwich board signs. Such signs shall be permitted in the C3 and PRI
Districts only and shall be limited to six square feet in area and three and
one half feet in height.
      1.   In the C3 District, such signs shall be located in a manner that:
preserves a continuous sidewalk width of a minimum of three feet; does not
block points of ingress or egress; is no more than one foot from the wall of
the building or unit of a building to which they are associated; and is no less
than three feet and no more than six feet from the building entrance of the
building or unit of a building to which they are associated. In the C3
District, such signs shall only be permitted during the operating hours of the
use to which they are associated.
      2.   In the PRI District, such signs shall be located in a manner that:
preserves a continuous sidewalk width of a minimum of three feet and does not
block points of ingress or egress. In the PRI District, such signs shall be
limited to special event wayfinding only, in order to provide for the safe and
efficient movement of people and vehicles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2781.png]
   E.   Yard signs. Such signs shall be limited to freestanding signs of not
more than six square feet in area and three feet in height; illumination of
such signs is prohibited. A maximum of four yard signs may be displayed
concurrently.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2783.png]
   F.   Window signs, temporary: The aggregate area of all such signs shall not
exceed thirty percent of the area of the window in which they are exhibited nor
block any window area required for light, ventilation or emergency exit by any
applicable code. Permitted temporary window sign area shall be considered in
aggregate with permitted permanent window sign area. Illumination of such signs
is prohibited. Temporary window signs shall include window film, decals and
clings which are more than fifty percent opaque and / or contain sign copy.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2785.png]
(Ord. 3392, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 3509, 2-24-2014; Ord. 3781, 9-23-2019; Ord.
3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-7: SIGNS SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS:
The following signs, as well as all other signs not expressly permitted by this
chapter, are prohibited and shall not be erected, maintained or, except as
provided for elsewhere in this chapter, permitted to continue in any district:
   A.   Attention getting devices.
   B.   Box signs.
   C.   Electronic reader board (except as approved as part of a planned
development).
   D.   Moving or animated signs.
   E.   Off premises signs (except as approved as part of a planned
development).
   F.   Outline lighting.
   G.   Portable signs.
   H.   Roof signs.
   I.   Temporary signs, except as expressly authorized in this chapter and
when approved in connection with temporary uses.
   J.   Vehicle/trailer signs.
   K.   Any sign on a tree, utility pole or light pole, whether on public or
private property (except municipal/government banners appropriately approved
and mounted).
   L.   Any sign on public property, except governmental signs and signs in the
PRI district authorized in this chapter.
   M.   Any sign painted directly on a wall, roof or fence.
   N.   Any ground sign (or portion of a sign) existing at a height of more
than fifteen feet above the grade of an adjacent residential district.
   O.   Construction signs in residential neighborhoods other than the sign or
permit placard required by the village. (Ord. 3446, 7-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3825,
11-30-2020)
4-5-8: DISTRICT REGULATIONS - C1:
Signs shall be permitted in the C1 district as follows (North Avenue):
   A.   Sign Types Permitted:
      1.   All signs permitted in any district without a village permit as
provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter.
      2.   Awning and canopy signs.
      3.   Monument signs.
      4.   Pylon signs.
      5.   Temporary signs, but only as authorized in section
4-5-6 of this chapter or for construction signs.
      6.   Wall signs.
      7.   Window signs.
      8.   Drive-through sign, but only as authorized as part of a planned
development.
   B.   Number of Signs Permitted Per Lot:
      1.   All signs permitted in section
4-5-6 of this chapter; plus
      2.   One wall sign per zoning lot frontage for buildings with a single
ground floor tenant or one wall sign per ground floor business tenant fronting
the public right of way; plus
      3.   One monument sign; or
      4.   One pylon sign.
   C.   Maximum Gross Surface Area of Signs Permitted:
      1.   Total Sign Area: Unless otherwise stated in this section, the total
area of all signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed one square foot per linear
foot of zoning lot frontage on a public street; provided, however, that signs
allowed without permits, shall not be counted toward the total allowance gross
sign surface area permitted on a zoning lot.
      2.   Individual Sign Area Limitations: The following individual sign area
limitations shall apply to all signs:
         a.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Not to exceed sixty square feet per sign
face. No sign belonging to an individual tenant of a multi-tenant building
shall cover more than five percent of the wall to which it is affixed.
         b.   Monument Signs: Not to exceed eighty square feet per sign face.
         c.   Pylon Signs: Not to exceed eighty square feet per sign face.
         d.   Wall Signs: Not to exceed eighty square feet per sign, or not to
exceed covering more than five percent of the wall to which it is affixed,
whichever is less.
         e.   Window Signs: Not to exceed twenty five percent of any individual
window frame. Permitted permanent window sign area shall be considered in
aggregate with permitted temporary window sign area.
      3.   Multi-Tenant Buildings: Regardless of total sign area allowed for a
multi-tenant building, each ground floor business tenant fronting the public
right of way shall be allowed at least one sign of the following types:
         a.   Awning and Canopy Signs: An awning or canopy sign belonging to an
individual tenant of a multi-tenant building shall cover up to, but not more
than five percent of the proportion of the awning or canopy area associated
with the subject tenant.
         b.   Wall Signs: A wall sign belonging to an individual tenant of a
multi-tenant building shall cover up to, but not more than five percent of the
proportion of the wall area associated with the subject tenant.
   D.   Maximum Height of Signs Permitted:
      1.   Signs Without Permits: As provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
      2.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Twenty feet; all awning and canopy signs
shall be at least eight feet above grade. Awning and canopy signs for
individual tenants of a multi-tenant building shall be at the same height on
the building to which they are affixed.
      3.   Monument Signs: A maximum height of ten feet.
      4.   Pylon Signs: A maximum height of twenty feet or the height of the
primary structure or service area canopy for gas stations, whichever is less.
      5.   Wall Signs: Thirty feet. Permitted only on the first floor of multi-
story buildings. No wall sign shall cover any architectural features of the
building to which it is attached (architectural features shall include, but not
be limited to: pediment, cornice, belt course, pier, windows, pilaster, roof,
decorative stone or tile inlay, kick plate/bulkhead, raised or colored brick
pattern and corbel). Wall signs for individual tenants of a multi-tenant
building shall be at the same height on the building to which they are affixed.
   E.   Minimum Setback Required:
      1.   Signs Without Permits: As provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
      2.   Monument Signs: Three feet from "right of way" and six feet from all
other lot lines. All monument signs shall be located outside of the "sight
triangles" and shall be maintained.
      3.   Pylon Signs: Three feet from "right of way" and six feet from all
other lot lines. All pylon signs shall be located outside of the "sight
triangles" and shall be maintained.
   F.   Illumination:
      1.   Signs Without Permits: Signs permitted pursuant to section
4-5-6 of this chapter shall be illuminated only as permitted in that section.
      2.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Can only be illuminated using a direct
light source. Direct illumination shall be aimed at the exterior of the awning/
canopy.
      3.   Monument Signs: Monument signs shall be backlit, directly lit or
internally illuminated. All letters must be individually affixed. Any direct
light source shall be concealed from view from the right of way. The sign area
backing shall not be internally illuminated.
      4.   Pylon Signs: Pylon signs shall be internally illuminated.
      5.   Wall Signs: Letters shall be individually affixed to walls of a
building or utilize a mounting system which gives the appearance of
individually affixed letters and be either internally illuminated or backlit.
      6.   Window Signs: Illumination of window signs shall be prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2787.png]
4-5-8: Awning Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2789.png]
4-5-8: Canopy Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2791.png]
4-5-8: Monument Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2793.png]
4-5-8: Pylon Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2795.png]
4-5-8: Wall Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2797.png]
4-5-8: Window Signs
(Ord. 3392, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-9: DISTRICT REGULATIONS - C2 AND PRI:
Signs shall be permitted in the C2 and PRI districts as follows:
   A.   Sign Types Permitted:
      1.   All signs permitted in any district without a village permit as
provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter.
      2.   Awning and canopy signs.
      3.   Monument signs.
      4.   Temporary signs, but only as authorized in section
4-5-6 of this chapter or for construction signs.
      5.   Wall signs.
      6.   Window signs.
      7.   Drive-through sign, but only as authorized as part of a planned
development.
   B.   Number of Signs Permitted Per Lot:
      1.   All signs permitted in section
4-5-6 of this chapter; plus
      2.   One wall sign per zoning lot frontage for buildings with a single
ground floor tenant or one wall sign per ground floor business tenant fronting
the public right of way; plus
      3.   One monument sign.
   C.   Maximum Gross Surface Area of Signs Permitted:
      1.   Total Sign Area: Unless otherwise stated in this section, the total
area of all signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed one square foot per linear
foot of zoning lot frontage on a public street; provided, however, that signs
allowed without permits, shall not be counted toward the total allowance gross
sign surface area permitted on a zoning lot.
      2.   Individual Sign Area Limitations: The following individual sign area
limitations shall apply to all signs:
         a.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Not to exceed sixty (60) square feet per
sign face. No sign belonging to an individual tenant of a multi-tenant building
shall cover more than five percent of the wall to which it is affixed.
         b.   Monument Signs: Not to exceed eighty (80) square feet per sign
face.
         c.   Wall Signs: Not to exceed sixty (60) square feet per sign or not
to exceed covering more than five percent of the wall to which it is affixed,
whichever is less.
         d.   Window Signs: Not to exceed twenty five percent of any individual
window frame. Permitted permanent window sign area shall be considered in
aggregate with permitted temporary window sign area.
      3.   Multi-Tenant Buildings: Regardless of total sign area allowed for a
multi-tenant building, each ground floor business tenant fronting the public
right of way shall be allowed at least one sign of the following types:
         a.   Awning and Canopy Signs: A sign belonging to an individual tenant
of a multi-tenant building shall cover up to, but not more than five percent of
the proportion of the awning or canopy area associated with the subject tenant.
         b.   Wall Signs: A sign belonging to an individual tenant of a multi-
tenant building shall cover up to, but not more than five percent of the
proportion of the wall area associated with the subject tenant.
   D.   Maximum Height of Signs Permitted:
      1.   Signs Without Permits: As provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
      2.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Twenty feet; all awning and canopy signs
shall be at least eight feet above grade. Awning and canopy signs for
individual tenants of a multi-tenant building shall be at the same height on
the building to which they are affixed.
      3.   Monument Signs: A maximum height of ten (10) feet.
      4.   Wall Signs: Thirty feet. Permitted only on the first floor of multi-
story buildings. No wall sign shall cover any architectural features of the
building to which it is attached (architectural features shall include, but not
be limited to: pediment, cornice, belt course, pier, windows, pilaster, roof,
decorative stone or tile inlay, kick plate/bulkhead, raised or colored brick
pattern and corbel). Wall signs for individual tenants of a multi-tenant
building shall be at the same height on the building to which they are affixed.
   E.   Minimum Setback Required:
      1.   Signs Without Permits: As provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
      2.   Monument Signs: Three feet from "right of way" and five (5) feet
from all other lot lines. All monument signs shall be located outside of the
"sight triangles".
   F.   Illumination:
      1.   Signs Without Permits: Signs permitted pursuant to section
4-5-6 of this chapter shall be illuminated only as permitted in that section.
      2.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Can only be illuminated using a direct
light source. Direct illumination shall be aimed at the exterior of the awning/
canopy.
      3.   Monument Signs: Monument signs shall be backlit, directly lit or
internally illuminated. All letters must be individually affixed. Any direct
light source shall be concealed from view from the right of way. The sign area
backing shall not be internally illuminated.
      4.   Wall Signs: Letters shall be individually affixed to walls of a
building or utilize a mounting system which gives the appearance of
individually affixed letters and be either internally illuminated or backlit.
      5.   Window Signs: Illumination of window signs shall be prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2799.png]
4-5-9: Awning Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2801.png]
4-5-9: Canopy Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2803.png]
4-5-9: Monument Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2805.png]
4-5-9: Wall Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2807.png]
(Ord. 3392, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 3817, 7-13-2020; Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-10: DISTRICT REGULATIONS - C3:
Signs shall be permitted in the C3 district as follows (Lake Street Village
Center Area):
   A.   Sign Types Permitted:
      1.   All signs permitted in any district without a village permit as
provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter.
      2.   Awning and canopy signs.
      3.   Projecting signs.
      4.   Temporary signs, but only as authorized in section
4-5-6 of this chapter or for construction signs.
      5.   Wall signs.
      6.   Window signs.
      7.   Drive-through sign, but only as authorized as part of a planned
development.
   B.   Number of Signs Permitted Per Lot:
      1.   All signs permitted in section
4-5-6 of this chapter; plus
      2.   One wall sign per zoning lot frontage for buildings with a single
ground floor tenant or one wall sign per ground floor business tenant fronting
the public right of way.
      3.   One projecting sign per zoning lot frontage for buildings with a
single ground floor tenant or one projecting sign per ground floor business
tenant fronting the public right of way.
   C.   Maximum Gross Surface Area of Signs Permitted:
      1.   Total Sign Area: Unless otherwise stated in this section, the total
area of all signs on a zoning lot shall not exceed one square foot per linear
foot of zoning lot frontage on a public street; provided, however, that signs
allowed without permits, shall not be counted toward the total allowance gross
sign surface area permitted on a zoning lot.
      2.   Individual Sign Area Limitations: The following individual sign area
limitations shall apply to all signs:
         a.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Not to exceed sixty square feet per sign
face. No sign belonging to an individual tenant of a multi-tenant building
shall cover more than five percent of the wall to which it is affixed.
         b.   Projecting Signs: Not to exceed four- and one-half square feet
per sign face.
         c.   Wall Signs: Not to exceed sixty square feet per sign, or not to
exceed covering more than five percent of the wall to which it is affixed,
whichever is less.
         d.   Window Signs: Not to exceed twenty five percent of any individual
window frame. Permitted permanent window sign area shall be considered in
aggregate with permitted temporary window sign area.
      3.   Multi-Tenant Buildings: Regardless of total sign area allowed for a
multi-tenant building, each ground floor business tenant fronting the public
right of way shall be allowed at least one sign of the following types:
         a.   Awning and Canopy Signs: A sign belonging to an individual tenant
of a multi-tenant building shall cover up to, but not more than five percent of
the proportion of the awning or canopy area associated with the subject tenant.
         b.   Wall Signs: A sign belonging to an individual tenant of a multi-
tenant building shall cover up to, but not more than five percent of the
proportion of the wall area associated with the subject tenant.
   D.   Maximum Height of Signs Permitted:
      1.   Signs Without Permits: As provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
      2.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Twenty feet; all awning and canopy signs
shall be at least eight feet above grade. Awning and canopy signs for
individual tenants of a multi-tenant building shall be at the same height on
the building to which they are affixed.
      3.   Projecting signs: A projecting sign shall not extend above the
roofline of the building to which it is attached, or a maximum of twelve (12)
feet. A minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance shall be maintained from the
lower edge of the sign face to grade.
      4.   Wall Signs: Thirty feet. Permitted only on the first floor of multi-
story buildings. No wall sign shall cover any architectural features of the
building to which it is attached (architectural features shall include, but not
be limited to: pediment, cornice, belt course, pier, windows, pilaster, roof,
decorative stone or tile inlay, kick plate/bulkhead, raised or colored brick
pattern and corbel). Wall signs for individual tenants of a multi-tenant
building shall be at the same height on the building to which they are affixed.
Wall signs for individual tenants of a multi-tenant building shall be of the
same type/font and overall design and color.
   E.   Minimum Setback Required:
      1.   Signs Without Permits: As provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
      2.   Projecting Signs: Projecting signs shall not horizontally project
more than four (4) feet beyond that portion of the building or structure to
which it is attached.
   F.   Illumination:
      1.   Signs Without Permits: Signs permitted pursuant to section
4-5-6 of this chapter shall be illuminated only as permitted in that section.
      2.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Can only be illuminated using a direct
light source. Direct illumination shall be aimed at the exterior of the awning/
canopy.
      3.   Wall Signs: Letters shall be individually affixed to walls of a
building or utilize a mounting system which gives the appearance of
individually affixed letters and be either internally illuminated or backlit.
      4.   Window Signs: Illumination of window signs shall be prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2809.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2811.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2813.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2815.png]
4-5-10: Wall Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2817.png]
(Ord. 3392, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020; Ord. 3961, 7-14-2025)
4-5-11: DISTRICT REGULATIONS - ORIC:
Signs shall be permitted in the ORIC district as follows:
   A.   Sign Types Permitted:
      1.   All signs permitted in any district without a village permit as
provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter.
      2.   Awning and canopy signs.
      3.   Monument signs.
      4.   Projecting signs, but only as authorized as part of a planned
development.
      5.   Temporary signs, but only as authorized in section
4-5-6 of this chapter or for construction signs.
      6.   Wall signs.
      7.   Drive-through sign, but only as authorized as part of a planned
development.
   B.   Number of Signs Permitted Per Lot:
      1.   All signs permitted in section
4-5-6 of this chapter; plus
      2.   One wall sign per zoning lot frontage for buildings with a single
ground floor tenant, or one wall sign per ground floor business tenant fronting
the public right of way; plus
      3.   One monument sign per street frontage; plus
      4.   One on site directory sign per zoning lot frontage.
   C.   Maximum Gross Surface Area of Signs Permitted:
      1.   Total Sign Area: The total area of all signs on a zoning lot shall
not exceed one square foot per linear foot of zoning lot frontage on a public
street; provided, however, that signs allowed without permits, shall not be
counted toward the total allowance gross sign surface area permitted on a
zoning lot.
      2.   Individual Sign Area Limitations: The following individual sign area
limitations shall apply to all signs:
         a.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Not to exceed sixty square feet per sign
face. No sign belonging to an individual tenant of a multi-tenant building
shall cover more than five percent of the wall to which it is affixed.
         b.   Monument Signs: Not to exceed one hundred square feet per sign
face, nor more than two hundred square feet total.
         c.   Wall Signs: Not to exceed one hundred square feet per sign, or
not to exceed covering more than five percent of the wall to which it is
affixed, whichever is less.
   D.   Maximum Height of Signs Permitted:
      1.   Signs without Permits: As provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
      2.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Twenty feet; all awning and canopy signs
shall be at least eight feet above grade. Awning and canopy signs for
individual tenants of a multi-tenant building shall be at the same height on
the building to which they are affixed.
      3.   Monument Signs: A maximum height of ten feet.
      4.   Wall Signs: Thirty feet. Wall signs for individual tenants of a
multi-tenant building shall be at the same height on the building to which they
are affixed. No wall sign shall cover any architectural features of the
building to which it is attached (architectural features shall include, but not
be limited to: pediment, cornice, belt course, pier, windows, pilaster, roof,
decorative stone or tile inlay, kick plate/bulkhead, raised or colored brick
pattern and corbel).
   E.   Minimum Setback Required:
      1.   Signs Without Permits: As provided in section
4-5-6 of this chapter for signs permitted pursuant to that section.
      2.   Monument Signs: Three feet from "right of way" and six feet from all
other lot lines. All monument signs shall be located outside of the "sight
triangles".
   F.   Illumination:
      1.   Signs Without Permits: Signs permitted pursuant to section
4-5-6 of this chapter shall be illuminated only as permitted in that section.
      2.   Awning and Canopy Signs: Shall be illuminated using a direct light
source. Direct illumination shall be aimed at the exterior of the awning/
canopy.
      3.   Monument Signs: Monument signs shall be backlit, directly lit or
internally illuminated. All letters must be individually affixed. Any direct
light source shall be concealed from view from the right of way. The sign area
backing shall not be internally illuminated.
      4.   Wall Signs: Letters shall be individually affixed to walls of a
building or utilize a mounting system which gives the appearance of
individually affixed letters and be either internally illuminated or backlit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2819.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2821.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2823.png]
   4-5-11: Monument Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2825.png]
(Ord. 3392, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-12: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   A "temporary sign" is any sign in any nonresidential district that is
not designed or intended to be placed permanently.
   B.   Any owner or tenant desiring to erect or maintain a temporary sign
shall submit a temporary sign permit application. An application may only be
made by the owner or tenant of the property on which the temporary sign will be
erected and maintained. A separate application must be submitted for each
temporary sign an owner or tenant desires to erect and maintain. The applicant
shall be responsible for the installation, maintenance and removal of a
temporary sign pursuant to a permit issued by the village.
   C.   No temporary sign shall be erected or maintained without a permit. No
temporary sign shall be maintained beyond the date and time set forth in the
permit permitting the temporary sign to be erected and maintained.
   D.   The permit fee for temporary signs shall be one hundred dollars per
application.
   E.   Temporary signs shall not exceed thirty-two square feet in area.
   F.   Only one temporary sign shall be allowed for each temporary sign permit
application. No applicant may display a temporary sign more than three times a
year. A separate permit application is required for each temporary sign
request.
   G.   Temporary signs are limited to a display duration not to exceed ninety
calendar days.
   H.   All temporary signs must remain in good condition throughout the
display period. The applicant is responsible for maintaining the temporary
sign. Corrective action must be taken immediately by the applicant if there
exists any problems or defects with the appearance, condition or maintenance of
the sign and/or support hardware. Temporary signs must be constructed of
durable, weather resistant materials (canvas, nylon, etc.) with sufficient
strength and resilience to maintain an acceptable appearance for the duration
of its display and shall be securely affixed on all sides/corners.
   I.   No temporary sign may be located higher than the roofline of the
building to which it is attached or, if attached to a permanent sign, higher
than the sign. There must be no encroachment of a temporary sign into the
public right of way.
   J.   Temporary signs may not block any public signs or public infrastructure
and shall be placed not less than eight feet from the nearest edge of a right
of way or property line.
   K.   River Forest units of government may install temporary streetlight
banners on village owned streetlights. Said banners shall be limited to a
display not to exceed one hundred eighty days and the display may be extended
for an additional one hundred eighty days with approval of the village. One
temporary sign permit application shall be required for each street or parking
lot at which the temporary streetlight banners will be installed. All other
temporary sign regulations listed in this section shall apply to temporary
streetlight banners. (Ord. 3484, 4-22-2013; amd. Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-13: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Maintenance: Legal nonconforming signs, meaning a nonconforming sign
lawfully erected which has since become nonconforming, may be maintained
subject to the following regulations:
      1.   No nonconforming sign shall be expanded or altered to prolong the
life of the sign.
      2.   No nonconforming sign structure shall be changed to another
nonconforming sign structure except that the copy, message or graphic of a
nonconforming sign may be changed.
      3.   The nonstructural component of a multi-tenant sign on which the
copy, message or graphic is displayed, such as a plastic or metal panel or
insert, may be replaced to accommodate a change in tenant.
      4.   If the copy, message or graphic of a nonconforming sign cannot be
changed without altering a structural component, then such change is not
permitted. Structural components include any part of a sign attached directly
to the ground or to a building or structure, any part of the supporting
structure of a sign without which the sign fails to maintain its structural
integrity, and any part of a sign's electrical or lighting equipment.
      5.   No nonconforming sign shall be relocated in whole or in part unless,
when relocated, it conforms to all of the provisions of this chapter.
      6.   If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed to the extent of
fifty percent of its replacement value, the sign must be repaired or replaced
in conformance with all provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Abatement, Abandonment And Discontinuance: If a legal nonconforming
sign is discontinued or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty days, the
rights to legal nonconforming status shall have expired and any subsequent use
of such a sign shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in
which such a sign is located. The period of such discontinuance caused by
government action, acts of God or other acts without any contributing fault by
the user, shall not be included in calculating the length of discontinuance for
this section.
   C.   Removal: Illegal nonconforming signs, meaning a nonconforming sign
unlawfully erected or maintained, shall be removed. (Ord. 3392, 9-12-2011; amd.
Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-14: CONSTRUCTION SIGNS:
   A.   Construction Sign: Such signs shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square
feet in surface area in a commercial district or approved planned development
area. The limit for surface area is applicable on each street frontage.
Such signs are permitted as standalone signs or mounted on construction fences
in a commercial district, subject to the following:
      1.   Temporary construction fence wrap signs require approval by the
Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may impose conditions on
approval of temporary construction fence wrap signs.
      2.   Copy, message or graphics of a temporary construction fence wrap
signs is limited to twenty-five percent (25%) of the surface area of the
construction fence.
      3.   Temporary construction fence wrap signs are limited to a display of
the lesser of eighteen (18) months, or such shorter time period as the Zoning
Administrator allows, after initial approval by the Zoning Administrator for
the sign ("initial display period"). If construction of an applicable building
begins within the initial display period, a sign may continue to be displayed
for an additional nine (9) months after the expiration of the initial display
period. If construction does not commence within the initial display period,
the sign shall be removed within seven (7) calendar days after the expiration
of the initial display period.
      4.   The wrap material shall be of a durable, weather resistant material
like canvas, nylon or vinyl coated fabric.
      5.   Temporary construction fence wrap signs shall not be displayed at
the same time as a construction sign, if the construction wrap sign contains
any copy, message or graphics.
   B.   Permit Fee: The cost of the permit fee shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) per application. (Ord. 3781, 9-23-2019; amd. Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020)
4-5-15: VARIATIONS:
   A.   The Zoning Administrator may issue the following minor variations from
the requirements of this chapter following the procedures for minor variations
in section
10-5-4 of this code to the extent practicable:
      1.   Up to a one percent (1%) increase in individual sign area
limitations for all permanent sign types except for wall signs.
      2.   An increase in the area of a wall sign in excess of the maximum
square footage of wall sign area permitted in the district in which the sign
shall be located, but less than or equal to five percent (5%) of the wall to
which the sign shall be affixed.
   B.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have jurisdiction to hold public
hearings and make recommendations to the Village President and Board of
Trustees for the following major variations from the requirements of this
chapter, pursuant to its powers granted in section
10-5-4 of this code, and following the procedures therein to the extent
practicable, and the Village President and Board of Trustees may thereafter
approve such major variations, in their discretion:
      1.   An increase greater than one percent (1%) in individual sign area
limitations for all sign types with the exception of wall signs.
      2.   An increase in the area of a wall sign in excess of the maximum
square footage of wall sign area permitted in the district in which the sign
shall be located and in excess of five percent (5%) of the wall to which the
sign shall be affixed.
      3.   An increase in the total area of all signs permitted on a zoning
lot.
   C.   A planned development may include relief from any of the requirements
of this chapter. (Ord. 3817, 7-13-2020; amd. Ord. 3825, 11-30-2020)
CHAPTER 6
AWNINGS AND CANOPIES
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Permit Required
4-6-3: Permit Fees
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
AWNING: Any flexible awning which extends over any public sidewalk, street,
alley or other public place, but which is so constructed that it can be rolled
up or otherwise withdrawn so that it does not extend over such public place.
CANOPY: Any rigid canopy, marquee or other roof like structure, other than an
awning, which extends over any public sidewalk, street, alley or other public
place. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-6-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No awning or canopy shall be erected until a permit has been issued by the
Building Official. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by plans
and specifications, which shall be in accord with the requirements of the ICC
International Building Code, 2018 Edition. (Ord. 2236, 1-26-1987; amd. Ord.
3873, 9-12-2022)
4-6-3: PERMIT FEES:
Fees for permits required by this Chapter are as follows:
   A.   Awnings: Before any permit shall be issued there shall be paid to the
village a permit fee of one hundred dollars.
   B.   Canopies: Before any permit shall be issued there shall be paid to the
village a permit fee of one hundred dollars.
   C.   Failure To Maintain: If the owner fails to maintain the awning or
canopy in good condition and repair, the Building Official may proceed to
repair said awning or canopy and assess the cost thereof against the owner, and
the amount of such cost shall be paid by such owner to the village. (Ord. 2668,
2-12-1996; amd. Ord. 3278, 4-27-2009; Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 7
HEATING REQUIREMENTS IN BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Apartment Houses
4-7-2: Offices, Factories and Workshops
4-7-1: APARTMENT HOUSES:
It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling any apartment house,
in which the heat is furnished from a heating plant used in common for the
purpose of heating the various rooms and apartments therein and in which the
heating plant is under the control or supervision of such owner or person in
control of such building, to furnish heat to such rooms and apartments from
October 1 of each year to May 1 of the succeeding year, so that the occupants
thereof may secure, without such undue restrictions of ventilation as to
interfere with proper sanitary conditions, a minimum temperature of sixty
degrees Fahrenheit at six thirty o'clock A.M., sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit
at seven thirty o'clock A.M., and thereafter until ten thirty o'clock P.M.,
averaged throughout the apartment. Written notice of complaint concerning lack
of heat in such room or apartment shall first be given to the Building Official
before any person shall be deemed to have violated this Section. For the
purpose of determining whether or not the temperature in any such room or
apartment is in accordance with the provisions of this Section, temperature
readings shall be made by the Village by means of a standard Fahrenheit
thermometer, in not less than two separate rooms in such apartment, or if the
apartment consists of only one room, then in two opposite parts of the room as
near the extremes as practicable, such thermometer to be placed at a point not
less than four feet nor more than six feet above the floor of any such room or
apartment and at least four feet away from any door or window leading to the
outer air. Failure to furnish the heat required under the terms of this Section
shall not constitute an offense where it is due to a breakdown of the heating
plant, if diligence is used to have such plant repaired (unless such breakdown
has been caused by the violation of an ordinance relating to the operation of
heating plants), nor where it is due to strikes, to general shortage of fuel,
nor to any act of the tenant who makes the complaint nor to any cause beyond
the owner's control. (amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-7-2: OFFICES, FACTORIES AND WORK SHOPS:
It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the heating plant
which furnishes heat to any office, factory or workshop to maintain a
temperature within such office, factory or workshop of not less than sixty five
degrees Fahrenheit without such undue restriction of ventilation as to
interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein; provided, however, that this
requirement shall not apply to any office, factory or workshop where the
business conducted therein is of such a nature that a higher or lower
temperature than sixty five degrees Fahrenheit is necessary or expedient for
the work, trade, occupation or manufacturing processes of the business so
conducted therein. (amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 8
FENCES
SECTION:
4-8-1: Permit To Construct Required
4-8-2: Definitions
4-8-3: Fence Construction Types
4-8-4: Fence Regulations
4-8-5: Zoning Board Of Appeals
4-8-1: PERMIT TO CONSTRUCT REQUIRED:
A fence permit shall be required for the construction of a new fence and for
any substantial changes of any existing fence. Application for a fence permit
shall include the type of fence, the height, width and length, and a sketch
showing the location of the fence on the lot. The fee for said permit shall be
one hundred dollars, payable in advance and a permit, when issued, shall be
visibly displayed on the premises of the lot during the period of time of the
construction or change of the fence and in no event for less than ten days.
Every person found guilty of violating this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars nor
more than five hundred dollars for each offense. (Ord. 3479, 4-8-2013; amd.
Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
FABRICATED METAL FENCE: A fence assembled from discrete metal pieces including
bars, channels, rods, pipes, tubes, cast or fabricated scrollwork and
ornaments. No part of the fabricated metal fence shall include wire fabric or
mesh, whether it is of woven or welded construction. The fabricated metal fence
may be constructed of iron, steel or aluminum. The fabricated metal fence shall
be finished or painted to prevent corrosion, and that finish shall be
maintained throughout the duration of the fence installation. Fabricated metal
fences shall meet the structural requirements of the building code adopted in
Chapter 1 of this Title 4.
ORNAMENTAL PILLARS: Shall include any construction of stone, masonry, or
precast concrete, either freestanding or used to support fence panels.
Constructions supporting a horizontal structure shall not be considered to be
an ornamental pillar. When included in a fence, wherein the area of the fence
open to view is regulated, the area of the pier shall not be counted against
the area open to view if the cumulative length of the piers is equal to or less
than ten percent of the length of the run of the fence in any run. Ornamental
pillars, and any decorative extensions except lighting fixtures, shall comply
with the maximum height for the type of fence it is part of. Ornamental pillars
and their foundations shall meet the structural requirements of the building
code adopted in Chapter 1 of this Title 4, and shall be reinforced and anchored
to prevent overturning.
YARD: The open space between a building and any lot line, further defined as
follows:
   Yard, Front: The yard facing the public street, including the area between
the side lot lines and from the front line of the lot and the front line of the
building. On through lots, front yards face both streets. On corner lots, the
front yard faces on the lot's primary street; such street being the street
which has the greatest distance between the two cross streets forming the block
frontage.
   Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between the
side lines of the building and between the rear lot line and the rear of the
building. On both interior lots and corner lots, the rear yard shall in all
cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
   Yard, Secondary Front: On a corner lot, the secondary front yard faces the
lot's secondary street. The secondary front yard includes the area from the lot
line abutting the secondary street to the face of the building and from the
front line of the building (boundary of the front yard) to the rear lot line.
   Yard, Side: A yard between the building and the side lot line and extending
from the front line of the building (boundary of the front yard) to the rear
lot line. (Ord. 3479, 4-8-2013; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-8-3: FENCE CONSTRUCTION TYPES:
The following provisions shall control the classification of fences as to the
type of construction, area open for view, and height:
   A.   Type 1 Fence: A type 1 fence shall be of construction meeting the
definition of a "fabricated metal fence", as defined in section
4-8-2 of this Chapter, being not less than fifty percent open to view, and not
exceeding a height of four feet above the established grade.
   B.   Type 2 Fence: A type 2 fence shall be of construction meeting the
definition of a "fabricated metal fence", as defined in section
4-8-2 of this Chapter, being not less than eighty percent open to view, and not
exceeding a height of six feet above the established grade.
   C.   Type 3 Fence: A type 3 fence shall be of any approved type of fence
construction, except that chainlink fencing is not permitted to be installed on
any front yard or secondary front yard in any zoning district. The maximum
height of a type 3 fence shall be seven feet above the established grade;
provided, however, that the portion of a fence which is higher than six feet
above the established grade shall have an area open for view of at least fifty
percent. That portion of the fence below six feet above the established grade
shall not be regulated in regard to the area open to view.
   D.   Type 4 Fence: A type 4 fence shall be of any approved type of fence
construction, shall not exceed a height of eight feet above the established
grade, and is not regulated in regard to the area open to view. (Ord. 3479, 4-
8-2013; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-8-4: FENCE REGULATIONS:
This section refers to zoning districts as defined in title 10 of this Code.
Yards shall be as defined in section
4-8-2 of this chapter. Additional requirements for height and enclosure may be
required by the building code adopted in chapter 1 of this title 4, where a
fence is used to provide specific functions required by the building code.
Exhibits are hereby incorporated to depict the following:
   A.   Zoning Districts C1, C2, C3 Or ORIC:
      1.   A type 1 fence, as provided in section
4-8-3 of this chapter, shall be permitted to be constructed in any front yard
or secondary front yard. (See Exhibit B of this section.)
      2.   A type 3 fence, as provided in section
4-8-3 of this chapter, shall be permitted to be constructed in any side yard or
rear yard. (See Exhibit B of this section.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2897.png]
 
   B.   Zoning Districts C1, C2, C3, ORIC Or PRI: For a lot located in a C1,
C2, C3, PRI or ORIC district and adjacent to a lot located in an R1, R2, R3 or
R4 district, a type 4 fence as provided in section
4-8-3 of this chapter, shall be permitted to be constructed in any side yard or
rear yard along any property line that abuts the residential use, at the option
of the lot owner of the property in the R1, R2, R3 and R4 districts. (See
Exhibit G of this section.)
   C.   Zoning Districts R1, R2, R3, R4 Or PRI:
      1.   A type 2 fence, as provided in section
4-8-3 of this chapter, shall be permitted to be constructed in any front yard
or secondary front yard. (See Exhibit C of this section.)
      2.   A type 3 fence, as provided in section
4-8-3 of this chapter, shall be permitted to be constructed in any side yard or
rear yard. (See Exhibit C of this section.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2895.png]
 
      3.   On a corner lot which is located in an R1, R2, R3, R4 or PRI
district and which rears upon another corner lot, a type 3 fence, as provided
in section
4-8-3 of this chapter, is permitted to be constructed on the secondary front
yard between the rear lot line and rear building line of the residence. (See
Exhibit D of this section.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2893.png]
 
      4.   On a corner lot which is located in an R1, R2, R3, R4 or PRI
district and which rears upon an interior lot, a type 3 fence, as provided in
section
4-8-3 of this chapter, is permitted to be constructed on the secondary front
yard between the rear lot line and rear building line of the residence,
provided that the setback of such fence be equal or greater to the lesser of
the front yard setbacks of the buildings located on said corner lot or adjacent
interior lot. (See Exhibit E of this section.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2891.png]
 
      5.   On a corner lot which is located in an R1, R2, R3, R4 or PRI
district and which rears upon an alley, a type 3 fence, as provided in section
4-8-3 of this chapter, is permitted to be constructed on the secondary front
yard between the rear lot line and rear building line of the residence; except
that no fence, ornamental pillar, or other permanent obstruction shall be
placed on the street side of a line, drawn from the two points on the lot lines
measured ten feet from the intersection of the lot line abutting the street and
the lot line abutting the alley. (See Exhibit F of this section.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2889.png]
 
      6.   For a lot located in an R1, R2, R3 or R4 district and adjacent to a
lot located in a C1, C2, C3, PRI or ORIC district, a type 4 fence as provided
in section
4-8-3 of this chapter, shall be permitted to be constructed in any side yard or
rear yard along any property line that abuts the nonresidential use, at the
option of the lot owner of the property in the R1, R2, R3 and R4 districts.
(See Exhibit G of this section.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2887.png]
 
(Ord. 3479, 4-8-2013; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-8-5: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the jurisdiction to hold public hearings
and offer recommendations to the Board of Trustees concerning variations of
this chapter pursuant to its powers granted by section
10-5-4 of this Code. (Ord. 3479, 4-8-2013; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 9
[RESERVED]
CHAPTER 10
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-10-1: Dangerous Building Defined
4-10-2: Nuisance Declared
4-10-3: Statement of Condition; Notice to Abate
4-10-4: Failure to Comply With Notice
4-10-1: DANGEROUS BUILDING DEFINED:
The term "dangerous building" as used in this Chapter is hereby defined to mean
and include:
   A.   Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which is
dangerous to the public health because of its construction or condition, or
which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or cause injury to the health
of the occupants of it or neighboring structures.
   B.   Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, because of
faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard.
   C.   Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, by reason
of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any
part of such structure.
   D.   Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, because of
lack of doors or windows, is available to and frequented by malefactors or
disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of such structure. (amd. Ord.
3873, 9-12-2022)
4-10-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any dangerous building or other man-made structure, as defined in section
4-10-1 hereof, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to
maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous building or other man-made
structure in the Village. It shall also be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
person in custody of any dangerous building or other man-made structure to
permit the same to remain in a dangerous condition, or to occupy such building
or permit it to be occupied while it is or remains in a dangerous condition.
(amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-10-3: STATEMENT OF CONDITION; NOTICE TO ABATE:
Whenever the Building Official, or any other officer of the Village shall be of
the opinion that any building in the Village is a dangerous building, he shall
file a written statement to that effect with the Director of Public Works and
Development Services. The Director of Public Works and Development Services
shall thereupon cause written notice to be served upon the owner thereof, and
upon the occupants thereof, if any, by registered or certified mail or by
personal service. Such notice shall state that the building has been declared
to be in a dangerous condition, that such dangerous condition must be removed
or remedied by repairing or altering the building, or by demolishing it, and
that the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice may be in the
following form:
"To (owner-occupant) of the premises known and described as              .
You are hereby notified that (describe building) on the premises above
described has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after
inspection by           .
The causes for this decision are (here insert the facts as to the dangerous
condition).
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the
Village will proceed to do so."
If the person receiving such notice has not complied therewith within ten days
from the time that this notice is served upon such person by personal service
or by registered mail, the Building Official may proceed to remedy the
condition or demolish the dangerous building. (amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-10-4: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE:
   A.   If the Village shall determine, upon due investigation, that any
building or structure in the Village fails to conform to the minimum standards
of health and safety required by this Code and the owner or owners of such
building or structure shall fail, after due notice, to cause such property so
to conform, the Village is hereby authorized to make application to any court
of competent jurisdiction for an injunction requiring compliance with the
provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the Village, and for such other
order as the court may deem necessary or appropriate to secure such compliance
pursuant to the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-2.
   B.   The Village is hereby authorized to demolish, repair or enclose, or
cause the demolition, repair or enclosure of, dangerous and unsafe buildings or
uncompleted and abandoned buildings in the Village. To implement said action,
the Village is hereby authorized to apply to the Circuit Court of Cook County
pursuant to the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-2, and take
such further action as may be necessary as authorized by said Statutes,
including filing of lien where necessary. (amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 11
HOUSE TRAILERS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-11-1: Definitions
4-11-2: Prohibition
4-11-3: Exemption
4-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter certain words and phrases are defined as
follows:
HOUSE TRAILER: Any structure for, or used for, living or sleeping purposes,
mounted upon wheels and capable of being transported from place to place,
either by its own power or by some vehicle attached to it; provided however,
that this definition shall not apply to any vehicle operated over fixed rails.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: As set forth in section
10-3-1 of this Code.
TRAILER CAMP: Any plot of ground where one or more house trailers used as
living or sleeping quarters may be located, regardless of whether or not a
charge is made for such accommodations. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-11-2: PROHIBITION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any plot of ground
as a place for living in a recreational vehicle, a house trailer or as a
trailer camp for human habitation within the Village. (1981 Code; amd. Ord.
3873, 9-12-2022)
4-11-3: EXEMPTION:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit the passage of any house
trailer or recreational vehicle through the Village, or parking such trailer
unoccupied in connection with its movement through the Village, or storing or
parking such house trailer or recreational vehicle unoccupied in the Village
where the parking of vehicles is permitted by law; and subsection 10-8-8B of
this Code; nor shall anything in this Chapter prohibit making repairs to any
such house trailer or recreational vehicle in the Village. (1981 Code; amd.
Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 12
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-12-1: Purpose
4-12-2: Definitions
4-12-3: Administration
4-12-4: Base Flood Elevation
4-12-5: Occupation And Use Of Flood Fringe Areas
4-12-6: Occupation And Use Of Designated Floodways
4-12-7: Occupation And Use OF Floodplain Areas Where Floodways Are Not
Identified
4-12-8: Permitting Requirements Applicable To All Floodplain Areas
4-12-9: Subdivision Requirements
4-12-10: Variances
4-12-11: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-12-12: Penalty
4-12-13: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
4-12-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this Village
by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2. The purpose
of this Chapter is to maintain this Village's eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program; to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding
including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve
and enhance the quality of surface
waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources. This Chapter is adopted in
order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
   A.   To meet the requirements of 615 ILCS 5/18g, the Illinois Rivers, Lakes
and Streams Act;
   B.   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage
hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
   C.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   D.   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   E.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations;
   F.   To make federally subsidized Flood insurance available for property in
the Village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program;
   G.   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;
   H.   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources; and
   I.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and Floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits, and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions are adopted and
shall apply whether or not the defined words and phrases are capitalized:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A non-habitable Building, used only for parking of
vehicles or storage, that is on the same parcel of property as the principal
Building and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal
Building.
ACT: An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes, and streams of
the State of Illinois, 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.
AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed structure used exclusively for
agricultural purposes or uses in connection with the production, harvesting,
storage, raising, or drying of agricultural commodities and livestock,
including aquatic organisms. Structures that house tools or equipment used in
connection with these purposes or uses are also considered to have agricultural
purposes or uses.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation, or agency that applies for a
Floodplain Development permit.
APPROPRIATE USES: Only uses of the Designated Floodway that are permissible and
will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are
as specified in Section
4-12-6(B) of this Chapter.
ASCE: American Society of Civil Engineers
BASE FLOOD: The Flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The Base Flood is often referred to as the 100year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The height in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified) of the crest of
the Base Flood. Application of the BFE at any location is as defined in Section
4-12-4 of this Chapter.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building, including any sunken room or sunken portion
of a room, having its floor below ground level (subgrade) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed Building, including gas or liquid storage tank,
that is principally above ground, including Manufactured Homes and
prefabricated buildings. The term also includes Recreational Vehicles and
travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred and eighty (180)
consecutive days.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a Channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel Modification includes
Damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel Modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the Channel. Channelization is a severe form
of Channel Modification involving a significant change in the Channel cross-
section and typically involving relocation of the existing Channel (e.g.
straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the Floodplain used to balance the loss of natural
Flood storage capacity when artificial fill or Structures are placed within the
Floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural Floodplain storage can increase
off-site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the Floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708, gives
assurances to the property owner that once an Appropriate Use is constructed
according to permitted plans, the Floodway map can be changed, as previously
agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter providing FEMA's comment
on a proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or
hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the
modification of the existing Designated Floodway, the effective BFEs, or the
Floodplain.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these Critical Facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts, or impoundment Structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion
of the Floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on
the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing Base Flood
discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of
Flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in
velocities.
   A.   The Floodways are designated for on the countywide FIRM of Cook County
prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008. When two Floodway maps exist for a
waterway, the more recent effective Floodway limit shall prevail.
   B.   The Floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village that may be annexed
into the Village are designated on the countywide FIRM of Cook County prepared
by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008.
   C.   To locate the Designated Floodway boundary on any site, the Designated
Floodway boundary should be scaled off the FIRM map and located on a site plan,
using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to
determine the exact location of the Designated Floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR
should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to real estate, including:
   A.   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a Building or any
addition or improvement to a Building;
   B.   Substantial Improvement of an existing Building;
   C.   Installing a Manufactured Home on a site, preparing a site for a
Manufactured Home, or installing a travel trailer or Recreational Vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days;
   D.   Installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar
projects;
   E.   Demolition of a Building, re-development of a site, clearing of land as
an adjunct of construction;
   F.   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, Dams, culverts, or
Channel Modification;
   G.   Filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, drilling, mining, or
other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface;
   H.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and any other activity that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of Flood or surface waters;
   I.   Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of Flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal;
   J.   Development does not include such activities as re-surfacing of
pavement when there is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and
similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or
construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a Building has been elevated.
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79,
as amended.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waters, or from the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood also includes the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash Flood
or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal
waters.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a Flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of a Zone A or Zone AE Floodplain that is outside of
the Floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
Floodplain or Special Flood Hazard Area within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and Floodplains and may or may not depict Floodways and
show BFE.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): An examination, evaluation, and determination of
Flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOODPLAIN:
   A.   The Floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village
that are subject to inundation by the Base Flood. The Floodplains of the
Village are generally identified as such on panel numbers of the countywide
FIRM for Cook County as prepared by the FEMA and dated August 19, 2008.
   B.   The Floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed
into the Village and that are subject to inundation by the Base Flood. The
Floodplains are generally identified as such on panel numbers 17031C0387J,
17031C0389J and 17031C0395J of the countywide FIRM for Cook County by the FEMA
and dated August 19, 2008.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to Buildings that reduce or eliminate Flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
Buildings, and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a Building has been designed and constructed to be
structurally dry floodproofed.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The greater of: 1) the elevation of the Base
Flood (or depth) plus one foot of Freeboard, or 2) when required by the MWRD,
the elevation of the Base Flood (or depth) plus two feet of Freeboard at any
given location in the Floodplain.
FLOODWAY: See Designated Floodway.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the BFE to provide a factor of
safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed Development, unknown
localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those
caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any Building that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on the State inventory of historic places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency;
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources.
IDNR /OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM: IDNR/OWR has jurisdiction over any stream
serving a tributary area of 640 acres or more in an urban or urbanizing area,
or in the floodway of any stream serving a tributary area of 6,400 acres or
more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a permit from the
IDNR/OWR (17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3700 or Part 3708). The IDNR/OWR may grant
approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a statewide permit or
a regional permit.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific
Building, area of land or a parcel of land, where there has not been any
alteration of the topography since the date of the first NFIP map showing the
property within the Floodplain, was inadvertently included within the
Floodplain and that the Building, area of land or a parcel of land is removed
from the Floodplain.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises BFEs, Floodplains or
Floodways as shown on an effective FIRM.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
Basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a Basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the Building in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this Chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A Building, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
Manufactured Home does not include a Recreational Vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more Manufactured Home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: New Construction means Buildings for which the Start of
Construction commenced on or after the effective date of a Floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such Buildings.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured Home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the Village of River Forest's initial Floodplain management
regulations.
NAVD 88: North American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
PUBLIC BODY OF WATER: All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main Channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto, as identified in 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part
3704.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and
proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude
the design, engineering, construction, or financing, in whole or in part, of a
flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGIONAL PERMITS: Regional Permits are offered for pre-approved projects which
are considered minor projects that are permissible per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part
3708 rules for Northeastern Illinois Designated Floodways. A complete listing
of the terms and conditions for specific project types can be obtained from the
IDNR/OWR website.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois,
under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act, 225 ILCS 330/1, et seq.
REGISTERED OR LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER (P.E.): An engineer registered in
the State of Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering Practice
Act, 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood-related damages sustained by a Building on two separate
occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of
each such Flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the
market value of the Building before the damaged occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff
without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
Flood or storm.
RIVERINE FLOODPLAIN: Any Floodplain subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified
Channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes Substantial Improvement and means the date the
Building permit was issued, provided the actual Start of Construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement, was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement
of permanent construction of a Building on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work
beyond the stage of excavation, including the placement of a Manufactured Home
on a foundation. For a Substantial Improvement, actual Start of Construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a Building whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the Building.
STATEWIDE PERMITS: Statewide permits are offered for pre-approved projects that
are considered minor projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR Part 3700
rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and permit requirements can
be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
STRUCTURE: The results of a man-made change to the land constructed on or below
the ground, including a Building any addition to a Building; installing
utilities, construction of roads or similar projects; construction or erection
of levees, walls, fences, bridges or culverts; drilling, mining, filling,
dredging, grading, excavating; and the storage of materials.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a Building whereby cost
to repair the building to its before damaged condition equals or exceeds 50
percent of the market value of the Building before the damage occurred,
regardless of actual repair work performed. The term includes flood related
damages sustained by a Building on two separate occasions in a ten (10)-year
period, in which the cost of the repairs, on average, equals or exceeds twenty-
five percent (25%) of the market value of the Building at the time of each such
flood event.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a Building taking place during a five (5)-year period in which
the percentage of improvements, figured cumulatively by dividing the cost of
each improvement by the market value of the Building prior to the start of
construction of each improvement, equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%).
   A.   Substantial Improvement is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
Building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the Building. This term includes Buildings which have incurred
Repetitive Loss or Substantial Damage, regardless of the actual work done.
   B.   The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   any project for improvement of a Building to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a Historic Structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the Building's continued
designation as a Historic Structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or Floodway where water flows from a
narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a Structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this Chapter. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-3: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Floodplain Development Permit:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body shall commence
any Development activities, including New Construction, Substantial
Improvements, and alterations of a watercourse wholly within, partially within
or in contact with the Floodplains until a floodplain development permit is
obtained from the Director of Public Works. No permit shall be issued by the
Director of Public Works until the requirements of this Chapter have been met.
      2.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body shall commence
any development of a critical facility on land below the 0.2% annual chance
flood elevation without first obtaining a development permit from the Director
of Public Works.
      3.   A local floodplain development permit shall not be issued by the
Director of Public Works for Development in a Floodway without the applicant
first obtaining a state floodway permit from IDNR/OWR, except as noted in
Section
4-12-6.
      4.   The Director of Public Works shall review all proposed Development
by comparing field surveyed topography of the site to the FIRM and shall make
interpretations, where needed, as to the location of the floodplain boundaries,
floodway boundaries, and BFE.
         a.   Any Development that is located on land below the BFE, located in
the mapped Floodway, or associated with a Zone AO is subject to the
requirements of this Chapter. A LOMA-Floodway (LOMRFW) shall be required before
issuing a floodplain development permit for land higher than the BFE if located
within a mapped floodway.
         b.   Any Development located on land below the BFE that was filled
after the date of the site's first Floodplain designation on a flood map is
subject to the requirements of this Chapter.
         c.   Any Development located on land below the BFE that is that is
hydraulically connected to the Floodplain, but not shown on the current FIRM,
is subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
         d.   The Director of Public Works shall maintain documentation of the
pre-existing ground elevation at the site and, if applicable, certification
that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first FIRM
identification in the Floodplain.
      5.   If the Development site is within a Floodway or in a Floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted, the floodplain development
permit shall be referred to a P.E. under the employ or contract of the Village
for review to ensure that the Development meets the requirements of this
Chapter.
      6.   A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid
unless the actual Start of Construction, for work authorized by such permit, is
commenced within one hundred and eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if
the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred and
eighty (180) days after the work commences.
The Director of Public Works shall ensure that all Development activities
happen in a timely manner. All permitted work shall be completed within fifteen
(15) months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire. Time extensions, of not more than ninety (90) days each, may be
granted, in writing, by the Director of Public Works. Time extensions shall be
granted only if the original permit is compliant with this Chapter and the FIRM
and FIS in effect at the time the extension is granted.
      7.   Letters of Map Revision. The Director of Public Works shall require
a CLOMR prior to issuance of a development permit for proposed floodway
encroachments that will cause an increase in the BFE; and proposed development
which will increase the BFE by more than 0.1 feet in riverine area where FEMA
has provided a BFE but no floodway.
Once a CLOMR has been issued, the development permit may be issued for site
grading and structures necessary in the area of the map change to achieve the
final LOMR. Upon completion, the applicant shall submit as-built
certifications, as required by FEMA, to achieve a final LOMR prior to the
release of final development permits. Review Section
4-12-8(C)(10) for the construction of buildings in any floodplain issued a LOMR
Based on Fill.
      8.   Application. An application for a floodplain development permit
shall be made on a form provided by the Director of Public Works.
         a.   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a Registered P.E, licensed architect or Registered Land
Surveyor; existing grade elevations, using the NAVD 88, and all proposed
changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all existing and proposed Buildings, additions to Buildings,
sewage disposal and water supply facilities; Floodplain limits based on
elevation or depth, as applicable; Floodway limits, as applicable; location and
dimensions of all structures, including but not limited to fences, culverts,
decks, gazebos, agricultural structures, and Accessory Structures.
         b.   For all proposed Buildings, the elevation of the Lowest Floor
(including Basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the Development will be subject to the requirements of Section
4-12-8 of this Chapter.
   B.   Duties of the Director of Public Works. It shall be the duty of the
Director of Public Works to:
      1.   Check all new Development sites to determine whether they are in a
Floodplain using criteria listed in Section
4-12-4 of this Chapter or for Critical Facilities, using the 0.2% annual chance
flood elevation, if defined.    
      2.   If the site is in a Floodplain, determine whether the site in a
Floodway, Flood Fringe or in a Floodplain for which a detailed study has not
been conducted.
      3.   If the site within a Flood Fringe, require that the minimum
requirements of Sections
4-12-5 and
4-12-8 of this Chapter be met.
      4.   If the site within a Floodway, require that the minimum requirements
of Sections
4-12-6 and
4-12-8 of this Chapter be met.
      5.   If the site is located within a Floodplain for which no detailed
study has been completed and approved, require that the minimum requirements of
Sections
4-12-7 and
4-12-8 of this Chapter be met.
      6.   Inspect all projects before, during and after construction to assure
proper elevation of the Building and to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this Chapter.
      7.   Schedule, on an annual basis, an inspection of the Floodplain and
document the results of the inspection.
      8.   Review Elevation Certificates and Floodproofing Certificates for
accuracy and require incomplete or deficient certificates be corrected and
maintained in permit files including:
         a.   Elevation Certificate certifying the elevation of the Lowest
Floor (including Basement) of a residential or non-residential Building subject
to Section
4-12-8 of this Chapter, or an Elevation Certificate certifying the elevation of
the lowest horizontal structural member of the Lowest Floor, where required by
Section
4-12-8(C) and/or;
         b.   Floodproofing Certificate certifying the elevation to which a
nonresidential Building has been dry floodproofed, using a Floodproofing
Certificate, for all Buildings required to be dry floodproofed pursuant to
Section
4-12-8 of this Chapter.
      9.   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request all permit
records, including but not limited to Base Flood data, Floodplain and
Designated Floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit documents, variance
documentation, soil compaction records, Conditional Letter of Map Revision,
Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Amendment, asbuilt elevation,
Floodproofing Certificates and Elevation Certificates for all Buildings
constructed subject to this Chapter.
      10.   Floodway Permits: For all Development projects in a Floodway,
ensure that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR or a
Delegated Community, or written documentation is provided stating that a permit
is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to the Act. Floodway permit
requirements are specified in Sections
4-12-6 and
4-12-7 of this Chapter.
      11.   Permits for Dams may be required from IDNR/OWR. The Director of
Public Works shall contact IDNR/OWR to determine if a permit is required and
for application details. Any work involving the construction, modification, or
removal of a Dam, per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of
Dams), shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the issuing a local permit.
      12.   Ensure any and all required federal, state, and local permits are
received prior to the issuance of a Floodplain Development permit, including,
but not limited to, permits pertaining to the Clean Water Act, Public Water
Supply, Endangered Species Act, and Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act,
all as amended from time to time.
      13.   Establish procedures for administering and documenting
determinations, as outlined below, of Substantial Improvement and Substantial
Damage made pursuant this Chapter.
         a.   Determine the market value or require the Applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the Building before the Start of Construction of the proposed work. In the case
of repair, the market value of the Building shall be the market value before
the damage occurred and before any repairs are made.
         b.   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged Building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the Building,
including the cost of volunteer labor and donated materials must be included.
         c.   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
Substantial Improvement or Substantial Damage.
         d.   Notify the Applicant if it is determined that the work
constitutes Substantial Improvement or repair of Substantial Damage and that
compliance with the Flood resistant construction requirements of the Village
and this Chapter is required.
      14.   Cooperation with Other Agencies.
         a.   Cooperate with state and federal Floodplain management agencies
to improve Base Flood and Floodway data and to improve the administration of
this Chapter;
         b.   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a
regulatory map within six (6) months whenever a modification of the Floodplain
may change the BFE or result in a change to the Floodplain map;
         c.   Submit reports as required for the NFIP; and
         d.   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this Chapter.
      15.   Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and
enforce the provisions of this Chapter, subject however to the review and
approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any Ordinance changes.
      16.   Notify IDNR/OWR and adjacent communities in writing thirty (30)
days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of a
watercourse.
      17.   If a variance is to be granted, the Director of Public Works shall
review the requirements of Section
4-12-10 to make sure they are met. In addition, the Director of Public Works
shall complete all notifications requirements, prepare a staff report and
recommendations.
      18.   Enforce the provisions of this Chapter, investigate violations,
issue notices of violation or stop work orders, and require corrective action,
as outlined in Section
4-12-12. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-4: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
   A.   This Chapter's protection standard is based on the FIS for Cook County.
   B.   If a BFE is not available for a particular site, then the protection
standard shall be according to the best existing data available from federal,
state, or other sources.
   C.   When a party disagrees with the best available data, they shall submit
a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to any
Development of the site.
      1.   The BFE for the Floodplains of the Village shall be as delineated on
the Base Flood profiles in the FIS of Cook County prepared by FEMA dated August
19, 2008 and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.
      2.   The BFE for the Floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Cook
County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or that
may be annexed into the Village shall be as delineated on the Base Flood
profiles in the FIS of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008,
and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from
time to time.
      3.   The BFE for each Floodplain delineated as an AH Zone or AO Zone
shall be that elevation (or depth) indicated on the countywide FIRM of Cook
County and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such
study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. For any AH zone with an
elevation specified in a table of still water elevations in the FIS, the BFE
shall be the elevation specified in the table of still water elevations.
      4.   The BFE for each of the remaining Floodplains delineated as an A
Zone on the countywide FIRM of Cook County shall be according to the best
existing data available from federal, state, or other sources. Should no other
data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the Applicant to determine
BFEs.
         a.   When no BFE exists, the BFE for a riverine Floodplain shall be
determined from an accepted hydraulic model, based on current industry
standards.
         b.   The Flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained
from an accepted hydrologic model, based on current industry standards, or by
techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States
Geological Survey for estimating peak Flood discharges. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-5: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the Flood Fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the Base Flood by proper elevation, compliance
with Compensatory Storage requirements, and other applicable provisions of this
Chapter. No use will be permitted that adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the Flood Fringe
shall meet the requirements of this Section, along with the requirements of
Section
4-12-8.
   A.   Preventing Increased Damages
      1.   No Development in the Flood Fringe shall create a threat to public
health and safety.
      2.   If fill is being used to elevate the site above the BFE, the
Applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a LOMR from FEMA for the
purpose of removing the site from the Floodplain. See Section
4-12-8(C) for additional requirements.
      3.   Compensatory Storage. Whenever any portion of a Floodplain is
authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the
authorized fill or Structure below the BFE shall be compensated for and
balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below
the BFE.
         a.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.1 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or Structure
         b.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
         c.   All Floodplain storage lost below the existing ten percent (10%)
annual chance Flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten percent
(10%) annual chance Flood elevation. All Floodplain storage lost above the
existing one percent (1%) annual chance Flood elevation shall be replaced above
the proposed one percent (1%) annual chance Flood elevation.
         d.   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS:
This Section applies to proposed Development, redevelopment, site modification
or Building modification within a Designated Floodway. The Designated Floodway
shall be as delineated on the countywide FIRM of Cook County. Floodplain
development permits may only be issued for works that meets 17 Ill. Adm. Code
Part 3708, which restricts development to Appropriate Uses of the Designated
Floodway of which periodic inundation will not pose a danger to the general
health and welfare of the user, or require the expenditure of public funds, or
the provisions of public resources or disaster relief services, or result in
increased Flood stages due to the singular or cumulative loss of regulatory
Floodway storage or regulatory Designated Floodway conveyance, or increase in
Flood velocities. All Floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to
accomplish the purpose of the project. The Development shall also meet the
requirements of Section
4-12-8. No application is required for an individual permit from IDNR/OWR if
the project meets Regional Permit No. 3.
   A.   Floodway Permit :
      1.   In addition to a floodplain development permit, work in the
Designated Floodway of an IDNR/OWR Jurisdictional Stream shall require either a
floodway permit from IDNR/OWR, documentation that the projects meets Regional
Permit No. 3, or a letter from IDNR/OWR stating no permit is required. An
application for work in a Floodway shall be made by submitting a completed
application on the form furnished by IDNR/OWR. The application for work in a
Floodway, shall as a minimum meet all the requirements in 17 Ill. Adm. Code
Part 3708.
         a.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of
4-12-6(B) of this Chapter.
         b.   If the Designated Floodway delineation or BFE will change due to
the proposed project, the application will not be considered complete until
IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional approval of the Designated Floodway map
change.
      2.   A Licensed P.E., under the employ or contract of the Village shall
review and approve applications reviewed under this Section.
   B.   Preventing Increased Damages and a List of Appropriate Uses.
      1.   The only Development in a Floodway allowed are Appropriate Uses that
will not cause a rise in the BFE and will not create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in Flood heights or velocity, be a threat to public health
and safety and welfare, impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions
of the Floodway or Channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or
aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate
mitigation methods as called for in this Chapter. Only those Appropriate Uses
listed in 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 will be allowed. The approved Appropriate
Uses are as follows:
         a.   Flood Control Structures, dikes, Dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, Flooding, erosion, or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife.
         b.   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring
access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities,
and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
         c.   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls;
         d.   Underground and overhead utilities;
         e.   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems,
including any related fencing (at least fifty percent (50%) open when viewed
from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of Flood flows, and
including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (four (4) stall maximum)
that will not block Flood flows nor reduce Floodway storage.
         f.   Detached garages, storage sheds, or other non-habitable Accessory
Structures that will not block Flood flows nor reduce Floodway storage;
         g.   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto;
         h.   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
            (1)   The depth of flooding during the Base Flood will not exceed
1.0 foot; or
            (2)   The Applicant of a short-term recreational use facility
parking lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events
and accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all
overbank flooding events.
         i.   Aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground elevation where
the depth of flooding during the Base Flood will not exceed 1.0 foot;
         j.   Designated Floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive
non-erosive slope toward a watercourse.
         k.   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
Buildings including the construction of water tight window wells, elevating
Buildings, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal Buildings where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten (10) feet away from the exterior wall of the existing
Building, and, which are not considered Substantial Improvements to the
Building.
         l.   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged Building,
provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the Building was
damaged to fifty (50%) percent or more of the market value before the damage
occurred, the Building will be protected from flooding to the FPE.
         m.   Modifications to an existing Building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the Building below the BFE, and which will not block
Flood flows including but not limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks,
patios, and second story additions. If the Building is improved to fifty (50%)
percent or more of the market value before the modification occurred (i.e., a
Substantial Improvement), the Building will be protected from flooding to the
FPE.
      2.   Appropriate Uses do not include the construction or placement of any
new Buildings, fill, Building additions, Buildings on stilts, excavation or
Channel Modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonAppropriate Uses in the
Floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an
Appropriate Use.
      3.   Within the Designated Floodway, the construction of an Appropriate
Use, will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets
the criteria established in 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 and is so stated in
writing with supporting plans, calculations, and data by a Registered P.E. and
provided that any Building meets the protection requirements of this Chapter.
         a.   Preservation of Floodway Storage so as Not to Increase Downstream
Flooding.
            (1)   Compensatory Storage shall be provided for any Designated
Floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
Structures placed and the impact of any related Flood control projects.
            (2)   Compensatory Storage for fill or Structures shall be equal to
1.1 times the volume of Designated Floodway storage lost.
            (3)   Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head
loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
            (4)   The compensatory Designated Floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed BFE. All
Designated Floodway storage lost below the existing ten percent (10%) annual
chance Flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten percent (10%)
annual chance Flood elevation. All Designated Floodway storage lost above the
existing ten percent (10%) annual chance Flood elevation shall be replaced
above the proposed ten percent (10%) annual chance Flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
            (5)   If the Compensatory Storage will not be placed at the
location of the proposed construction, the Applicant's engineer shall
demonstrate through a determination of Flood discharges and water surface
elevations that the Compensatory Storage is hydraulically equivalent.
            (6)   There shall be no reduction in Floodway surface area, as a
result of a Floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to
reduce flooding at an existing Structure.
         c.   Preservation of Floodway Velocities so as Not to Increase Stream
Erosion or Flood Heights.
            (1)   For all Appropriate Uses, except bridges or culverts or on-
stream Structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the
average Channel or Designated Floodway velocities or stage for all Flood events
up to and including the Base Flood event.
            (2)   In the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream Structures
built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or Flood
flows, velocities may be increased at the Structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
         d.   Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway
approaches shall meet 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708.
            (1)   The proposed Structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream Flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all Flood events up to and including the Base Flood event; or
the upstream Flood stage increases will be contained within the Channel banks
(or within existing vertical extensions of the Channel banks) such as within
the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded
Flood easements.
            (2)   If the proposed construction will increase upstream Flood
stages greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a
permit for a Dam or waiver.
               A.   The engineering analysis of upstream Flood stages must be
calculated using the Flood study flows, and corresponding Flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the Flood study specified in Section
4-12-4 of this Chapter. Bridges and Culverts must be analyzed using any
commonly accepted FEMA approved hydraulic models.
               B.   Lost Floodway storage must be compensated for per Section
4-12-6 of this Chapter.
               C.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per Section
4-12-7(B)(1).
               D.   If the crossing is proposed over a Public Body of Water
that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must
be received.
               E.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the
bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this
Chapter.
               F.   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall
be designed per
4-12-6(B)(3)(h) of this Chapter.
         e.   Reconstruction or Modification of Existing Bridges, Culverts, and
Approach Roads shall meet 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708.
            (1)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1-foot increase in
backwater over the existing Flood profile for all Flood frequencies up to and
including the Base Flood event, if the existing Structure is not a source of
Flood damage.
            (2)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of Flood damage to Structures in the upstream Floodplain, the
Applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the existing
bridge or culvert and roadway approach to reduce the existing backwater, taking
into consideration the effects on Flood stages on upstream and downstream
properties.
            (3)   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing
is a source of Flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 (Floodway Construction in
Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued.
         f.   On-Stream Structures Built for the Purpose of Backing Up Water
shall meet 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708.
            (1)   Any increase in upstream Flood stages greater than 0.0 foot
when compared to the existing conditions, for all Flood events up to and
including the Base Flood event shall be contained within the Channel banks (or
within existing vertical extensions of the Channel banks) such as within the
design protection grade of existing levees or Floodwalls or within recorded
Flood easements.
            (2)   A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must
be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any Structure built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or Flood flow.
            (3)   All Dams and impoundment Structures, shall meet the
permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Construction and
Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the
Channel or Floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated
that:
               A.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest
by providing Flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater
detention;
               B.   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle, such as for spawning;
               C.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded
water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual
bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a pre-sedimentation
basin;
               D.   A non-point source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants.
If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
               E.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of
this Chapter.
         g.   Excavation in the Floodway shall meet 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part
3708.
         h.   General Criteria for Analysis of Flood Elevations.
            (1)   The Flood profiles, flows and Floodway data in the Designated
Floodway study, referenced in Section
4-12-5, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data
appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted
for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
            (2)   If the Floodway elevation at the site of the proposed
construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a
larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet:
            (3)   The requirements of this section for the BFEs of the
Designated Floodway conditions; and
            (4)   Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water
elevations.
            (5)   If the Applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or
a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a Public Flood Control Project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
Flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or Flood control project is
built.
         i.   Conditional Letter of Map Revision.
            (1)   If the Appropriate Use would result in a change in the
Designated Floodway location or the BFE, the Applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR
and FEMA all information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional Designated Floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a
conditional concurrence of the Designated Floodway change before a permit is
issued.
            (2)   The final Designated Floodway map will not be changed by FEMA
until as-built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging,
or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. All
field surveys shall be conducted under the supervision of a Registered P.E. or
Registered Land Surveyor and shall be sealed. All required engineering analyses
shall be conducted under the supervision of a Registered P. E., or in the case
of a federal project, by the federal agency and shall be so sealed or stated.
            (3)   In the case of non-government projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional Designated Floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval
can be given.
            (4)   No filling, grading, dredging, or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.
            (5)   After receipt of conditional approval of the Designated
Floodway change and issuance of a permit and a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision, construction as necessary to change the Floodway designation may
proceed including filling, grading, dredging, and excavating, No additional
Development activities, including the construction of Buildings, shall take
place in the Floodplain or Designated Floodway until a final LOMR is issued by
FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
         j.   Public Flood Control Projects. For Public Flood Control Projects,
the permitting requirements of this Section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100year frequency event.
         k.   Professional Engineer's Supervision. All engineering analyses
shall be performed by or under the supervision of a Registered P.E.
      4.   Permits for Dams:
         a.   Any work involving the construction, modification, or removal of
a Dam per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall
obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of Dam construction.
         b.   If the Director of Public Works finds a Dam that does not have an
IDNR/OWR permit, the Director of Public Works shall immediately notify the
IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
         c.   If the Director of Public Works finds a Dam which is believed to
be in unsafe condition, the Director of Public Works shall immediately notify
the owner of the Dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency.
      5.   Activities that do not Require a Registered Professional Engineer's
Review: Regional Permit No. 3, which authorizes, for example, underground and
overhead utilities, storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios,
athletic fields, playground equipment and streambank protection activities; may
be permitted without a Registered P.E.'s review. Such activities shall still
meet the other requirements of this Chapter, including the mitigation
requirements. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT
IDENTIFIED:
In riverine Floodplains, where no Floodways have been identified, no
Development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the proposals,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and Structures,
shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of the
floodwaters nor significantly increase flood heights. The Development must meet
all applicable requirements of this Chapter and 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3700.
   A.   Floodway Permit.
      1.   In addition to a floodplain development permit, work within an IDNR/
OWR Jurisdictional Stream shall require either a floodway permit from IDNR/OWR,
documentation that the projects meets the conditions of a Statewide Permit
listed in Section
4-12-7(B)(3), or a letter from IDNR/OWR stating no permit is required. In
addition to the requirements of Section
4-12-3, the application for a floodplain development permit shall also include
the following information:
         a.   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and
intended use;
         b.   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the FIRM, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an
incorporated or unincorporated area;
         c.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
         d.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as
a minimum:
            (1)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
            (2)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
Structure or work, elevations, using the NAVD 88, adjacent property lines and
ownership, drainage and Flood control easements, distance between proposed
activity and navigation Channel (when the proposed construction is in or near a
commercially navigable body of water), Floodplain limit, location and
orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;
            (3)   Cross-section views of the project perpendicular to the flow
of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view,
existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10percent annual
chance Flood elevation, BFE, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and
vertical); and
            (4)   A seeding or stabilization plan for the disturbed areas.
         e.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of Section
4-12-7(B).
         f.   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approvals
that may be required for this type of Development.
      2.   Based on the best available existing data according to federal,
state, or other sources, the Director of Public Works shall compare the
elevation of the site to the BFE.
         a.   Should no BFE information exist for the site, the developer's
engineer shall calculate the BFE according to Section
4-12-4.
         b.   The Director of Public Works shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevation at the Development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's current FIRM's
Floodplain identification.
   B.   Preventing Increased Damages.
      1.   No Development in the Floodplain, where a Floodway has not been
determined, shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in Flood
heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair
the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the Floodway or Channel or
impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this Chapter.
      2.   Within all riverine Floodplains where the Floodway has not been
determined, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   The developer shall have a Licensed P.E. state in writing and
show through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the project meets
the engineering requirements of Section
4-12-6 for the entire Floodplain.
         b.   As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study
performed to determine a Floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR
and FEMA for acceptance as a Designated Floodway.
         c.   Upon acceptance of the Floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the
developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of
Section
4-12-6 for the Designated Floodway.
         d.   A Development permit shall not be issued unless the Applicant
first obtains an IDNR/OWR permit or a determination has been made that an IDNR/
OWR permit is not required.
         e.   Permits for Dams.
            (1)   Any work involving the construction, modification, or removal
of a Dam per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall
obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of dam construction.
            (2)   If the Director of Public Works finds a Dam that does not
have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Director of Public Works shall immediately notify
the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
            (3)   If the Director of Public Works finds a Dam which is believed
to be in unsafe condition, the Director of Public Works shall immediately
notify the owner of the Dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency.
      3.   The following activities may be permitted without a Licensed P.E.'s
review or calculation of BFE and Designated Floodway. Such activities shall
still meet the other requirements of this Chapter.
         a.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 2;
         b.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 3;
         c.   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 4
         d.   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit
No. 5;
         e.   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change in
grade) are covered by this permit;
         f.   Outfall Structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;
         g.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8;
         h.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 9;
         i.   Accessory Structures and additions to existing residential
Buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10;
         j.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit No. 11;
         k.   Bridge and culvert replacement Structures and bridge widenings
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12;
         l.   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 13;
         m.   Special Uses of Public Waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 14; and
         n.   Any Development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a Flood Fringe area shall be exempt from State Floodway permit
requirements.
      4.   The Flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse
shall be maintained.
      5.   Compensatory Storage.
         a.   Whenever any portion of a Floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or Structure
below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically
equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the BFE.
         b.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.1 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or Structure.
         c.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
         d.   All Floodplain storage lost below the existing ten percent (10%)
annual chance flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten percent
(10%) annual chance Flood elevation. All Floodplain storage lost above the
existing one hundred percent (100%) annual chance Flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed one hundred percent (100%) annual chance Flood
elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly
to the watercourse. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-8: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in Sections
4-12-5,
4-12-6 and
4-12-7 for Development in Flood Fringes, Designated Floodways, and Floodplains
where no Floodways have been identified, the following requirements shall be
met. Where an existing or proposed Building or other Development is affected by
multiple flood zones, by multiple BFEs, or both, the Development activity must
comply with the provisions of the Ordinance applicable to the most restrictive
flood zone and the highest base flood elevation affecting any part of the
existing or proposed Building, or for other developments, affecting any part of
the Development area.
   A.   Public Health and Other Standards
      1.   No Developments in the Floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a P.E. or floodproofed Building constructed according to the
requirements of Section
4-12-8 of this Chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate Flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer
lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal systems
shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
      5.   All other activities, defined as Development, such as pools, fences,
filling, paving, etc., shall be designed so as not to alter Flood flows or
increase potential Flood damages.
   B.   Carrying Capacity and Notification of Adjacent Communities
      1.   For all projects involving Channel Modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the Flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
      2.   In addition, the Village shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse.
   C.   Protecting Buildings:
      1.   In addition to the damage prevention requirements in this Chapter,
all Buildings located within a Floodplain, shall be protected from Flood damage
below the FPE. This Building protection criteria applies to the following
situations:
         a.   New Construction or placement of a new Building or alteration or
addition to an existing Building.
         b.   Substantial Improvements, made to any existing Building. If
substantially improved, both the existing Building and any addition must meet
the Flood protection standards of this Section.
         c.   Substantially Damaged Building under repair. Substantial Damage
shall be figured cumulatively during a ten (10)-year period by comparing the
cost to repair the building to its pre-damage condition with the market value
of the building immediately prior to the damage, for each event in which the
building sustains damage, and adding the percentages of damage for each event.
If Substantially Damaged, the entire Building must meet the Flood Protection
standards of this Section.
         d.   Installing a Manufactured Home on a new site or a Manufactured
Home on an existing site.
         e.   Installing a travel trailer or Recreational Vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days; and
         f.   Repetitive Loss to an existing Building.
      2.   Residential Buildings: In zones A, AO, AH, and AE, the lowest floor,
including Basement, of New Construction of residential Buildings, and
Substantially Improved residential Buildings, must be elevated to the FPE, and
are subject to the more specific additional requirements below.
         a.   If fill, including grading to redistribute onsite material to
alter existing topography, is used as a means of elevation:
            (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and must extend at least twenty (20) feet beyond the
foundation before sloping below the FPE in lieu of a geotechnical report.
            (2)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
            (3)   The fill shall be composed of clean rock or soil and not
include debris or refuse material.
            (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
         b.   If the Building's lowest floor is elevated above ground level
with an enclosed or unenclosed area below the lowest floor:
            (1)   The Building shall be elevated on piles, walls, columns, or
other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters.
            (2)   All enclosed areas below the FPE shall provide for
equalization of hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters. A minimum of two (2) permanent openings shall be provided on at
least two walls located below the BFE and no more than one (1) foot above
finished grade. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than
one (1) square inch for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding, or the design must be certified by a Registered P.E, as providing the
equivalent performance in accordance with accepted standards of practice. Refer
to FEMA TB1, Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures, for
additional guidance.
            (3)   All electrical lines, switches, receptacles, and fixtures
must be located above the FPE except to the minimum extent required by
applicable building or lifesafety codes. Any switches, receptacles, and/or
fixtures required by applicable building or life-safety codes to extend below
the FPE shall be rated, or located in enclosures rated, for prolonged
submersion.
            (4)   The Building, foundation, and supporting members shall be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
Building resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy, and be designed so as to minimize exposure to current,
waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (5)   All Building components below the FPE shall be constructed of
materials resistant to Flood damage.
            (6)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the FPE
provided they are waterproofed.
            (7)   The area below the FPE shall be used solely for parking,
storage, or building access and not later modified or occupied as habitable
space.
      3.   Nonresidential Buildings: In zones A, AO, AH, and AE, the lowest
floor (including basement) of New Construction of nonresidential buildings, and
Substantial Improvement of nonresidential Buildings, must either:
         a.   Be elevated to or above the FPE, subject to the more specific
additional requirements of Sections
4-12-8(C) above; or
         b.   Be structurally dry-floodproofed, provided a Registered P.E. or
architect has developed and/or reviewed the structural design, specifications,
and plans for construction, and the Registered P.E. or architect submits a FEMA
Floodproofing Certificate, certifying that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the requirements of ASCE 24-14, and the following conditions:
            (1)   Below the FPE, the Building and attendant utility and
sanitary facilities shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydraulic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
            (2)   The Building design accounts for Flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and
impact from debris and ice.
            (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the Building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
            (4)   The Building, utility, and sanitary facilities' design and
construction will prevent the effect of sewer backup into the building.
            (5)   Levees, berms, floodwalls, and similar works are not
considered Floodproofing for the purpose of this Chapter.
      4.   In zones A, AO, AH, and AE, all placement or substantial improvement
of Manufactured Homes and permanent installation of travel trailers on site for
more than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days, shall be:
         a.   Elevated with the Lowest Floor at or above the FPE using a
support and anchoring system, designed by a P.E. pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code
§ 870.110.
         b.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.220
      5.   In zones A, AO, AH, and AE, travel trailers and Recreational
Vehicles, on site for more than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days,
shall meet the elevation requirement and anchoring requirements of Section
4-12-8(C)(4) unless the following conditions are met:
         a.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck.
         b.   The vehicle must not be attached to any permanent additions or
external Structures, such as decks and porches.
         c.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
         d.   The vehicles having a total area not exceeding four hundred (400)
square feet when measured at the largest horizontal projection.
         e.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and have inflated
tires.
         f.   Any air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to
be safe for movement out of the Floodplain.
         g.   The vehicle must be attached to a site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices. Utility connections include, but are not
limited to, propane tanks, electrical and sewage.
         h.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a Recreational Vehicle
or park model, be entirely supported by jacks, or have a hitch jack permanently
mounted, have the tires touching the ground and be supported by block in a
manner that will allow the block to be easily removed by use of the jacks/hitch
jack.
      6.   In zones A, AO, AH, and AE, detached Accessory Structures may be
constructed with the Lowest Floor below the FPE provided the following
conditions are met:
         a.   The Building must be non-habitable, must not include areas
intended or used for cooking, and must not include bathrooms, toilet rooms, or
shower rooms.
         b.   All areas below the BFE shall be constructed with Floodresistant
materials.
         c.   The Building must be used only for the storage and parking and
cannot be modified later into another use.
         d.   The Building shall be located outside of the Designated Floodway
unless the Building can be constructed and placed on a Building site so as not
to block Flood flows nor reduce Floodway storage, can also meet the Appropriate
Use criteria of Section
4-12-6(B), and all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.
         e.   All electrical lines, switches, receptacles, and fixtures must be
located above the FPE except to the minimum extent required by applicable
building or life-safety codes. Any switches, receptacles, and/or fixtures
required by applicable building or life-safety codes to extend below the FPE
shall be rated, or located in enclosures rated, for prolonged submersion.
         f.   No plumbing, heating, or air conditioning shall be permitted in
Accessory Structures allowed under this Subsection to be wet floodproofed in
lieu of elevation.
         g.   The structure must have at least two (2) permanent openings on at
least two walls not more than one (1) foot above grade and below the BFE, with
one (1) square inch of opening for every one (1) square foot of floor area.
         h.   The structure must be no more than one story in height and no
more than six hundred (600) square feet in size.
         i.   The Building shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning.
         j.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the FPE.
         k.   The Lowest Floor elevation should be documented, and the owner
advised of the Flood insurance implications of building with the Lowest Floor
below the BFE.
      7.   In Floodplain zones AO and AH, drainage paths shall be provided to
guide water around and away from the Buildings.
      8.   The repair, remodeling, or maintenance of existing Buildings located
within a Designated Floodway, built before November 18, 1987, are exempt from
17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708, including the more restrictive Appropriate Use
standards. Such Buildings are not exempt from Section
4-12-8(C)(1), including Substantial Damage and Substantial Improvement
requirements, and if enlarged, replaced, or structurally altered must meet the
requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708.
      9.   New Construction or Substantial Improvement of Critical Facilities
within the floodplain or the 0.2 percent annual chance flood elevation when
defined, shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
structurally dry floodproofed to the 0.2 percent annual chance flood elevation
or three feet above the BFE, whichever is greater. Adequate parking shall be
provided for staffing of the critical facilities at or above the BFE or 0.2
percent chance flood, when defined. Access routes to all critical facilities
should be reviewed and considered when permitting. Access routes should be
elevated to or above the level of the BFE.
   Floodproofing and sealing measures may also be used to provide protection,
as described in Section
4-12-6, and must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced
by or released into floodwaters.
   Critical Facilities include emergency services facilities (such as fire and
police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes, and senior care
facilities.
      10.   When construction of a building following a LOMR Based on Fill is
requested, the condition where a site in the floodplain is removed due to the
use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, the applicant may not apply for
a permit from the Village to construct the lowest floor of a building below the
BFE in the floodplain.
   D.   Compensatory Storage.
      1.   Whenever any portion of a riverine Floodplain is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or Structure
below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically
equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the BFE.
      2.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.1 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or Structure.
      3.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
      4.   All Floodplain storage lost below the existing ten percent (10%)
annual chance Flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten percent
(10%) annual chance Flood elevation. All Floodplain storage lost above the
existing one percent (1%) annual chance Flood elevation shall be replaced above
the proposed one percent (1%) annual chance Flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-9: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The Corporate Authorities shall consider Flood hazards, to the extent that they
are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
Development.
   A.   New subdivisions, Manufactured Home parks, annexation agreements, and
Planned Unit Developments within the Floodplain shall be reviewed to assure
that the proposed Developments are consistent with this Chapter and the need to
minimize Flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, Manufactured Home
parks and Planned Unit Developments shall include a signed statement by a
Registered P.E. that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of
surface waters in accordance with Section 2 of the Plat Act, 765 ILCS 205/2, as
amended.
   B.   Proposals for new subdivisions, Manufactured Home parks, travel trailer
parks, Planned Unit Developments and additions to Manufactured Home parks and
additions to subdivisions shall include BFE data and Floodway delineations.
Where this information is not available from an existing adopted study, the
Applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the BFE per Section
4-12-4 and the Floodway delineation.
   C.   Streets, blocks, lots, parks, and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
Channels. Wherever possible, the Floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   D.   The Corporate Authorities shall not approve any Planned Unit
Development or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless
such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
   E.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, must be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate Flood
damage. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-10: VARIANCES:
   A.   No variances shall be granted within a Designated Floodway if any
increase in Flood levels would result.
   B.   Whenever the standards of this Chapter place undue hardship on a
specific Development proposal, the Applicant may apply to the Corporate
Authorities for a variance. The Corporate Authorities shall review and act on
the Applicant's request for a variance. The Village may attach such conditions
to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the Flood protection
intent of this Chapter.
   C.   No variance shall be granted unless the Applicant demonstrates, and the
Corporate Authorities finds, that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The Development activity cannot be located outside the Floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The variance granted is the minimum necessary, considering the Flood
hazard, to afford relief.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety,
destruction of beneficial stream uses and functions including, aquatic habitat,
creation of a nuisance, causation of fraud on or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for Flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public
facilities; and
      6.   The provisions of Sections
4-12-6 and
4-12-7 of this Chapter shall still be met; and
      7.   The circumstances of the property are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      8.   All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been
obtained.
   D.   The Director of Public Works shall notify an Applicant in writing that
a variance from the requirements of Section
4-12-8 that would lessen the degree of protection to a Building will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for Flood insurance up to amounts
as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage; and
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the Applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the Applicant will acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   E.   The findings of fact and conclusions of law made by the Corporate
Authorities according to this Section, the notifications required by this
Section, and a record of hearings and evidence considered as justification for
the issuance of all variances from this Chapter shall be maintained by the
Village. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-11: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of Flood Protection required by this Chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger Floods may
occur, or Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
Chapter does not imply that Development, either inside or outside of the
Floodplain, will be free from flooding or damage. This Chapter does not create
liability on the part of the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any
Flood damage that results from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-12: PENALTY:
   A.   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit for Development in
the Floodplain or failure to comply with the conditions of a floodplain
development permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this
Chapter. Upon due investigation, whenever the Director of Public Works
determines that a Violation of the minimum standards of this Chapter exists,
the Director of Public Works shall issue a Notice of Violation. The Notice of
Violation constitutes a suspension of the permit.
The Notice of Violation shall contain the address or parcel identification
number of the property, a brief description of the Violation; Section of the
Ordinance violated; the requirement to stop all work in Violation of this
Chapter; a statement informing the violator that they may contest the notice in
writing within ten days, correct the violation in ten days, or apply for a
permit; a warning that if the violator fails to comply the Village shall
institute appropriate legal proceedings; and a statement that the Ordinance
authorizes fines of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day during or on which a Violation
occurs or continues.
Notification to the owner shall be in any of the following manners:
      1.   By personally delivering to the owner of the property involved, or
to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work;
      2.   By posting a copy of the stop work order on the subject property in
a conspicuous place;
      3.   By personally delivering or mailing a copy of the notice of
violation to any adult who resides at, occupies, uses, leases, manages, or
maintains the property on which the Violation is located; or
      4.   By personally delivering or mailing a copy of the notice of
violation to any owner in title to the property on which the Violation is
located.
   B.   If such owner fails, after ten days from the date the written notice is
issued, to correct the violation, apply for a permit, or contest the notice in
writing, the Village may make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this Chapter or make such other order as
the Court deems necessary to secure compliance with the Ordinance.
   C.   Any person who violates this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   D.   The Village shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   E.   The Director of Public Works shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase Flood damages and, therefore
may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
   F.   No floodplain development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Corporate Authorities. Written notice of
such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation;
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee
shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on his/her behalf. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the Corporate Authorities shall determine whether
the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   G.   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
4-12-13: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This Chapter repeals and replaces other Ordinances adopted by the Village
President and Board of Trustees to fulfill the requirements of the NFIP
including the "Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance," effective May 1,
2014, and any subsequent amendments thereto.
However, this Chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance
adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this Chapter repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing annexation agreements, easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions. Where this Chapter and other ordinance easements,
covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 3852, 1-10-2022)
CHAPTER 13
STORMWATER DETENTION
SECTION:
4-13-1: Purpose
4-13-2: Application Of Regulations
4-13-3: Affidavit Of Ownership Interest
4-13-4: Permit Required
4-13-5: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-13-6: Access
4-13-7: Variance
4-13-8: Violations
4-13-9: Definitions
4-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to diminish threats to public health and safety
caused by the runoff of excessive stormwater, reduce the possibilities of
hydraulic overloading of sewer systems, and to reduce economic losses to
individuals and the community at large. The provisions of this chapter further
regulate, guide and control development which increases runoff of stormwater.
Except as hereinafter provided, that certain document titled "Cook County
Watershed Management Ordinance", effective May 1, 2014, and any subsequent
amendments thereto, three copies of which are on file at Village Hall for
reference only, shall be and is hereby adopted as the ordinance for the Village
regulating stormwater, erosion and sediment control practices, and sewer
construction within the Village; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Watershed Management
Ordinance, as amended herein, on file at Village Hall, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this section.
The following sections of the WMO, as effective within the corporate boundaries
of the Village, are hereby amended as follows:
Section 504.1: The requirements of this Section shall apply to any of the
following:
   A.   Residential Subdivision Development on parcels greater than or equal to
one (1) acre;
   B.   Multi-Family Residential Development on parcels of any size;
   C.   Non-Residential Development on parcels of any size; and
   D.   Right-of-way Development totaling one (1) acre or more of new
impervious area, where practicable.
Section 504.13: The detention facility shall be designed and constructed to:
   A.   Be accessible and maintainable;
   B.   Function with a gravity outlet wherever possible;
   C.   Function without human intervention and under tailwater conditions;
   D.   Provide an overflow structure and overflow path that can safely convey
the design runoff rate using the methodology specified in 502.9 of the Cook
County Watershed Management Ordinance and no less than 1.0 cfs/acre of
tributary area;
   E.   Maximum detention depths on new parking lots shall not exceed seven (7)
inches within parking stalls and twelve (12) inches elsewhere, and the
inundation hazard below the 100-year high water elevation shall be clearly
posted;
   F.   Maximum water depth shall not exceed four feet
   G.   Maximum side slope shall be no less than 50:1 and no greater than 4:1,
provided, however, that retaining walls may be incorporated into the design of
the facility in lieu of the side slope requirements if approved by the
Director;
   H.   Provide side slope stabilization and earth stabilization in a manner
that is subject to the approval of the Director;
   I.   Roof-top detention shall be subject to the approval of the Director.
Section 504.14: The control structure for the detention facility shall be:
   A.   Designed using a baffle wall system
   B.   Located within the property boundary when possible;
   C.   Durable and permanent;
   D.   Visible and accessible for maintenance in the opinion of the Director;
   E.   Located on the outlet side of a manhole structure;
   F.   Designed to include a debris screen upstream of all restrictors less
than six (6) inches in diameter;
   G.   Designed with a minimum two (2) inch diameter opening;
   H.   Designed to be self-cleaning; and
   I.   Designed to incorporate a backflow prevention device when connecting to
the combined sewer system or a storm sewer system tributary to District water
reclamation facilities.
(Ord. 3737, 4-8-2019)
4-13-2: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any development within any and
all zoning district classifications in the Village.
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
      1.   Structures and land uses existing as of the effective date of this
chapter, except when redevelopment occurs;
      2.   Proposed development with an active grading permit, watershed
management permit, or sewerage system permit issued prior to the effective date
of this chapter, which has not been fully constructed by the effective date of
this chapter. Stormwater management provisions for such development shall
conform to the approved plans and specifications of the permit and shall not
result in any increase in impervious area over the amount specified by the
permit;
      3.   Proposed development for which a complete grading permit application
has been accepted by the Village prior to the effective date of this chapter.
Any such grading permit application shall be subject to the ordinance effective
at the time the application was made. A complete grading permit application is
considered accepted by the Village upon actual receipt by the Village and is
minimally composed of the following:
         a.   Complete and executed grading permit application form;
         b.   Grading permit fee paid in full;
         c.   Plan drawings and calculations signed and sealed by a
professional engineer; and
         d.   Permit documents signed by the permittee;
      4.   Development undertaken as a flood control project.
   B.   Existing structures that do not conform to the requirements of this
chapter shall not be substantially improved, replaced, or enlarged in any
manner unless such substantial improvements, replacements, or enlargements
conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 3737, 4-8-2019)
4-13-3: AFFIDAVIT OF OWNERSHIP INTEREST:
At the time of building permit application, the owner of the development may be
required to execute and file with the Department of Public Works a completed
Affidavit of Ownership Interest on a form to be provided by the Village. This
requirement may apply to any development meeting the criteria identified in
subsection
4-13-2B of this chapter, though the Director may apply it to additional
developments at his discretion. (Ord. 3737, 4-8-2019)
4-13-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall commence any construction, substantial improvement, subdivision
of land or other development without first obtaining a permit from the
Director. The Director shall not issue such permit for any construction,
substantial improvement or other development that does not comply with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 3737, 4-8-2019)
4-13-5: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection provided by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering experience and
scientific methods of study. This Code does not warrant that areas outside the
delineated floodplain or permitted developments within the delineated
floodplain will be free from flooding and associated damages. This chapter
shall not be construed or applied in any manner to create liability on the part
of, or a cause of action against, the Village, or any elected official,
officer, agent, or employee thereof, for any damage or injury to person or
property resulting from reliance on the provisions of this chapter or from
reading or interpreting any map that is part of this chapter. The design and
supplementary design requirements contained herein do not replace nor
substitute sound engineering practice. (Ord. 3737, 4-8-2019)
4-13-6: ACCESS:
Representatives of the Village may, at all reasonable times during regular
business hours or upon notice, request entry upon any development subject to
this chapter for the purpose of conducting periodic inspections to ensure
compliance with this chapter and/or a grading permit issued thereunder. The
scope of the inspection, including reviewing and copying of records, is limited
to determining whether the development is in compliance with all requirements
and conditions of this chapter and/or a grading permit.
The Village may periodically request entry to inspect any mitigation measure at
reasonable times and such inspection shall be limited to determining whether
the development is in compliance with all requirements and conditions of this
chapter and/or a grading permit.
If a request for entry is denied, the Village may seek to obtain and execute a
search warrant pursuant to
chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 3737, 4-8-2019)
4-13-7: VARIANCE:
The Village may grant a variance when it is consistent with the general purpose
and intent of this chapter and when the development meets the requirements as
specified in all of the following conditions:
   A.   Granting the variance shall not alter the essential character of the
area involved, including existing stream uses;
   B.   Failure to grant the variance would create an exceptional hardship on
the applicant (economic hardship of the applicant alone shall not constitute
exceptional hardship);
   C.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary and there are no means
other than the requested variance by which the alleged hardship can be avoided
or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit the reasonable continuation of the
development;
   D.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general
condition or problem;
   E.   The applicant's circumstances are not self-imposed; and
   F.   Granting the variance shall not result in any of the following:
      1.   Additional threats to public safety;
      2.   Extraordinary public expense;
      3.   Nuisances, fraud, or victimization of the public, or;
      4.   Conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
To the extent a permit is denied pursuant to this chapter, the applicant may,
no later than thirty days from the date of said denial, appeal the decision to
the Corporate Authorities. The appeal shall state with particularity the
following:
   A.   The name of the party requesting the appeal and its interest in the
appeal;
   B.   The common address of the subject property;
   C.   A statement setting forth the reasons for the appeal; and
   D.   The specific relief being sought.
The appeal shall be heard at the earliest available scheduled meeting of the
Corporate Authorities. In reviewing the permit denial, the Corporate
Authorities shall consider all written documentation submitted by the applicant
in conjunction with the request for a permit. (Ord. 3745, 5-13-2019)
4-13-8: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not less than two-hundred fifty dollars or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars. A separate offense may be deemed committed upon each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 3737, 4-8-2019)
4-13-9: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions for this chapter shall be the same as those listed in section
4-12-2  of this title. (Ord. 3737, 4-8-2019; amd. Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
CHAPTER 14
SEARCH WARRANTS
SECTION:
4-14-1: Search Warrants
4-14-2: Exceptions
4-14-3: Applicability
4-14-1: SEARCH WARRANTS:
   A.   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect any property, no
entry or inspection shall be made without the procurement of a warrant from the
Circuit Court of Cook County. The Court may consider any of the following
factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as
to whether a warrant shall issue:
      1.   Eyewitness account of violation.
      2.   Citizen complaints.
      3.   Tenant complaints.
      4.   Plain view violations.
      5.   Violations apparent from Village records.
      6.   Property deterioration.
      7.   Age of property.
      8.   Nature of alleged violation.
      9.   Similar properties in the area.
      10.   Documented violations of similar properties in the area.
      11.   Passage of time since last inspection.
      12.   Previous violations on the property.
      13.   Overall reasonableness.
   B.   Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of
reasonable legislative and administrative standards which show that there is
reason to believe that a condition of nonconformity exists with respect to a
particular property in violation of a Village ordinance. (Ord. 2121, 5-23-83)
4-14-2: EXCEPTIONS:
Under the controlling standard of reasonableness, a search warrant need not be
obtained prior to entry or inspection of a particular property in emergency
situations recognized by law. (Ord. 2121, 5-23-83)
4-14-3: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any inspection required with
respect to any real property under any title of the Village Code. (Ord. 2121,
5-23-83)
CHAPTER 15
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS, TELEVISION ANTENNAS, AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNAS AND
CELLULAR TELEPHONE TOWERS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES
SECTION:
4-15-1: Definitions
4-15-2: Regulations Applicable To Satellite Dish Antennas
4-15-3: Television Antennas And Television Antenna Support Structures
4-15-4: Regulations Applicable To Amateur Radio Antennas
4-15-5: Regulations Applicable To Cellular Telephone Towers
4-15-6: Fines
4-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA: Any antenna having a combined surface area greater than
ten square feet, or having any single dimension exceeding twelve feet, that is
capable of transmitting as well as receiving radio signals and whose operator
is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission as an amateur radio
operator.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any mast, pole, tripod or similar structure used to
support a satellite dish antenna, a television antenna, an amateur radio
antenna or a cellular telephone tower.
CELLULAR TELEPHONE TOWER: A single antenna or an array of antennas that is
principally used for transmission and reception of cellular telephone
communications and that is mounted on: 1) a building or other structure, or 2)
a freestanding pole, mast or other
structure that is attached to the ground or mounted on the roof of a building.
COMMERCIAL ANTENNA: Any antenna used for communication purposes in any
commerce, industry or business; provided, however, that an antenna for
transmission of data to or from a dwelling unit in a residential zoning
district as part of a "home occupation" validly conducted under the Village
Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed not to be a commercial antenna (irrespective
of the commercial or noncommercial nature of the data which is transmitted or
received) so long as such antenna does not violate the terms and conditions for
satellite dish antennas as set forth in subsection
4-15-2A1 through A10 of this Chapter.
NONCOMMERCIAL ANTENNA: Any antenna which is not a commercial antenna.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: Any device incorporating a reflective surface that is
solid, open mesh, or bar configured, and is in the shape of a shallow dish,
cone, horn, cornucopia, or flat plate. A satellite dish antenna is used to
receive or transmit radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or
orbitally based units. This definition shall include but not be limited to what
is commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, satellite receivers,
satellite discs, antennas for direct broadcast systems (DBSs), antennas for
television reception-only systems (TVROs), antennas for satellite microwave
systems, antennas for multichannel multiservice distribution services,
microwave antennas (wireless cable systems), and antennas for digital satellite
systems (DSSs).
TELEVISION ANTENNA: Any device, external to or attached to the exterior of a
building, together with any supporting structure, used for reception of
television signals. (Ord. 2647, 8-14-95; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-15-2: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS:
   A.   Permit Required: Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted as an
accessory structure in any zoning district, but only upon compliance with the
requirements of this subsection, or upon approval pursuant to subsection D or E
of this section. The Director of Public Works shall issue a building permit for
any satellite dish antenna that conforms to the following standards and
criteria:
      1.   In residential zoning districts, no satellite dish antenna shall be
installed in the area between the front property line of the zoning lot and the
residential structure located thereon;
      2.   In residential zoning districts, no satellite dish antenna shall be
installed in the required side yard setbacks of the zoning lot;
      3.   In residential zoning districts, the maximum height limit of a
satellite dish antenna shall be eight feet above grade;
      4.   In residential zoning districts, and also for satellite dish
antennas designed to receive, but not transmit, radio or electromagnetic waves
or other signals, no satellite dish antenna shall have a solid surface; such
satellite dish antenna shall be made of open-mesh materials; provided, however,
that any satellite dish antenna which is not more than twenty four inches in
diameter may have a solid surface;
      5.   In residential zoning districts, no more than one satellite dish
antenna may be located on any zoning lot;
      6.   In residential zoning districts, each satellite dish antenna shall
be permanently ground-mounted and no such antenna shall be installed on a
portable or movable vehicle or structure, such as a trailer or recreation
vehicle; provided, however, that any satellite dish antenna which is not more
than twenty four inches in diameter may be roof-mounted in a residential zoning
district on that portion of the roof facing the rear yard below the highest
portion of the roof;
      7.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection A10 below, each satellite
dish antenna shall be a neutral color. For purposes of this subsection, black
and gray shall be considered to be neutral colors. The Director of Public Works
may determine that any other color is "neutral" within the meaning of this
subsection if such color blends with the surrounding dominant color, such color
helps camouflage the satellite dish antenna, and such color is neither bright
nor metallic;
      8.   Each ground-mounted satellite dish antenna shall be screened so that
no portion of the satellite dish antenna will be visible either from the
abutting properties' ground view or from the public streets at a point five
feet above grade level, except that no such screening shall be required within
the area in front of or to the rear of the satellite dish antenna to the extent
that such screening would create reception interference or prevent a shift in
the position of the antenna. In such instances, the required screening shall be
placed so as to achieve the screening purposes of this subsection, but outside
of the area within which the screening would create reception interference or
prevent a shift in the position of the antenna. Screening materials may consist
of year-round vegetation, the dwelling on the zoning lot where such antenna is
located, garages, storage buildings, fences, earth berms or other accessory
buildings which meet all of the provisions of the Zoning Code;
      9.   No advertising in any form shall be permitted on any part of a
satellite dish antenna, except for a six inch square displaying the
manufacturer's or distributor's company name. Such six inch square area may not
be on the concave side nor on the upper fifty percent of the convex side of the
satellite dish;
      10.   No satellite dish antenna shall exceed a diameter of eight feet.
      11.   No commercial antenna shall be permitted in any residential zoning
district;
      12.   In nonresidential zoning districts, the maximum height of the
satellite dish antenna as measured from grade level, or if the antenna is not
ground-mounted, as measured from that portion of the satellite dish antenna
which is closest to grade, shall be eight feet. If an antenna is mounted on a
building and exceeds the height of the roof, then the satellite dish antenna
shall satisfy at least one of the conditions set forth below:
         a.   If mounted on a flat-roofed building, the satellite dish antenna
shall not intersect or otherwise project above a plane projecting from the
perimeter of the roof upwards and toward the interior of the building but at an
angle of forty-five degrees from the horizontal; or
         b.   If mounted on a pitched-roof building, the satellite dish antenna
shall not project more than two feet above the highest point of the roof line,
shall be the color of the roof, and the bottom of the satellite dish antenna
shall be no more than eight inches above the roof.
   B.   Application Requirements: A building permit shall be required for the
erection of a new satellite dish antenna or any similar accessory structure in
any zoning district in the Village, and for any substantial changes of an
existing satellite dish antenna or similar accessory structure. The application
for a permit pursuant to this subsection shall include a dimensioned site plan
depicting the proposed location, and the manufacturer's or distributor's
installation requirements and product specifications, including the location of
the principal buildings on adjacent lots, together with a description of the
type of antenna, total height and diameter, a sketch showing the proposed
setbacks from adjacent property lines and public rights of way, and also
showing the method of screening to be provided, the materials and colors of the
screening and antenna and mounting details and foundation. The Director of
Public Works may require any additional information that would assist in
determining visual intrusion and structural safety. The fee for said permit
shall be twenty-five dollars, payable in advance, and a permit when issued
shall be visibly displayed on the premises of the zoning lot during the period
of time of the erection or change of such satellite dish antenna, and in any
event for not less than ten days.
   C.   Aesthetics Review: In all zoning districts, the Director of Public
Works shall review any permit application to determine whether the proposed
color of the satellite dish antenna will blend with the dominant surrounding
color, or would otherwise be unobtrusive; whether the satellite dish antenna
can be installed in a location which will minimize visual intrusion while
maintaining practical operation; and whether the satellite dish antenna can be
screened so that it is concealed from view from public streets and adjoining
property. If the proposed satellite dish antenna requires review under
subsection D2 of this section, then such review shall be completed before
aesthetic review is conducted pursuant to this subsection.
   D.   Proposed satellite dish antennas that do not meet the requirements of
subsection A above:
      1.   Any person who desires to install any satellite dish antenna in a
residential zoning district that does not meet the applicable requirements
contained in subsection A above may apply to the Director of Public Works for a
special building permit. In addition to the criteria set forth herein, an
applicant's right to reasonable satellite signal reception shall be taken into
consideration in determining whether to approve an application for a special
building permit pursuant to this subsection.
      2.   Any person desiring to install any satellite dish antenna in any
nonresidential zoning district that does not meet the applicable requirements
set forth in subsection A above, or desiring to install an additional satellite
dish antenna in excess of the quantity permitted by subsection A5 above, may
apply for a special building permit. Upon receipt of a completed application,
the Director of Public Works shall establish acceptable locations, materials,
quantity, height and/or diameter for such satellite dish antenna. The Director
of Public Works shall be guided by the criteria set forth in D1 of this
subsection.
   E.   Existing Satellite Dish Antenna: Any satellite dish antenna for which a
building permit or antenna permit has been issued prior to the effective date
of this Chapter but which does not conform to this Chapter shall, within ten
years of the effective date of this Chapter, be removed or brought into
conformance with this Chapter. During the interim period, said nonconforming
satellite dish antenna shall be maintained in good repair and in a neat and
clean condition. No structural alteration shall be made thereto, unless to
preserve the safety of said antenna, or to bring the antenna into compliance
with this Chapter. Any owner of a nonconforming satellite dish antenna may
apply for review and approval.
   F.   Installation: The installation or modification of each satellite dish
antenna shall be in accordance with all applicable requirements of the Village
Building Code and all other applicable codes and ordinances. Each satellite
dish antenna shall be constructed and installed so as to withstand the forces
of wind pressure, snow and ice loads and other forces, as provided in the
Village Building Code. (Ord. 2647, 8-14-95; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-15-3: TELEVISION ANTENNAS AND TELEVISION ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES:
Television antennas and television antenna support structures shall be
permitted as an accessory structure in any zoning district, but only in
compliance with the following regulations:
   A.   Number Limited: No more than one television antenna and television
antenna support structure may be located on any zoning lot.
   B.   Height Limited: No television antenna or television antenna support
structure shall exceed six feet in height.
   C.   Attachment To Buildings: Each television antenna and television antenna
support structure must be mounted in the attic or comparable enclosed area (if
any) of the principal structure located on the zoning lot, and if there is no
attic or other enclosed area, or if mounting in the attic or other enclosed
area presents a grave hardship in respect to reception of signals, then such
television antenna and its support structure shall be attached to the chimney
(if any) or other similar building appurtenance on the principal structure
located on the zoning lot. In no event shall the television antenna and its
support structure extend more than three feet above the chimney or other
appurtenance to which the television antenna or its support structure is
mounted.
   D.   Mounting: The television antenna and its support structure shall not be
mounted or attached to the front of any principal building or to the side of
any building facing a street, including any portion of the building roof facing
any street. The television antenna and its support structure shall be designed
to withstand a wind force of eighty miles per hour without the use of
supporting guy wires.
   E.   Grounding: The television antenna and its support structure shall be
bonded to a grounding rod.
   F.   Other Standards: The television antenna and its support structure shall
satisfy such other design and construction standards as the Director of Public
Works determines are necessary to ensure safe construction and maintenance of
the antenna and its support structure, including the standards set forth in the
ICC, International Building Code, 2018 Edition, and the National Electrical
Code, 2017 Edition.
   G.   Guy Wires: No guy or other support wiring shall be used in connection
with any television antenna or its support structure except when used to anchor
the antenna or support structure to a chimney.
   H.   Color: When the television antenna and its support structure are
attached to a chimney or similar building appurtenance, the antenna and its
support structure shall be a color that blends in with the roof and chimney to
which it is attached. (Ord. 2647, 8-14-95; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-15-4: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNAS:
   A.   Permit Required: Amateur radio antennas shall be permitted as an
accessory structure in any zoning district, but only upon compliance with the
requirements of this subsection, or upon approval pursuant to subsection C of
this section. The Director of Public Works shall issue a building permit for
any amateur radio antenna that conforms to the following standards and
criteria:
      1.   No more than one amateur radio antenna may be located on any zoning
lot;
      2.   No ground-mounted amateur radio antenna shall exceed thirty-five
feet in height. No amateur radio antenna which is attached to a building, as
provided in subsection A3 below, shall exceed the height limitation therein
specified.
      3.   No amateur radio antenna or its support structure shall be attached
to a principal or accessory structure unless all of the following requirements
are fulfilled:
         a.   The amateur radio antenna and its support structure shall not
extend more than fifteen feet above the highest point of the building or
accessory structure on which the amateur radio antenna and its support
structure are mounted.
         b.   The amateur radio antenna and its support structure shall not be
attached to or mounted upon any building appurtenance, such as a chimney, nor
be mounted upon or attached to the front of any principal building, or to the
side of any building facing a street (including any portion of the building
roof facing any street).
         c.   The amateur radio antenna and its support structure shall be
designed and mounted or attached so as to be able to withstand a wind force of
eighty miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires.
         d.   The amateur radio antenna and its support structure shall be
bonded to a grounding rod.
         e.   The amateur radio antenna and its support structure shall satisfy
such other design and construction standards as the Director of Public Works
determines are reasonably necessary to ensure the safe construction and
maintenance of the amateur radio antenna and its support structure.
         f.   No amateur radio antenna or its support structure shall be
located in any front yard or required side yard, or located nearer to any
habitable building on any adjacent property than a distance equal to one-half
of the fully extended height of the amateur radio antenna and its support
structure.
   B.   Application Requirements: A building permit shall be required for the
erection of a new amateur radio antenna or its support structure in any zoning
district in the village, and for any substantial changes of an existing amateur
radio antenna or antenna support structure. The application for a permit
pursuant to this subsection shall include a dimensioned site plan depicting the
proposed location, and the manufacturer's or distributor's installation
requirements and product specifications, including the location of the
principal buildings on adjacent lots, together with a description of the type
of antenna and antenna support structure, total height and width, a sketch
showing the proposed setbacks from adjacent property lines and public rights of
way, and also showing the method of screening (if any) to be provided, the
materials and colors of the screening and antenna, and the antenna and antenna
support structure mounting details and foundation. The director of public works
may require any additional information that would assist in determining visual
intrusion and structural safety. The fee for said permit shall be twenty-five
dollars, payable in advance, and a permit when issued shall be visibly
displayed on the premises of the zoning lot during the period of time of the
erection or change of such amateur radio antenna or antenna support structure,
and in any event for not less than ten days.
   C.   Proposed amateur radio antennas that do not meet the requirements of
subsection A of this section:
      1.   Any person who desires to install any amateur radio antenna in a
residential zoning district that does not meet the applicable requirements
contained in subsection A of this section may apply to the director of public
works for a special building permit. In addition to the criteria set forth
herein, in determining whether to approve an application for a special building
permit pursuant to this subsection, the Director of Public Works shall seek to
accommodate reasonably the applicant's desire to engage in amateur radio
communications, using the minimum practicable regulations to accomplish the
goals of this chapter.
      2.   Any person desiring to install any amateur radio antenna in any
nonresidential zoning district that does not meet the applicable requirements
set forth in subsection A of this section, or desiring to install an additional
amateur radio antenna in excess of the quantity permitted by subsection A1 of
this section, may apply for a special building permit. Upon receipt of a
completed application, the director of public works shall establish acceptable
locations, materials, quantity and height limitations for such amateur radio
antenna. The director of public works shall be guided by the criteria set forth
in subsection C1 of this section.
   D.   Existing Amateur Radio Antenna: Any amateur radio antenna or antenna
support structure for which a building permit or antenna permit has been issued
prior to the effective date of this chapter but which does not conform to this
chapter shall, within ten years of the effective date of this chapter, be
removed or brought into conformance with this chapter. During the interim
period, said nonconforming amateur radio antenna and antenna support structure
shall be maintained in good repair and in a neat and clean condition. No
structural alteration shall be made thereto, unless to preserve the safety of
said antenna and antenna support structure, or to bring the antenna and antenna
support structure into compliance with this chapter. Any owner of a
nonconforming amateur radio antenna may apply for review and approval.
   E.   Installation: The installation or modification of each amateur radio
antenna shall be in accordance with all applicable requirements of the Village
Building Code and all other applicable codes and ordinances. Each amateur radio
antenna shall be constructed and installed so as to withstand the forces of
wind pressure, snow and ice loads and other forces, as provided in the Village
Building Code. (Ord. 2647, 8-14-1995; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-15-5: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO CELLULAR TELEPHONE TOWERS:
   A.   Permit Required: A building permit shall be required for the erection
of a new cellular telephone tower or any similar accessory structure, and for
any substantial changes of an existing cellular telephone tower or similar
accessory structure. The director of public works shall issue a building permit
for any cellular telephone tower that conforms to the following standards and
criteria:
      1.   The cellular telephone tower complies with the requirements of title
10 of this Code.
      2.   No more than two cellular telephone towers may be located in any PRI
zoning district.
      3.   No cellular telephone tower shall exceed one hundred twenty feet in
height.
      4.   The village shall have a right to use the cellular telephone tower
jointly with the owner thereof, on terms and conditions which are mutually
acceptable to the village and the owner thereof.
   B.   Application Requirements: The application for a permit pursuant to this
subsection shall include a dimensioned site plan depicting the proposed
location, and the manufacturer's or distributor's installation requirements and
product specifications, including the location of the principal buildings on
adjacent lots, together with a description of the type of the cellular
telephone tower, total height and diameter, a sketch showing the proposed
setbacks from adjacent property lines and public rights of way, and also
showing the method of screening to be provided, the materials and colors of the
screening and the cellular telephone tower, and mounting details and
foundation. The Building Official may require any additional information that
would assist in determining visual intrusion and structural safety. The fee for
said permit shall be twenty five dollars, payable in advance, and a permit when
issued shall be visibly displayed on the premises of the zoning lot during the
period of time of the erection or change of such cellular telephone tower and
in any event for not less than ten days.
   C.   Existing Cellular Telephone Tower: Any cellular telephone tower for
which a building permit or cellular telephone tower has been issued prior to
the effective date of this chapter but which does not conform to this chapter
shall, within ten years of the effective date of this chapter, be removed or
brought into conformance with this chapter. During the interim period, said
nonconforming cellular telephone tower shall be maintained in good repair and
in a neat and clean condition. No structural alteration shall be made thereto,
unless to preserve the safety of said cellular telephone tower, or to bring the
tower into compliance with this chapter. Any owner of a nonconforming cellular
telephone tower may apply for review and approval.
   D.   Installation: The installation and maintenance of the cellular
telephone tower shall be in accordance with all applicable requirements of the
Village Zoning Ordinance, all applicable requirements of the Village Building
Code, and all other applicable codes and ordinances. Each cellular telephone
tower shall be constructed and installed so as to withstand the forces of wind
pressure, snow and ice loads, and other forces, as provided in the Village
Building Code. (Ord. 2647, 8-14-1995; amd. Ord. 3223, 2-25-2008; Ord. 3705, 7-
9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018; Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-15-6: FINES:
Any person causing or allowing a violation of any of the terms and conditions
of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than fifty dollars,
nor more than five hundred dollars, for each offense. Each day that a violation
of any term or condition of this section exists shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 2647, 8-14-1995; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 16
HOMELESS SHELTERS
SECTION:
4-16-1: Interpretation
4-16-2: Certificate of Occupancy Required
4-16-3: Application
4-16-4: Requirements
4-16-5: Inspection
4-16-1: INTERPRETATION:
In their interpretation and application, the provision of this Chapter shall be
held to be the minimum requirements with respect to homeless shelters. Where
this Chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or
premises for homeless shelter purposes than is imposed or required by the
provisions of any other part of this Code, the provisions of this Chapter shall
control. (Ord. 2538, 3-8-93; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-16-2: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to conduct, keep, manage or
operate, or cause to be operated, a homeless shelter without a certificate of
occupancy therefor. Such certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the
Building Official and there shall be no fee for such certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 2538, 3-8-93; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-16-3: APPLICATION:
A written application shall be submitted which includes the following
information:
   A.   Name and address of person responsible for the homeless shelter
operation;
   B.   Location of homeless shelter;
   C.   Written statement and plans indicating compliance with the provisions
of this Chapter as well as those contained in Title 6, Chapter 16 of this Code,
entitled "Homeless Shelters". (Ord. 2538, 3-8-93; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-16-4: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Each area used for sleeping or resting must have two exits remote from
one another.
   B.   Emergency lighting of the exit ways is required.
   C.   Lighted exit signs are required.
   D.   Smoke detectors are required in the sleeping area and in hallways
leading from sleeping areas to exits.
   E.   The following plumbing fixtures shall be provided:
      1.   Water Closets: Two for each sex.
      2.   Lavatories: Two for each sex.
      3.   Urinals: One.
      4.   Showers: One for each sex (fixed head type only).
      5.   Drinking Fountains: One.
   F.   Basement areas used for sleeping and resting must have a sprinkler
system provided; however, basement areas which have windows and doors directly
to the exterior need not be sprinklered.
   G.   The occupancy of the shelter facility shall be limited to a maximum of
thirty guests; provided, however, that in no event shall the minimum net floor
area per guest be less than sixty-five square feet including aisle spacing of
forty four inches between sleeping mattresses.
   H.   Mechanical ventilation of five hundred cubic feet per minute (CFM) or
operable windows equal to four percent of floor area are required.
   I.   An evacuation plan shall be posted in each sleeping room. (Ord. 2538,
3-8-93; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-16-5: INSPECTION:
At least once a year after a certificate of occupancy has been issued as herein
provided, or more often if deemed necessary, it shall be the duty of the
Building Official, Fire Chief, and the Health Department to authorize the
inspection of said premises and determine that the provisions of this Code are
being complied with. (Ord. 2538, 3-8-93; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 17
GRADING PERMITS
SECTION:
4-17-1: Purpose
4-17-2: Application Of Regulations
4-17-3: Exemptions From Grading Permits
4-17-4: Permit Application Information Required
4-17-5: Grading Permit Application Form
4-17-6: Site Grading Plan
4-17-7: Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
4-17-8: Record Drawings
4-17-9: Grading Permit Fees
4-17-10:Permit Duration
4-17-11:Permit Denial
4-17-12:Assignment Of Permit
4-17-13:Permittee’s Duties
4-17-14:Site Inspections And Plan Modifications
4-17-15:Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
4-17-16:Hazards; Access; Variance
4-17-17:Violations
4-17-18:Roof Drainage, Sump Drainage, And Yard Drainage
4-17-19:Definitions
4-17-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate, guide, and control development in a
manner that is designed to minimize adverse impacts to the properties and
public rights-of-way surrounding a development. As such, no person may fill,
store or dispose of earth materials; alter an existing land grade, contour or
drainage pattern; or perform any other land disturbing activity, without first
obtaining a grading permit pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-2: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
Projects that require a grading permit include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Construction of new homes or buildings;
   B.   Construction or modification of structures or accessory structures that
comprise ten percent or more of the existing structure’s footprint, increases
existing impervious area by 1,000 square feet, or as required by the Director
of Public Works and Development Services;
   C.   Development requiring Volume Control Practices in accordance with
Chapter 4-13  of the Village Code;
   D.   Installation of underground or above ground swimming pools;
   E.   Installation of patios, driveways or other impervious surface;
   F.   Landscaping or any other ground disturbance that changes the grade of
the site such that existing drainage flows will be altered;
   G.   Any project that includes the creation of a foundation;
   H.   Any land disturbance proposed in a floodplain, floodway, wetland,
wetland buffer or riparian environment;
   I.   Any land disturbance that equals twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
lot, or one-half acre, whichever is less;
   J.   Demolition of any building or structure;
   K.   Proposing to install qualified sewer construction within the Village’s
corporate limits; and
   L.   Any other development at the discretion of the Director of Public Works
and Development Services. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM GRADING PERMITS:
Projects that, in the determination of the Director of Public Works and
Development Services, do not alter an existing grade, contour or drainage flow
and are located outside of a floodplain, floodway, wetland, wetland buffer or
riparian environment may not be subject to the permitting requirements herein,
including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Raised decks;
   B.   Fences; and
   C.   Tree removal and planting. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-4: PERMIT APPLICATION INFORMATION REQUIRED:
No request for a grading permit shall be reviewed until the following items
have been submitted to the Village:
   A.   Grading application form;
   B.   Grading permit fee;
   C.   If required, two copies of the proposed site grading plan; and
   D.   Proof of notice to adjacent property owners.
   E.   Copy of applicable MWRD permit applications; and
   F.   For land disturbing activities over one acre in area, the applicant
must obtain and satisfy the requirements of any applicable NPDES IEPA ILR-10
permit. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-5: GRADING PERMIT APPLICATION FORM:
The applicant shall submit the grading permit application form supplied by the
Village and provide the following information:
   A.   Address and permanent index number (PIN) of the site;
   B.   Name, address, email, and telephone number of the applicant(s);
   C.   Name, address, email, and telephone number of all contractors,
subcontractors or other persons performing the activities at the site;
   D.   Description and schematic depiction of the project; and
   E.   Signature(s) of the owner(s) of the site. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-6: SITE GRADING PLAN:
   A.   Application Review: Upon submittal of a complete grading application
form and grading permit fee, the Director of Public Works and Development
Services will determine whether a site grading plan will be necessary and, if
so, the level of plan detail that will be required.
   B.   Plan Detail: The site grading plan may be required to include:
      1.   Name, address, email, and telephone number of the professional
engineer(s) responsible for the preparation of the site grading plan;
      2.   Date of original preparation and any revisions;
      3.   Legend;
      4.   Scale of drawing;
      5.   North arrow;
      6.   Site address;
      7.   Existing and proposed contour intervals that extend a minimum of
twenty-five feet off site, or sufficient enough to show on and off site
drainage and spot elevations as deemed necessary by the Director of Public
Works and Development Services;
      8.   Site property lines and/or lot lines and all drainage and utility
easements on, under or across thereto;
      9.   Location and representation of all existing natural drainage and
runoff patterns, swales and direction of flow, as well as all stormwater
facilities, including all surface and subsurface drainage devices or walls on
or within twenty-five feet of the site;
      10.   Delineation of the drainage area and the drainage area served by
all existing and proposed downspouts;
      11.   Location of downspout, sump pump, and area drain discharges and all
associated piping;
      12.   Location and identification of existing vegetation, proposed
vegetation to be placed on the site, and vegetation to be removed from the
site;
      13.   Location of flood protection areas;
      14.   Location of any existing and proposed buildings and structures,
including top of foundation, finish floor elevation, garage slab, and
elevations of proposed finished grade at all significant points around the
proposed building or structure, including window well rims and adjacent grades,
patios and swimming pools;
      15.   Existing and proposed impervious surface area calculations;
      16.   Delineation of the measures that will be used to control surface
erosion and runoff from the site after all improvements have been constructed
on site;
      17.   Elevation and descriptions of the benchmark utilized for the site
grading plan.
      The North American Vertical Datum of 1988 should be used for all
properties within or adjacent to a Special Flood Hazard Area;
      18.   Three or more representative cross sections at each property line
shared by a neighboring property. Cross sections shall extend between the top
of foundation (T/F) of the proposed structure to the T/F of the adjacent
structure (where applicable) or a distance sufficient to determine drainage
patterns;
      19.   Locations of all manholes, utility structures, fire hydrants,
streetlights, curbs, sidewalks, transformers, junction boxes and pads/pedestals
located in the public right of way adjacent to the property or as requested by
the Director of Public Works and Development Services;
      20.   Location, elevation, size and material of all existing private and
public utilities;
      21.   To the extent the site grading plan includes a connection to a
sewer, provide the size and location of all sewers, water mains, and open
ditches located in the public right of way or in any easement. The rim and
invert elevation shall be provided for all structures within or near the
vicinity of the subject property. The direction of flow for all sewers and open
ditches must also be provided, as well as the methods to be used to protect
them;
      22.   A volume control plan, if required by Chapter 13, that includes the
following:
         a.   Calculations of impervious area and the associated volume
required for the Volume Control Practices.
         b.   Pretreatment measures to protect the functionality of Volume
Control Practices where necessary;
   C.   A Statement by a professional engineer, stating that the proposed
project will not cause or aggravate drainage, erosion or runoff which adversely
impacts adjacent properties or public rights of way shall be submitted.
   D.   Submittal Of Site Grading Plan:
      1.   Submittal Requirements: The site grading plan shall be prepared and
stamped by a professional engineer (licensed in the state of Illinois), and
drawn to a scale of one inch equals twenty feet. The plan and all supporting
documentation shall be submitted electronically via the Village’s current
Permit Portal.
      2.   Notice to Adjacent Property Owners: The applicant shall provide
notice of the land disturbing activities to any adjacent property owner, on the
form to be provided by the Village. Proof of said notice, by means of a signed
affidavit form, shall be submitted with the site grading plan.
   E.   Submission of Additional Data: The of Public Works and Development
Services shall review all documentation submitted pursuant to this Section and,
if deemed necessary to evaluate potential adverse consequences from the
proposed land disturbing activity, the Director of Public Works and Development
Services has the authority to request additional data, clarification or
correction of data already submitted, and the authority to require additional
or alternate measures based upon site conditions.
   F.   Conditions Or Modifications Imposed: The Director of Public Works and
Development Services may impose reasonable conditions on other land disturbing
activities in order to prevent or mitigate such adverse impact on trees,
adjacent properties or easements and rights-of-way, and any such restrictions
shall be incorporated into the requirements of the grading permit. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to prohibiting excessive over
digging, requiring shoring or requiring directional boring instead of open
trenching. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-7: STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN:
   A.   Requirements: The applicant shall also submit a separate plan labeled
“Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan” which identifies the practices to be
used to control runoff, erosion, sedimentation and drainage expected to occur
while the project is ongoing, and before final grading, that may adversely
impact adjacent properties or public rights of way. The stormwater pollution
prevention plan shall also include:
      1.   A specific plan to eliminate the adverse impacts from stormwater
runoff, including, but not limited to, interim soil stabilization and proposed
erosion and sediment control practices for all times during construction work
and specifically during demolition; between completion of demolition and the
commencement of construction work; and continuing through the construction
work, until final grading and establishment of a minimum of 70 percent of the
permanent vegetation. All such proposed measures shall be based upon the
standards and requirements contained in the latest edition of the “Illinois
Urban Manual.”
      2.   Details regarding the intended interim on site storage, placement,
fill and disposal of earth materials;
      3.   Location of the proposed areas of excavation, fill, storage and
disposal of earth materials, including an appropriate method of erosion and
sediment control practices;
      4.   Location of flood protection areas;
      5.   Delineation and standard details of the measures that will be used
to control surface erosion and runoff from the site after all buildings,
structures and permanent improvements have been erected on the site;
      6.   Location of temporary stockpiles; and
      7.   Location of stabilized construction entrance.
   B.   Final Stabilization: To the extent the Director of Public Works and
Development Services determines that the proposed final grade, land contour or
drainage pattern may, upon project completion, adversely impact adjacent
properties or public rights of way, the site grading plan shall also include:
      1.   Data regarding the classification, distribution, strength and
erodability of existing soils;
      2.   Data regarding the nature, distribution, strength and erodability of
earth materials, if any are to be placed on the site;
      3.   Level of water table;
      4.   Plans for permanent soil stabilization upon project completion;
      5.   Design criteria for corrective measures, when necessary; and
      6.   An alternate proposal for final grading that will eliminate the
identified adverse impacts.
   C.   Inspection requirements for all ground disturbances, following the
inspection requirements established in the IEPA ILR10 general permit
conditions. All reports and correspondence related to these inspections and
following actions shall be provided to the Village. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-8: RECORD DRAWINGS:
   A.   Foundation Spot Survey: Upon completion of the construction of a
foundation, and prior to commencing framing, the Director of Public Works and
Development Services may require a foundation spot survey (prepared by a
Professional Land Surveyor licensed in the state of Illinois) which includes
the following:
      1.   All lot lines;
      2.   As-constructed foundation with elevation; and
      3.   Ties to all lot lines.
   B.   As-Built Survey: Upon final completion of the work, the Director of
Public Works and Development Services may require an as-graded plan (prepared
by a Professional Land Surveyor licensed in the state of Illinois) which would
include the following:
      1.   Approved site grading plan;
      2.   Ground surface elevations;
      3.   As-graded cross-sections matching those provided in the grading
review;
      4.   Lot drainage patterns; and
      5.   Locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage and
sewerage facilities, including rims, inverts, pipe sizes, materials, lengths
and slopes. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-9: GRADING PERMIT FEES:
   A.   A grading application fee in accordance with the Village’s schedule of
fees is required for all projects listed in Section
4-17-2 , except where noted in
4-17-9 (C).
   B.   The permit applicant shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the
Village, including any fees for the review of a site grading plan, stormwater
pollution prevention plan, permit applications, calculations and other
supporting documents, record drawings, and inspection(s).
   C.   The grading application fee shall be waived for all projects in which
100% of the proposed impervious area is devoted to installation of pervious
building materials. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-10: PERMIT DURATION:
   A.   Grading permits shall be valid until such time as there has been
inspection and approval of final grading; or up to fifteen months, whichever is
shorter.
   B.   Any request for an extension of a grading permit must be submitted in
writing to the Director of Public Works and Development Services at least 10
working days prior to the grading permit expiration date, and must detail the
reasons for said request. The Director of Public Works and Development Services
has the discretion to grant an extension. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-11: PERMIT DENIAL:
   A.   Reasons For Denial: If, in the determination of the Director of Public
Works and Development Services, the proposed work will unreasonably divert or
detain surface water onto adjacent properties or public rights of way; alter
existing drainage patterns so as to adversely impact adjacent properties or
public rights of way; increase or concentrate runoff of stormwater onto
adjacent properties or the public rights of way; or cause some similar adverse
impact; and the applicant fails to submit proposed measures that would
eliminate the identified adverse impacts, then the request for a grading permit
shall be denied.
   B.   Right To Appeal: To the extent a grading permit is denied pursuant to
this Section, or an extension is denied pursuant to Section
4-17-10 , the applicant may, no later than thirty days from the date of said
   denial, appeal the decision to the corporate authorities. The appeal shall
state with particularity the following:
      1.   The name of the party requesting the appeal and its interest in the
appeal;
      2.   The common address of the subject property;
      3.   A statement setting forth the reasons for the appeal; and
      4.   The specific relief being sought.
   C.   Appeal To The Corporate Authorities:
      1.   The grading permit appeal shall be heard at the earliest available
scheduled meeting of the corporate authorities. Notice of the hearing date to
all entitled under this Chapter shall be provided by the Village.
      2.   In reviewing the permit denial, the corporate authorities shall
consider all written documentation submitted by the applicant in conjunction
with the request for a grading permit. The corporate authorities shall apply
the standards stated in Subsection A of this Section. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-12: ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT:
   A.   A grading permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be assigned so
long as the permittee notifies the Director of Public Works and Development
Services of the proposed assignment and the proposed assignee:
      1.   Submits a new application form;
      2.   Agrees to all conditions and duties imposed by the existing grading
permit and site grading plan, including any modifications thereto; and
      3.   Assumes full legal responsibility for all work performed prior to
the date of the assignment. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-13: PERMITTEE’S DUTIES:
   A.   Upon the issuance of a grading permit, the permittee shall:
      1.   Maintain a copy of the grading permit, stormwater pollution
prevention plan, and site grading plan at the site and available for public
inspection during working hours; and
      2.   Post the grading permit placard at the site at least forty eight
hours prior to the initiation of any land disturbing activity.
   B.   At all times during the implementation of the site grading plan and the
stormwater pollution prevention plan, the permittee shall:
      1.   Be in conformity with the grading permit;
      2.   Notify the Director of Public Works and Development Services within
forty eight hours of the initiation of the work at the site;
      3.   Notify the Director of Public Works and Development Services within
forty eight hours of the installation of all erosion and sediment control
practices; and
      4.   Notify the Director of Public Works and Development Services within
forty eight hours of the readiness of the site for final inspection, including,
but not limited to, finished grading, installation of drainage devices and
final erosion and sediment control practices.
   C.   Permittee shall stop work immediately and notify the Director of Public
Works and Development Services, if site conditions arise that preclude
conformance of the work to the approved site grading plan or stormwater
pollution prevention plan.
      1.   Said notice shall identify the site conditions that preclude
compliance with the site grading plan, and delineate any and all revisions,
modifications and/or additions thereby required to the site grading plan or
stormwater pollution prevention plan.
      2.   The Director of Public Works and Development Services shall review
all documentation submitted pursuant to this Chapter, and may require permittee
to further clarify, revise or supplement the proposed plan modifications prior
to resuming any work at the site. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-14: SITE INSPECTIONS AND PLAN MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Site Inspections: The Director of Public Works and Development Services
may inspect a site as necessary to determine compliance with, and to effectuate
the purposes of, this Chapter including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Upon receipt of notice given pursuant to Section
4-17-13 ;
      2.   To verify completion of any modifications required as a result of
changed site conditions;
      3.   During and following any rainfall; and
      4.   Upon receipt of notice that site conditions pose a health or safety
risk.
   B.   Plan Modifications: The Director of Public Works and Development
Services shall have the authority to require modifications to the site grading
plan and stormwater pollution prevention plans based upon site conditions
existing or encountered at the site after the initiation of construction
activity. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-15: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   The Director of Public Works and Development Services shall issue a
stop work order and suspend the grading permit when:
      1.   It is determined that the grading permit was issued in error, on the
basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance,
regulation or provision of this Code;
      2.   Permittee fails to comply with any of the duties set forth in this
Chapter; or
      3.   Inspection by the Director of Public Works and Development Services
reveals that the work is not in conformance with the site grading plan, or
stormwater pollution prevention plan, or any required modifications thereto.
   B.   The Director of Public Works and Development Services may revoke any
grading permit if the permittee fails or refuses, after suspension of the
grading permit and receipt of a stop work order, to cease work at the site.
(Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-16: HAZARDS; ACCESS; VARIANCE:
   A.   Contractor shall be solely responsible for the determinations and
implementation of the means and methods of construction, as well as compliance
with all applicable workplace safety rules, regulations, or guidelines.
Notwithstanding any permitting under this Chapter, whenever the Director of
Public Works and Development Services determines that any existing excavation,
embankment, fill, or land contour on private property is a health hazard or
adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage
channel, the owner of said property shall, upon receipt of written notice from
the Director of Public Works and Development Services and within the period
specified therein, abate or eliminate any such hazard as requested by the
Director of Public Works and Development Services. The Village shall have the
right to abate any hazard related to the activities regulated by this Chapter
and to charge the applicant for all related costs.
   B.   Representatives of the Village may, at all reasonable times during
regular business hours or upon notice, request entry upon any development
subject to this Chapter for the purpose of conducting periodic inspections to
ensure compliance with this Chapter and/or a grading permit issued thereunder.
The scope of the inspection, including reviewing and copying of records, is
limited to determining whether the development is in compliance with all
requirements and conditions of this Chapter and/or a grading permit. The
Village may periodically request entry to inspect any mitigation measure at
reasonable times and such inspection shall be limited to determining whether
the development is in compliance with all requirements and conditions of this
Chapter and/or a grading permit. If a request for entry is denied, the Village
may seek to obtain and execute a search warrant pursuant to
Chapter 4-14  of the Village Code.
   C.   The Village may grant variances from the requirements of this Chapter
pursuant to Section
4-13-7  of the Village Code. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-17: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Failure to Obtain a Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person to
initiate or engage in any land disturbance prior to obtaining a grading permit
as required herein.
   B.   Refusal to Comply: It shall be unlawful for any permittee to continue
work on a site, after suspension or revocation of the grading permit, or after
receipt of a stop work order otherwise issued by the Village.
   C.   Fines and Penalties: Any person who violates the provisions of this
Section shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less than
two hundred fifty dollars and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars for
each offense. A separate offense may be deemed committed for each day that an
offense continues. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-18: ROOF DRAINAGE, SUMP DRAINAGE, AND YARD DRAINAGE:
   A.   All buildings shall be prohibited from discharging roof, sump, and/or
yard drainage directly into the public combined or sanitary sewer system. Such
drainage shall discharge on the premises upon which the building is located in
such a manner that said drainage shall not damage the same or adjoining
properties or become a nuisance to their occupants or the public right of way.
   B.   In the event that the Director of Public Works and Development Services
determines that roof, sump, and/or yard drainage cannot be discharged in a
manner that will not damage the same or adjoining properties or public right of
way, or become a nuisance to their occupants or users, direct connection to an
existing separate storm sewer system is allowable.
   C.   The following buildings shall be exempt from the requirements of
Subsection A of this Section:
      1.   Existing buildings with internal roof drains;
      2.   Nonresidential buildings without sufficient pervious area to
discharge to, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works and Development
Services; and
      3.   Buildings which discharge roof drainage through a detention facility
and located on premises providing onsite stormwater detention meeting the
requirements of
Chapter 13  of this Title.
   D.   Exceptions from the requirements of Subsections A & B of this Section
may also be made in those cases where, in the opinion of the Director of Public
Works and Development Services such disconnection will create an associated
hazard or nuisance to same or adjoining properties and in cases where locations
or existing downspouts preclude the practical disconnection of same. Requests
for exceptions must be made in writing on an application form provided by the
office of the Director of Public Works and Development Services. In all cases,
exceptions shall be null and void when gutters and downspouts are replaced
where redirection of flows allows for appropriate discharge to grade in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works and Development Services. Nothing in
this Section shall preclude a resident from reapplying for an exception,
subsequent to a denied request, if sufficient documentation evidencing the
creation of a hazard or nuisance is provided to the Director of Public Works
and Development Services. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
4-17-19: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions in this Chapter shall be the same as those listed in Section
4-12-2  of the Village Code. (Ord. 3877, 11-14-2022)
CHAPTER 18
STOP WORK ORDERS
SECTION:
4-18-1: Authority
4-18-2: Penalty
4-18-1: AUTHORITY:
Notwithstanding any provision in this code, or the national codes adopted
herein by reference, the Building Official or designee, may issue a stop work
order if work on a building, structure, or property is being conducted contrary
to the provisions of this code, or in an unsafe and dangerous manner. The stop
work order shall be in writing and shall be posted in a conspicuous location on
the subject building, structure, or property, and shall also be given to the
owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the applicant for the
permit (with a copy to the owner), or to the person doing the work, and shall
state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. (Ord. 3538, 1-26-
2015; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
4-18-2: PENALTY:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, or after having received actual notice thereof, except such work as
the person is directed by the building official to perform to remedy a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of up to seven
hundred fifty dollars. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (Ord. 3538, 1-26-2015; amd. Ord. 3873, 9-12-2022)
CHAPTER 19
OTHER JURISDICTIONAL APPROVALS REQUIRED
SECTION:
4-19-1: General Requirement
4-19-2: Penalty
4-19-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENT:
The recipient of a license or permit issued by the Village shall obtain all
approvals from all other jurisdictions required by law, statute, ordinance,
regulation, or otherwise before undertaking any activity, construction, or
other action authorized by the license or permit issued by the Village. (Ord.
3679, 1-22-2018)
4-19-2: PENALTY:
Any recipient of a license or permit issued by the Village who undertakes any
activity, construction, or other action authorized by the license or permit
issued by the Village without first obtaining all approvals from all other
jurisdictions required by law, statute, ordinance, regulation, or otherwise
shall be liable for a fine of up to seven hundred fifty dollars. Each day a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 3679, 1-22-
2018)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Established, Composition
5-1-2: Wage Rates, Public Works Contracts
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED, COMPOSITION:
The Public Works Department shall consist of the Director of Public Works 1 ,
two Office Secretary/Clerks, one Street Superintendent, one building and zoning
inspector, five truck drivers, four tree trimmers, one water operations
foreman, one water plant operator, one account clerk, one engineering
technician and such additional members as may be, from time to time, provided
by the President and Board. (Ord. 2531, 12-14-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 12 of this Code.
5-1-2: WAGE RATES, PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS:
To the extent and as required by "An Act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by State, county, city
or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under contract for
public works", approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general prevailing rate
of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the Village is
hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for
construction work in the Cook County area as determined by the Department of
Labor of the State of Illinois as of September 1, 2017 a copy of that
determination on file in the Village and incorporated herein by reference. As
required by said Act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by
the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois shall supersede the
department's June determination and apply to any and all public works
construction undertaken by the Village. The definition of any terms appearing
in this section which are also used in aforesaid action shall be the same as in
said Act.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to said general prevailing
rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except public
works construction of the Village to the extent required by the aforesaid Act.
The Village Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any
interested party in the main office of this Village this determination of such
prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this determination or of the current revised
determination of prevailing rates of wages then in effect shall be attached to
all contract specifications.
The Village Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and
to any association of employers and to any person or association of employees
who have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workers
whose wages will be affected by such rates.
The Village Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this section with
both the Secretary of State Index Division and the Department of Labor of the
State of Illinois. (Ord. 3700, 6-11-2018)
CHAPTER 2
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Grades
5-2-2: Construction Or Repair
5-2-3: Street And Sidewalk Specifications And Requirements
5-2-4: Responsibility Of Abutting Property Owners
5-2-5: Report Of Defects Or Obstructions
5-2-6: Prohibited Acts, Conditions
5-2-7: Permit Required
5-2-8: Openings And Stairways In Streets
5-2-9: Removal Of Snow And Ice
5-2-10: Exceptions
5-2-1: GRADES:
The establishment of any grade shall not be construed to confer any power on
any party or person to fill, raise or lower any street or sidewalk without
having first obtained permission to do so from the director of public works.
(1981 Code)
5-2-2: CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement
on any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the
same without first having secured a permit therefor. Application for such
permit shall be made to the director of public works and shall state the
location of the intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof and the person
who is to do the actual construction work.
   B.   Bond: Each applicant for a permit to construct, repair or lay any
pavement on any street, alley or other public way shall file a bond, with
surety conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss or damage resulting
from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the same.
Said bond shall be in such amount and form as may be required by the director
of public works. (1981 Code)
   C.   Permit Fees: Before any permit shall be issued, there shall be paid to
the village the permit fee of twenty five dollars. (Ord. 2309, 9-26-1988)
5-2-3: STREET AND SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Streets: All street pavements shall be made in conformity with
specifications of the village. (1981 Code)
   B.   Sidewalks: Public sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the
following specifications:
      1.   Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalks: All concrete used shall be
delivered by ready-mix trucks and have a minimum of six bags of portland cement
per cubic yard. Mixing of concrete on the site will not be permitted. The
concrete shall be placed at a maximum slump of four inches and shall have an
air- content of five to seven percent of the volume of the concrete. The
concrete shall have a twenty eight day compressive strength of not less than
four thousand pounds per square inch. The concrete shall be of one course,
minimum thickness of five inches (six inches at driveways), constructed on a
prepared subgrade, troweled twice, and given a light brush finish.
      2.   Expansion Joints: Expansion joints of the thickness specified below
shall consist of preformed joint filler. The top of the joint shall be placed
one-quarter inch below the surface of the sidewalk.
         a.   One-half inch thick expansion joints shall be placed between the
sidewalk and all structures such as light standards, traffic light standards,
traffic poles, manholes, etc., which extend through the sidewalk.
         b.   Three-quarter inch thick expansion joints shall be placed at
intervals of forty feet in the sidewalk or wherever it is practical. Where the
sidewalk is constructed adjacent to pavement or curb having expansion joints,
the expansion joints in the sidewalk shall be placed opposite the existing
expansion joints as nearly as practicable. Expansion joints shall also be
placed where the sidewalk abuts existing sidewalks, between driveway pavement
and sidewalk, and between sidewalks and curbs where the sidewalk abuts a curb.
      3.   Brick Paver Sidewalk: Brick sidewalks shall consist of either high
strength concrete paving units (minimum compression strength of eight thousand
pounds per square inch) or clay kiln-fired masonry units. Only those bricks
specifically manufactured for vehicular or pedestrian paving applications may
be used. Manufacturer's specifications shall be provided. In no case shall the
installation of previously used bricks be allowed. The paving units shall be
placed on a compacted aggregate basecourse consisting of a minimum of six
inches (eight inches at driveways) crushed stone or crushed gravel meeting the
aggregate base course requirements for asphalt driveway pavements with a
minimum one inch sand leveling course. The paving units shall be mechanically
tamped to finish grade and the joints sand swept. Mortared joints shall not be
allowed. All sidewalk edges shall be restrained.
   C.   Requirements: The construction of public streets and sidewalks shall be
built under the supervision of and subject to the approval of the director of
public works or his designated representative. Further, the construction of any
public sidewalk consisting of brick pavers by an abutting property owner shall
only be done upon the issuance of a permit and upon the property owner's
providing an executed covenant duly recorded by the Cook County recorder of
deeds. Said covenant shall be of such form and substance as approved by the
village and provide for the indemnification of the village in relation to the
construction, maintenance and defense of any claim or loss resulting from or
connected with the construction of the brick paver sidewalk. (Ord. 2353, 7-24-
1989)
5-2-4: RESPONSIBILITY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS:
All public street, alley and sidewalk pavements shall be kept in good repair.
All sidewalks and parkways shall be kept in good repair at all times by the
abutting owners at their own expense. (1981 Code)
When in the opinion of the village, the condition of a sidewalk constructed of
brick pavers is no longer considered safe for pedestrian traffic, the village
shall so notify the abutting property owner in writing and provide a thirty day
period to repair said sidewalk. If at the end of such thirty day period,
suitable repairs have not been made, the village shall be empowered to replace
the brick paver sidewalk with a Portland cement concrete sidewalk. The village
shall also be empowered to obtain reimbursement from the abutting property
owner for all of the costs of said replacement. (Ord. 2353, 7-24-1989)
5-2-5: REPORT OF DEFECTS OR OBSTRUCTIONS:
It shall be the duty of every village officer or employee who is aware of any
defect in any alley, street or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, to report
the same to the director of public works as soon as possible. (1981 Code)
5-2-6: PROHIBITED ACTS, CONDITIONS:
   A.   Private Use: It shall be unlawful for a person to use a street,
sidewalk or other public place as space for the display or sale of goods or
merchandise, or for peddling merchandise; or to write or mark any signs or
advertisements on such place; except as may be specifically authorized by
ordinance, such as section
3-6-3 of this code, or by the village board. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2512, 8-10-
1992)
   B.   Obstructions: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or
maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way,
except as may be specifically authorized by this code, or by the village board.
(Ord. 2900, 11-13-2000)
   C.   Injury To New Pavement: It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any
vehicle or animal upon, or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement
while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or knowingly to
injure any soft or newly laid pavement.
   D.   Damaging Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful to damage any sidewalk, street
or alley pavement. (1981 Code)
   E.   Deposits On Sidewalks And Other Public Ways: It shall be unlawful to
deposit on a public sidewalk any material which may damage the same, or any
waste material, except for "yard waste" which is further described in section
 6-3-6 of this code, or glass or other articles which might cause injury to
persons, animals or property 1 .
It shall also be unlawful for any person to deposit on a public sidewalk or
other public way any shopping cart, or for any business to allow its shopping
carts to be deposited on a public sidewalk or other public way. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each and every distinct violation of this
subsection. (Ord. 3165, 8-14-2006)
   F.   Poles And Wires: It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any poles or
wires on or over any public street, alley or other public way without having
first secured permission from the village. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
  1. See also subsection
1  6-8-2C and section
  8-6-14 of this code.
5-2-7: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Pursuant to subsection
5-2-6B of this chapter, obstructions of any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public way shall be unlawful without first obtaining a permit therefor. An
application for a permit shall be made to the director of public works. The
application shall describe the nature, location and duration of the
obstruction, as well as, details of any applicable traffic control and
protection. The fee for such permit shall be three hundred fifty dollars for
the first month or fraction thereof and three hundred fifty dollars per month
thereafter. In addition to the payment of applicable permit fees, a street
obstruction permit will only be issued upon payment of a three hundred fifty
dollar deposit. Said deposit being considered a cash performance bond to ensure
adherence to applicable policies and as a damage deposit. To ensure public
safety and welfare, all obstructions within the public right of way shall
conform to the village's "policy on obstructions of public rights of way". This
section shall not be construed so as to permit any obstruction otherwise
prohibited by this code. (Ord. 3279, 4-27-2009)
5-2-8: OPENINGS AND STAIRWAYS IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any
public sidewalk, street or alley without a permit from the village. All such
lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable, strong cover or a
railing, to be approved by the director of public works.
No such opening shall be maintained unless there is deposited or filed with the
village clerk a bond in the sum of five thousand dollars conditioned to
indemnify the village for any loss, damage or liability which may result from
or be caused by such opening or from the use thereof. (1981 Code)
5-2-9: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE:
Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge of any
building or lot of ground in the village abutting upon any public way or public
place shall remove the snow and ice from the sidewalk in front of such building
or lot of ground within twenty four hours after the snow falls or accumulates.
In case the snow and ice on the sidewalk shall be frozen so hard that it cannot
be removed without injury to the pavement, the person having charge of any
building or lot of ground as aforesaid shall, within the time specified, cause
the sidewalk abutting on the premises to be strewn with an abrasive material,
and as soon thereafter as the weather shall permit, thoroughly clean the
sidewalks.
No person shall place snow or ice or cause the same to be deposited on any
street, alley, sidewalk, public way or public grounds of the village. (1981
Code)
5-2-10: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a utility or
telecommunications provider. Any such work shall be controlled by chapter 14 of
this title. (Ord. 2900, 11-13-2000)
CHAPTER 3
DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Permit Required; Application
5-3-2: Permit Fees
5-3-3: Approval Required; Specifications
5-3-4: Grade And Curb Requirements
5-3-5: Construction Requirements
5-3-6: Repairs And Maintenance
5-3-7: Revocation Of Permit
5-3-8: Zoning Board Of Appeals
5-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall alter, construct, build or establish
any driveway over, across or upon any public sidewalk or parkway without
securing a permit for such purpose issued by the Village Clerk. No such permit
shall be issued without the approval of the Director of Public Works.
   B.   Application: Application for a permit for a driveway over, across or
upon any public sidewalk or parkway shall be filed with the Director of Public
Works and shall contain the name and address of the person making the
application, and the name and address of the owner of the property to be served
by such driveway, together with the proposed location and plans and
specifications for such driveway. The owner of the property shall maintain the
driveway in good condition and repair, free and clear of snow, ice, stone or
other obstructions of any kind. (1981 Code)
5-3-2: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Driveway: Before any permit shall be issued there shall be paid to the
Village a permit fee of one hundred dollars. (Ord. 3279, 4-27-2009)
   B.   Failure To Maintain: If the owner fails to maintain the driveway in
good condition and repair, the Director of Public Works may proceed to repair
the driveway and assess the cost thereof against the owner, and the amount of
such cost shall be paid by such owner to the Village. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
5-3-3: APPROVAL REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS:
No permit shall be issued for any work to be done in and about the construction
of any driveway until plans and specifications therefor have been submitted to
and approved by the Director of Public Works. (1981 Code)
5-3-4: GRADE AND CURB REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Maintain Existing Grade: Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the
terms of the written permit hereinbefore required, every driveway built across
or upon any sidewalk space or parkway shall conform to the existing sidewalk
grade. Where it shall be necessary in the construction of any driveway to break
the existing curb for the driveway opening, the curb and gutter shall be
completely removed and a new driveway section constructed.
   B.   Inclines To Be Gradual: Each such driveway shall be constructed and
maintained so as to permit free and unobstructed passage on, over or across the
same and in such manner as not to interfere with the proper drainage and safe
grading of streets. Gradual approaches to the regular sidewalk grade shall be
made from the grade of the driveway. The slope of any driveway and the
approaches thereto shall not exceed one inch to the foot in any direction. Each
such driveway shall be so constructed and maintained that its surface at the
point of crossing any sidewalk shall be flush with the adjoining sections of
such sidewalk. (1981 Code)
5-3-5: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Commercial Driveways: That portion of every driveway hereafter
constructed or remodeled which extends from the street across any public
parkway and sidewalk or sidewalk space to the owner's lot line and which is
used to serve any property other than that used exclusively for residential
purposes shall consist of a monolithic course of concrete not less than eight
inches thick, and the construction and installation of such driveway shall
otherwise comply with the provisions of this Code. All construction shall be
done under the supervision and subject to the approval of the Director of
Public Works.
   B.   Residential Driveways: That portion of every driveway hereafter
constructed or remodeled which extends from the street across any public
parkway and sidewalk space to the owner's lot line and which is used
exclusively to serve residential property, shall have a maximum width of
sixteen feet and a minimum width of eight feet at the sidewalk, except that on
a corner lot the maximum width may be increased to twenty four feet when such
driveway serves a garage which has a front yard setback of less than twenty
five feet and is not part of a circular driveway. No more than one parkway
driveway shall be permitted for each one hundred feet of total lot frontage or
fraction thereof, however, for any lot frontage on an arterial roadway or major
collector roadway, as classified by the Illinois Department of Transportation,
no more than one parkway driveway shall be permitted for each seventy-five feet
of total lot frontage or fraction thereof. The parkway driveway shall consist
either of: 1) a monolithic course of concrete not less than six inches thick,
and the construction and installation of such driveway shall otherwise comply
with the provisions of this Code; or 2) asphalt pavement constructed as
follows: a compacted aggregate base course of not less than eight inches of
crushed stone or crushed gravel equivalent in gradation to Illinois Department
of Transportation gradation CA-6. The surface of the base course shall be
primed with an asphalt emulsion or cutback prime at a rate of twenty five one
hundredths gallons per square yard. The primed base shall be covered with not
less than two inches of compacted hot bituminous concrete surface mix. In lieu
of an aggregate base course, a compacted hot mix bituminous base course of not
less than five inches may be used; or 3) a brick pavement consisting of either
high strength concrete paving units (minimum compression strength of eight
thousand pounds per square inch) or clay kiln-fired masonry units. Only those
bricks specifically manufactured for vehicular paving applications may be used.
Manufacturer's specifications shall be provided. In no case shall the use of
used bricks be allowed. The paving units shall be placed on a compacted
aggregate base course consisting of a minimum eight inches crushed gravel
meeting the aggregate base course requirements for asphalt driveway pavements
with a minimum one inch sand leveling course. The paving units shall be
mechanically tamped to finish grade and the joints sand swept. Mortared joints
shall not be allowed. All pavement edges shall be restrained. All construction
shall be done with the supervision of and subject to the approval of the
Director of Public Works or his designated representative. (Ord. 3682, 1-22-
2018)
5-3-6: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Every person maintaining any driveway in the Village shall keep the
same in good condition and repair, free and clear of snow, ice, stone, gravel
and other obstructions of any kind.
   B.   Whenever it is deemed necessary by the Village to disturb or remove a
section of, or an entire, driveway within the public parkway, the Village shall
restore the driveway utilizing asphalt or concrete materials only. Brick
pavements may be restored at the option and expense of the abutting property
owner upon application for and approval of the required permit. (Ord. 2336, 4-
24-1989)
5-3-7: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
All permits for driveways granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall provide that they may be revoked for cause, by order of the President and
Board, and that upon such revocation all rights granted thereunder shall
terminate and the sidewalk space, parkways and curbs shall be restored to their
former condition, all at the expense of the person to whom such permit may have
been given or at the expense of the owner of the property served by the
driveway at the time of any such revocation. The owner of the property shall be
provided written notice of the intent of the Village to revoke the driveway
permit and shall be given an opportunity to be heard before action is taken to
terminate the use of the driveway. (1981 Code)
5-3-8: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the jurisdiction to hold public hearings
and offer recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees concerning
variations of this chapter pursuant to its powers granted by, and pursuant to
the procedures set forth in, section
10-5-4 of this Code. The President and Board of Trustees may vary the
requirements of this chapter after receiving the recommendation of the Zoning
Board of Appeals. (Ord. 3682, 1-22-2018)
CHAPTER 4
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Permit Required; Compliance With Regulations
5-4-2: Bond And Permit Required
5-4-3: Manner Of Excavating
5-4-4: Area Limit; Temporary Sidewalks
5-4-5: Time Limits
5-4-6: Restoration Of Surface
5-4-7: Inspections
5-4-8: Barricades Required
5-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any street, alley
or other public place in the Village or to tunnel under any street, alley or
other public place in the Village without first having obtained a permit as is
herein required.
Applications for permits to excavate or tunnel in or under the streets of the
Village shall be made to the Director of Public Works and shall contain thereon
the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the
purpose thereof, and the person doing the actual excavation work and the name
of the person for whom or for which the work is being done.
Such application shall also contain an agreement signed by the person doing the
work to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this chapter.
The provisions of this chapter relative to securing permits shall not apply to
officers or employees of the Village engaged in doing work for the Village, nor
to persons doing work for the Village under contract. (1981 Code)
5-4-2: BOND AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Bond: No permit to excavate or tunnel in or under the streets or
parkways of the Village shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor
has filed with the Director of Public Works a bond with corporate surety in the
sum of five thousand dollars conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss,
liability or damage that may result or accrue from or because of the making,
existence or manner of guarding or constructing any such tunnel or excavation
or failure to properly restore the street or parkway. (1981 Code)
   B.   Permit Fee: No permit to excavate or tunnel in or under the streets of
the Village shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has paid to
the Village Clerk a permit fee of seventy five dollars to open up a street and
fifty dollars to open up a parkway. (Ord. 2309, 9-26-1988)
5-4-3: MANNER OF EXCAVATING:
It shall be unlawful to make any excavation or tunnel in any way contrary to or
at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper bracing shall be
maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground, and in excavations the
excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any portion which extends
beyond the opening at the surface.
No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making of such
excavations or tunnels, and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining
any such pipes, cables or conduits, or to the Village department or officer
charged with the care thereof before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be
disturbed. Proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree
or shrub wherever possible. (1981 Code)
5-4-4: AREA LIMIT; TEMPORARY SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful to render more than one-half the width of any street
unavailable for travel in connection with any excavation or tunnel. If any
sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed
or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. (1981
Code)
5-4-5: TIME LIMITS:
Each application for a permit shall state the length of time it is estimated
will elapse from the commencement of the work until the restoration of the
surface of the ground, or until the refill is made ready for the pavement to be
put on by the Village, if the Village is to restore such surface pavement. It
shall be unlawful to fail to comply with this time limitation unless the
permission for an extension of time is granted by the Director of Public Works.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
5-4-6: RESTORATION OF SURFACE:
Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley
or other public place in the Village shall restore the surface thereof to its
original condition if there is not pavement there. Refills shall be of suitable
materials placed under the supervision of the Director of Public Works and
properly tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be
left in the ground.
If the excavation or opening has necessitated an opening in a pavement, the
refill shall be properly made so that the surface pavement can be relaid by the
Village in the same manner, thickness and character as the surrounding
pavement. Notice shall be given to the Director of Public Works when such
opening is prepared for pavement, and the pavement may be laid by the Village
either by contract or by Village employees, provided the Village incurs no
expense in so doing. In either event the surface relaid may extend for one foot
in every direction beyond the original opening. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3656, 7-
10-2017)
5-4-7: INSPECTIONS:
The Director of Public Works shall, from time to time, inspect all excavations
or tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or other public
place in the Village to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. Notice shall be given to him at least ten hours before the work of
refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3656,
7-10-2017)
5-4-8: BARRICADES REQUIRED:
Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other
public place, or making any excavation in any such place, shall maintain
suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the
work. Such barricades shall be protected by suitable and sufficient lights.
These lights shall be kept burning from twilight in the evening through the
night. Flares, lanterns, "bombs" or other devices using a flame shall not be
permitted as suitable lights.
Defects in pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury; and any person
properly maintaining an opening or excavation in such place shall guard such
opening or excavation while the same remains open, by proper barricades and
lights described in the above paragraph of this section.
It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with a barricade or light lawfully
placed to protect or mark new pavement or excavation or opening in any public
street, alley or sidewalk. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 5
STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS SYSTEM
SECTION:
5-5-1: Continuation Of Street Names
5-5-2: Address Numbers
5-5-3: Directions For Numbering
5-5-4: Plat Kept On File
5-5-5: All Buildings Required To Be Numbered
5-5-1: CONTINUATION OF STREET NAMES:
Except as otherwise provided, the names of the streets and avenues within the
village shall be and remain as the same exist at the effective date hereof.
(1981 Code)
5-5-2: ADDRESS NUMBERS:
All buildings on lands contiguous to and fronting on any street or avenue
within the village shall have attached thereto, or permanently painted thereon,
upon the door facing such street, avenue, place or boulevard or upon some other
equally conspicuous place, the correct number of such building, so that it can
be easily and distinctly read from the street. Address numbers shall not be
affixed to parkway trees or to stands in the parkway. The figures of such
numbers shall be plain and substantial, and of dimensions not less than four
inches in height and two inches in width for each figure. (Ord. 3305, 10-13-
2009)
5-5-3: DIRECTIONS FOR NUMBERING:
The number of all such buildings or lots shall be determined by calculating one
number for each side of a street for every twenty five linear feet, excepting
necessary street and alley crossings. Eight hundred numbers shall be assigned
to a mile, or one hundred numbers to each one-eighth of a mile, on all streets,
and such numbers shall change from any one hundred to the succeeding one
hundred at the intersecting street nearest the said one-eighth mile line. All
lots or houses located on north and south streets or on streets running in a
northerly or southerly direction shall be numbered from Madison Street as a
base line, beginning with number 1 at the north line of Madison Street and
increasing to the north. Eight hundred numbers shall be allowed to a mile, so
that 800 shall be at Chicago Avenue and 1600 at North Avenue. The odd numbers
on north and south streets shall be on the east side of said streets. All lots
or houses located on east and west streets or on streets running in an easterly
or westerly direction shall be numbered from Harlem Avenue beginning with
number 7201 at the west line of Harlem Avenue, and increasing west. The odd
numbers on east and west streets shall be on the south side of said streets;
provided, however, that where a street or avenue changes its course, the
numbering of such buildings on such street or avenue shall continue in regular
consecutive order, as aforesaid, the same as though its course had not changed.
(1981 Code)
5-5-4: PLAT KEPT ON FILE:
The village clerk is hereby directed to keep on file in his office a plat of
the village, upon which shall be designated the correct numbers for the
buildings on each parcel of land ascertained, as aforesaid; and he shall notify
all owners and occupants of buildings within the village to place the correct
numbers on such buildings in conformity with this chapter. (1981 Code)
5-5-5: ALL BUILDINGS REQUIRED TO BE NUMBERED:
All persons owning or occupying any building used or to be used for residence
or business purposes, situated and fronting on lands contiguous to any street
or avenue within the village, are hereby required to cause the correct number
of such building to be placed thereon, of the dimensions and in the manner
provided by this chapter, within ten days after notice thereof by the village
clerk. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 6
NEWSSTANDS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Permit Required
5-6-2: Standards And Limitations
5-6-3: Bond Or Insurance
5-6-4: Revocation Of Permit
5-6-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, locate, construct or maintain any
newsstand, such as a manned newspaper stand or a coin operated newspaper
vending machine, on any public way or other public place in the village without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the village clerk. An application for a
permit for a newsstand shall be made to the village clerk upon such form as
shall be provided by him, and signed by the applicant. Said permit to erect,
locate, construct or maintain a newsstand shall state thereon the name and
address of the permittee and the location for each permit granted. The annual
permit fee to defray the cost of administrating this chapter shall be fifty
dollars for a manned newspaper stand and ten dollars for a coin operated
newspaper vending machine, and shall expire on April 30 of each year. (Ord.
2086, 11-9-1981)
5-6-2: STANDARDS AND LIMITATIONS:
Applications for permits for newsstands and the erecting, locating,
constructing or maintaining of newsstands shall be subject to and governed by
the following standards and limitations:
   A.   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsstand which projects
onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which
rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway.
   B.   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsstand which in whole
or in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk or parkway, when such
installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property,
or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public
transportation purposes or other government use, or when such stand
unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, the ingress to or egress from any residence, place of business, or any
legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or
signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near said
location, or when such stand interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by
the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning or snow removal machinery.
   C.   Newsstands which in whole or in part rest upon, in or over any sidewalk
or parkway, shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   No manned newspaper stand shall exceed six feet in height, four feet
in width and three feet in depth, and no coin operated newspaper vending
machine shall exceed five feet in height, two feet in width and two feet in
depth.
      2.   Newsstands shall only be placed on the paved portion of sidewalks
near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building so as not to interfere with
sidewalk and parkway maintenance. Newsstands placed near the curb shall be
placed more than three feet from the roadway. Newsstands placed adjacent to the
wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six
inches from the wall.
      3.   No newspaper vending machine shall be chained, bolted or otherwise
attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newspaper machine or to
any permanently fixed object, except that such machine may be chained to street
lighting poles (but not to traffic signs or traffic signal posts) if the chains
have adequate, effective protective coverings so as not to damage the poles.
      4.   Newspaper vending machines may be chained or otherwise attached to
one another; however, no more than three machines may be joined together in
this manner, and a space of no less than eighteen inches shall separate each
group of three machines so attached, so that they can be moved in connection
with snow removal and other sidewalk maintenance.
      5.   No newsstand shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
         a.   Within three feet of any marked crosswalk or within fifteen feet
of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
         b.   Within three feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call
box or other emergency facility.
         c.   Within three feet of the roadway, so as not to interfere with the
parking of vehicles and openings of vehicle doors.
         d.   Within three feet of any driveway.
         e.   Within three feet ahead of and fifteen feet to the rear of any
sign marking a designated bus stop.
         f.   Within three feet of any bus bench.
         g.   At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet.
         h.   Within three feet of any area improved with lawn, flower, shrubs
or trees, so as not to interfere with growth and development or within three
feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or
in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window
for display purposes.
      6.   No newsstand shall be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of
newspapers or news periodicals sold therein.
      7.   Each newsstand shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and
in good repair at all times.
   D.   Every person who places or maintains a newsstand on any public way or
other public place in the Village shall have his name, address and telephone
number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen.
(Ord. 2086, 11-9-1981)
5-6-3: BOND OR INSURANCE:
No permit shall be issued and no newsstand shall be maintained on any public
way or other public place unless the permittee maintains in force a bond in the
amount of five thousand dollars with surety approved by the Director of Public
Works, or a proper indemnity insurance policy conditioned to indemnify the
Village and to hold it harmless from any claim, loss, damage, injury or
liability from the existence or maintenance of such newsstand. (Ord. 2086, 11-
9-1981; amd. Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
5-6-4: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
In the event of noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, any permit
for the erection, location, construction or maintenance of a newsstand on any
public way or other public place may be revoked by the President and Board and/
or the newspaper stand or machine may be removed by the Director of Public
Works; provided, there shall be no such revocation and/or removal prior to ten
days' notice to the permittee or newspaper involved and an opportunity to be
heard by the President and Board or the Director of Public Works, as the case
may be. (Ord. 2086, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
CHAPTER 7
HOUSE MOVERS
SECTION:
5-7-1: License Required
5-7-2: License Fees, Term
5-7-3: Bond
5-7-4: Permit Required To Move Buildings; Frontage Consents
5-7-5: Safety Precautions; Condition Of Streets
5-7-6: Time Limit On Removal
5-7-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Before engaging in the occupation of a house mover, every person shall annually
obtain a license therefor from the Village Clerk upon a written application
therefor, and no person except a licensed house mover shall move any house,
barn or other building over, across or along any street or alley within the
corporate limits of the Village. (1981 Code)
5-7-2: LICENSE FEES, TERM:
House movers are required to pay an annual license fee of one hundred dollars
before entering into such business.
All licenses issued for persons to engage in the business of house moving shall
expire on April 30 of each year. (1981 Code)
5-7-3: BOND:
No person shall be issued a license to engage in the occupation of a house
mover until such person shall have given a bond in the sum of fifty thousand
dollars, with good and sufficient sureties, conditioned, among other things,
that the person will pay any and all damages which may happen to any tree,
pavement or sidewalk, or any other property, whether the damage shall be
inflicted by such person or his agents, employees or workmen; conditioned,
also, that the person will immediately pay any judgment that may be obtained
against the Village, as well as any costs the Village may incur in consequence
of the granting of such license, and all the acts done thereunder, and will, in
all things, strictly comply with the conditions of this license. (1981 Code)
5-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED TO MOVE BUILDINGS; FRONTAGE CONSENTS:
   A.   The person licensed as a house mover shall, in each and every instance,
before moving any building, obtain a written permit to do so from the Director
of Public Works, and shall pay the requisite fee as prescribed in the Building
Code 1 ; thereupon the Director of Public Works shall issue a permit stating
specifically the conditions, prescribing the route to be taken and limiting the
time for the removal; provided, however, that no permit shall be issued for the
removal of any building in the Village, except under the requirements of the
provisions of the Building Code. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3656, 7-10-2017)
   B.   Written consent of the owners of a majority of the foot frontage of
real estate within a radius of three hundred feet from the place where it is
proposed to locate any removed building shall be filed with the Village Clerk
prior to removal of any building. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 1 of this Code.
5-7-5: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS; CONDITION OF STREETS:
Every house mover, while using any portion of the street or sidewalk, shall
cause an adequate number of barricades with flashing amber lights to be placed
in a conspicuous place in front and one in the rear of any building or any
other obstruction placed in the street by him, from sunset to sunrise of each
night. He shall also have all streets and alleys over which he has moved any
building in as good condition as they were before being so used by him, and
shall strictly comply with the terms of his license. (1981 Code)
5-7-6: TIME LIMIT ON REMOVAL:
The owner of any building or the contractor for its removal, either or both,
who shall suffer the same to be or remain in any of the streets or alleys or
upon any of the public grounds of the Village for any time longer than may be
specified in the license, shall forfeit a penalty of five hundred dollars and a
like penalty for every twenty four hours the same shall be continued, and
unless such building is removed within such reasonable time as the President
may determine, he may declare the same to be a nuisance and cause its removal.
(1981 Code)
CHAPTER 8
TREES AND SHRUBS 1
SECTION:
5-8-1: Intent And Purpose
5-8-2: Planting, Maintenance Or Removing
5-8-3: Trees Guarded During Building Repairs
5-8-4: Trees Or Shrubs Overhanging Street
5-8-5: Injure Or Damage
5-8-6: Dutch Elm Disease
5-8-7: Right Of Entry Of Director Of Public Works
5-8-8: Removal Or Destruction
5-8-9: Filing Of Lien
5-8-10: Penalty
5-8-11: Definitions
5-8-12: Appeals
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 10, chapter 24 of this code.
5-8-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
Because it is recognized that maintenance of a vigorous urban forest is an
integral part of the infrastructure of the village and is important and
essential to the health, well being and welfare of the residents of the village
it is the intent of the village to maintain tree lined parkways by planting and
maintaining trees at all locations where space and conditions are appropriate.
Further, this chapter is designed to provide a means to properly regulate
activities impacting trees and shrubs in the village. (Ord. 2806, 12-14-1998;
amd. Ord. 3932, 7-8-2024)
5-8-2: PLANTING, MAINTENANCE OR REMOVING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any tree or shrub in any
public street or parkway, or other public place, without having first secured a
permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Director.
All trees and shrubs to be planted shall be placed subject to the direction and
approval of the Director. All trees planted by the Village shall be planted
consistent with the most current edition of American National Standards
Institute and shall be tree species identified as well-suited for the planting
site, based on the Morton Arboretum Northern Illinois Tree Species List. Trees
purchased by the Village shall be of a quality consistent with the most current
American Standards for Nursery Stock as approved by the most current American
National Standards Institute. All permitted tree maintenance and pruning will
be done in accordance with the latest revision of standards of the
International Society of Arboriculture’s Best Management Practices - Tree
Pruning and ANSI A300.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the village or its
designees, to remove, relocate or cut down any tree or shrub in any street,
parkway or other public place without a permit from the Director, which the
Director may grant or deny in his or her discretion. The Director may impose
conditions on the issuance of a permit, including, but not limited to, the
prepayment of the appraised value of the tree or shrub, and requiring the
applicant to pay for all expenses relating to the removal, replacement, and
relocation. The Director shall consider the following when determining whether
to grant or deny a request for a permit:
      1.   The size, age, and species of the tree or shrub; and
      2.   The location of the tree or shrub; and
      3.   The health of the tree or shrub; and
      4.   The reason for removal or relocation; and
      5.   The environmental impact of removal or relocation.
   If because of emergency weather or other casualty conditions a tree is
endangering health, safety or property and requires immediate removal, verbal
authorization may be given by the Director for the tree removal without
obtaining a written permit. Such verbal authorization shall later be confirmed
in writing by the village.
   C.   The Director or their designee shall have the right to plant, prune,
remove and maintain any plants, trees or shrubs located on the village right of
way or parkways. The Director may consult with a certified arborist in order to
ensure public safety, promote vigor and enhance plant structure.
   D.   The Village shall require that any Contractor, working for the Village,
who may interact or have impact on the Village public property urban forest
utilize a certified arborist for all work pertaining to trees, including but
not limited to removal, pruning and planting activities. Any Contractor working
for the Village shall comply with all licensing and insurance requirements set
forth in section
3-3-3.
   E.   The Village shall remove and shall not plant any invasive species
identified in the Northwest Illinois Forestry Association Exotic Invasive
Plants List from public streets or parkways, or other public places. (1981
Code; amd. Ord. 2806, 12-14-1998; Ord. 3513, 3-10-2014; Ord. 3895, 5-8-2023;
Ord. 3932, 7-8-2024)
5-8-3: TREES GUARDED DURING BUILDING REPAIRS:
In the erection, alteration or repair of any building or structure, the owner
thereof shall place such guards around all nearby trees in the street or public
highway as shall prevent injury to them. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2806, 12-14-
1998)
5-8-4: TREES OR SHRUBS OVERHANGING STREET:
Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in
the village in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on
such public place shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such
tree or shrub grows, so that the obstruction shall cease.
Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any
public street, sidewalk or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises
on which such tree grows or stands.
The Director may trim or remove, or cause to be trimmed or removed, any tree or
shrub so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall cease.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2806, 12-14-1998; Ord. 3932, 7-8-2024)
5-8-5: INJURE OR DAMAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or damage any tree or shrub
planted in any street, parkway or other public place.
   A.   Attaching Signs, Advertisements: It shall be unlawful for any person to
attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any street,
parkway or other public place.
   B.   Poles And Wires: It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any wire
or rope to any tree or shrub in any public street, parkway or other public
place without the permission of the Director. This section shall not apply to
commemorative ribbons as defined in section
5-8-11.
   Any person given the right to maintain poles and wires in the streets,
alleys or other public places in the village shall, in the absence of a
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles
free and away from any trees or shrubs in such places so far as may be
possible, and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to
the supervision of the Director, so that no injury shall be done either to the
poles or wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact.
   C.   Gas Pipes: Any person maintaining any gas pipe in the village shall, in
the absence of a provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such
pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any trees or shrubs.
   D.   All stump removals and tree plantings shall require all underground
utility locations be identified prior to any action. All nearby underground
utility locations shall be identified prior to planting. It shall be unlawful
to plant any tree under utility wires that is anticipated to grow to a height
that will interfere with the wires at its mature height so as to reduce
unnecessary damage for the purposes of wire clearance. (1981 Code; amd. Ord.
2806, 12-14-1998; Ord. 3913, 11-13-2023)
5-8-6: DUTCH ELM DISEASE:
   A.   Public Nuisance: All species and varieties of elm trees (trees of the
genus Ulmus) infected with the fungus known as the Dutch elm disease
(Ceratocystis ulmi) as determined by laboratory analysis by either the forestry
department of the village or the section of "Applied Botany And Plant
Pathology", Illinois natural history survey, Urbana, Illinois, are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
All species and varieties of elm trees that are dead or substantially dead, and
all dead elmwood to which the bark is still attached which, because of their
condition, may serve as a breeding place for the European elm bark beetle
(Scolytus multisriatus), are hereby declared to be public nuisances.
   B.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or land in
the village to permit or maintain on any such lot or land, any elm tree or dead
elmwood which, as provided in subsection A of this section, is a public
nuisance, and it shall be the duty of any such owner promptly to remove and
dispose of outside the village any such elm tree or dead elmwood under the
supervision and direction of the Director or their representative. (1981 Code;
amd. Ord. 2806, 12-14-1998; Ord. 3932, 7-8-2024)
5-8-7: RIGHT OF ENTRY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter and to implement the
enforcement thereof, the Director their representative is hereby authorized and
empowered to enter upon any lot or land in the village at all reasonable hours
for the purpose of inspecting any elm trees or dead elmwood situated thereon,
and the director of public works or his representative may remove such
specimens from any such trees as are required for the purposes of laboratory
analysis referred to in subsection
5-8-6A of this chapter or to determine whether such tree, because it is dead or
substantially dead, may serve as a breeding place for the European elm bark
beetle. It shall be unlawful for any person to take any action to prevent the
Director or their representative from entering on any lot or land in the
village for the purposes of such inspection, or to interfere with the Director
or such representative in the performance of any of his duties provided for
under the provisions of this chapter. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2806, 12-14-1998;
Ord. 3932, 7-8-2024)
5-8-8: REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION:
If on laboratory analysis of specimens removed from any elm tree by the
Director, it is determined that such tree is a public nuisance
as provided by subsection 5-8-6A of this chapter, or if the Director determines
that any dead or substantially dead elm trees, or dead elmwood, is a public
nuisance as provided in said subsection, the Director shall serve or cause to
be served upon the person designated in this section a written notice requiring
such person to comply with the provisions of this chapter. If the person upon
whom such notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to remove such elm tree
or dead elmwood within thirty days after service of such notice, the Director
or their representative may proceed to remove and dispose of outside the
village such tree or dead elmwood and assess the cost thereof against the owner
of such lot or land, and the amount of such cost shall be paid by such owner to
the village.
Service of notice provided for in this section shall be personally served or
sent by registered mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the
general taxes for the last preceding year on the real estate, such notice to be
delivered or sent not less than thirty days prior to the removal of the tree or
trees located thereon. Said notice shall contain the substances of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-12 providing for the filing of the notice of lien for
the cost of removal of elm trees infected with Dutch elm disease. Said notice
shall also include the substance of sections
5-8-6 through
5-8-10 of this chapter. Said notice shall further identify the real estate by
the common description and the tree or trees affected.
If the village removes from any lot or land in the village, pursuant to this
chapter, any infected elm tree which is a public nuisance as provided in
subsection
5-8-6A of this chapter, or any dead or substantially dead elm tree or dead
elmwood which is a public nuisance, the assessment of the cost of the work done
by the village against the owner of the lot or land involved shall be in
addition to the penalties imposed herein for any violation or noncompliance
with any provisions of this chapter.
Any elm tree or dead elmwood on property owned by the village which is a public
nuisance as provided by subsection
5-8-6A of this chapter shall promptly be removed and disposed of outside the
village under the supervision of the director of Director or their
representative at the expense of the village. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2806, 12-
14-1998; Ord. 3932, 7-8-2024)
5-8-9: FILING OF LIEN:
The village is hereby authorized pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-20-11 and 5/11-20-12 to collect from the property owner the reasonable cost
and expense of elm trees removed and infected with Dutch elm disease from the
property not owned by the village or dedicated for public use, when the owner
of such property refuses or neglects to remove any such tree. The cost and
expense are a lien upon the real estate affected; provided, that a notice of
lien is filed as provided for by state law and the ordinances of the village.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2806, 12-14-1998)
5-8-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter by failing,
neglecting or refusing to comply with the provisions of any notice herein
provided for, within thirty days after the service thereof, or who shall resist
or obstruct the Director or their representative in carrying out the provisions
of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be liable and be fined not less than
ten dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for each offense. (1981 Code;
amd. Ord. 2806, 12-14-1998; Ord. 3913, 11-13-2024)
5-8-11: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings, and are hereby defined, as follows:
APPLICANT: An owner of a lot, parcel or tract of land for which an application
has been filed for a permit or any activity requiring the issuance of a permit
ARBORIST: Any individual experienced in the profession of forestry or a related
field and is licensed or certified in forestry by an accredited forestry
industry body, e.g. International Society of Arboriculture.
COMMEMORATIVE RIBBONS: Material that is wrapped around a tree trunk without any
permanent fixtures to promote awareness of certain causes or to memorialize
events. Such ribbons are not permitted to promote political candidates,
parties, or referenda. Ribbons are to be removed if they are determined by
village staff to be in poor condition or are negatively affecting the health of
the tree.
CONTRACTOR: A company or individual contracted to perform tree removal, pruning
and planting activities.
DAMAGE: Impact or loss of function to any tree including but not limited to:
removal, root compaction, root removal, girdling, soil contamination, topping,
pruning more than 20% of the trees, canopy removal, bark removal, poisoning and
or/ actions resulting in the decline or death of a tree.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Public Works and Engineering or their authorized
representative.
INFRASTRUCTURE: The basic underlying framework or features that provide
collective services, including but not limited to roads, water lines, storm
sewers, bioswales, and trees.
INVASIVE SPECIES: An introduced or exotic species that significantly modifies
or disrupts the ecosystem in which it colonizes, including but not limited to
any species identified in the Northwest Illinois Forestry Association Exotic
Invasive Plants List.
NUISANCE: Trees that may provide potential impacts to other trees, people or
structures. Nuisance trees include, but are not be limited to, those outlined
in subsection
5-8-6A of this chapter and also may include any diseased, infested,
structurally unsound trees or known invasive species.
PERMIT: A written authorization from the Village authorizing the applicant to
conduct work which may or may not impact a tree.
REMOVAL: The cutting down, destruction, removal or relocation of any tree,
including damaging by poison or other direct or indirect action. (Ord. 3913,
11-13-2023; amd. Ord. 3932, 7-8-2024)
5-8-12: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Village in the enforcement
of any terms or provisions of this Section may, within ten working days after
the date of the decision, appeal to the Village Administrator by filing a
written notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall set forth concisely the
decision and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. The Village Administrator
may make a recommendation to affirm, modify, or reverse the decision. The
decision of the Village Administrator shall be final and no petition for
rehearing or reconsideration shall be available.
   B.   No variances in the strict application of the provisions of this
Section shall be recommended for approval by the Village Administrator unless
it finds:
      1.   That there are special circumstances or conditions, fully described
in the written notice of appeal which are peculiar to the property (properties)
and do not apply generally to properties within the Village, and that said
circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the Code
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the subject property
(properties).
      2.   That for reasons fully set forth in the written notice of appeal,
the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the
property (properties) and that the variance, as recommended for approval by the
Village Administrator, is the minimum variance that will accomplish this
purpose.
      3.   That the result of granting of the variance will be in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of standards set forth within this Code and in
harmony with this Section, and will not be injurious to adjacent property or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. (Ord. 3932, 7-8-2024)
CHAPTER 9
RAILROADS
SECTION:
5-9-1: Railroad Companies to Maintain Properties
5-9-2: Obstructing Street Crossings
5-9-3: Safe Crossings Maintained
5-9-4: Maximum Speed
5-9-5: Engine Whistle
5-9-1: RAILROAD COMPANIES TO MAINTAIN PROPERTIES:
   A.   Ditches, Drains, Sewers and Culverts: At all times, all railroad
companies shall make, keep open and in good repair all ditches, drains, sewers
and culverts along and under their tracks, so that water cannot stand on their
property and so that the natural drainage of adjacent property is not impeded.
   B.   Grade of Track; Construction of Railroad Crossings: All railroad
companies shall raise or lower their tracks to conform to any grade which at
any time is established by the Village. They shall also keep such portion of
the street as they may occupy for railroad purposes paved in the same manner
and with the same kind of material as the adjacent portion of the street not
used for railroad purposes.
   C.   Pavements and Sidewalks at Crossings: All railroad companies whose
tracks cross any of the streets of the Village shall build and maintain
pavements and sidewalks across their right of way for the full width thereof at
each street intersection crossed by their tracks and right of way. The
pavements and sidewalks shall be made to conform in quality to the pavement of
the streets and sidewalks extending in either direction across the right of
way; or shall be constructed of other materials meeting acceptable standards
for railroad crossings as approved by the Director of Public Works, and the
work shall be done to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. (1981
Code)
5-9-2: OBSTRUCTING STREET CROSSINGS:
No person shall cause or allow any locomotive engine, car or train of cars to
stop on or obstruct any street crossing within the limits of the Village for a
longer period than ten minutes at any one time; provided however, that in case
a collision should take place at or on such crossing, reasonable time shall be
allowed to remove any obstruction that may be caused thereby.
If any street crossing within the Village shall be obstructed, in whole or in
part, by any train of railroad cars, for or during the period of ten minutes,
it shall be the duty of each and every railroad company, upon whose line of
road such obstruction may occur, on or before the expiration of ten minutes,
when from any cause the entire train cannot be removed from the obstructed
crossing, to cause such cars as may be on or near the crossing to be uncoupled
and the obstructing cars to be removed from the crossing and leave the street
entirely clear, and when the train is again coupled, it shall be removed
immediately from off such crossing. (1981 Code)
5-9-3: SAFE CROSSINGS MAINTAINED:
All railroad companies shall keep their street crossings in good repair and in
safe condition. (1981 Code)
5-9-4: MAXIMUM SPEED:
No railroad company shall, by itself or agents, run any train, locomotive
engine or car at grade level at a speed greater than thirty miles per hour
through the corporate limits of the Village. (Ord. 2594, 6-13-94)
5-9-5: ENGINE WHISTLE:
No railroad company shall cause or allow the whistle of any locomotive engine
to be sounded within the Village except for necessary signals for brakes and
street crossings, and such as may be absolutely necessary to prevent injury to
persons and to property. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 10
VILLAGE WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
SECTION:
5-10-1: Combined Utility
5-10-2: Application And Deposit For Water Or Sewer Service
5-10-3: Rates For Sewerage Service
5-10-4: Water Use Rates
5-10-5: Bills For Water And Sewer Charges
5-10-6: Liability For Payment Of Water And Sewer Bills
5-10-7: Water Meter Readings
5-10-1: COMBINED UTILITY:
   A.   The existing waterworks system, in its entirety, together with all
additions, improvements and extensions thereto that may hereafter be made and
the existing sanitary sewerage system, in its entirety, together with all
additions, improvements and extensions thereto that may hereafter be made, be
and the same are hereby declared to be a combined system, and said combined
waterworks and sewerage system shall be maintained and operated as a single
utility, and a charge or rate shall be established for the use of such combined
system, which shall be reasonable and commensurate with the service performed
by said combined system, and shall be sufficient to maintain, operate and
provide an adequate Depreciation Fund and pay the principal and interest on any
revenue bonds which may be issued, which by their terms are made payable from
the revenues of such combined system 1 .
   B.   All property, real, personal and mixed, comprising the now existing
waterworks system and sanitary sewerage system, be and the same is hereby
found, determined and declared to constitute the properties of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system of the Village.
   C.   From and after the effective date of this section, said existing
waterworks system and sanitary sewerage system shall be owned and operated by
the Village as a combined utility, known as the combined waterworks and
sewerage system, and all improvements and extensions to said waterworks or
sewerage system, either or both, shall be considered as improvements and
extensions to said combined utility; and all the properties, assets,
obligations and liabilities, of all kinds, of said waterworks system and of
said sanitary sewerage system, existing, outstanding and accruing or to accrue,
shall be held, used, confessed and acknowledged as the properties, assets,
obligations and liabilities of said combined utility. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapters 11 and 12 of this title.
5-10-2: APPLICATION AND DEPOSIT FOR WATER OR SEWER SERVICE:
   A.   Any person desiring water or sewer service from the Village, including
any and all connections with the waterworks and sewerage system, shall make
application therefor, on a form to be furnished by the Director of Public
Works. Every such applicant shall state in detail the place, location and kind
of connection and appendages sought, the purpose for which the water is to be
used, and all the plumbing and plumbing work in any manner or way connected
therewith, and in case any street paving shall be opened or disturbed by such
work, the applicant shall conform to the requirements of this Code and other
ordinances of the Village.
   B.   All applicants who request water service shall make a deposit of forty
five dollars with the Village Clerk, as security for the payment of water to be
used, for which a certificate of deposit shall be issued. Upon surrender of
such certificate and the payment of all indebtedness, if any, due the Village,
the deposit shall be returned to the depositor whenever the Village shall have
discontinued the supply of water to such premises, after due notice in writing
to the Director of Public Works so to do. Upon such discontinuance, if there be
any unpaid indebtedness due the Village for water or material supplied to such
premises, the amount of such indebtedness shall be deducted from such deposit.
(Ord. 3400, 12-12-2011)
5-10-3: RATES FOR SEWERAGE SERVICE:
   A.   Effective June 1, 2025, there shall be charged for sewerage service
four dollars and sixty-nine cents ($4.69) per one hundred cubic feet of metered
water used on each metered account connected to the village water system,
including elementary schools, high schools, colleges, churches, River Forest
Park District, River Forest Public Library and the community center.
   B.   Minimum Billing: Effective November 1, 2012, there shall be a minimum
bimonthly sewerage billing of three hundred fifty cubic feet of metered water
at the current sewer rate for each metered account connected to the Village
water system. (Ord. 3445, 7-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3739, 4-22-2019; Ord. 3812, 6-8-
2020; Ord. 3836, 5-10-2021; Ord. 3862, 5-9-2022; Ord. 3894, 5-8-2023; Ord.
3931, 5-13-2024; Ord. 3956, 5-12-2025)
5-10-4: WATER USE RATES:
   A.   Metered Accounts: Effective November 1, 2012, every metered account
connected to the Village water system shall be assessed the minimum rate
specified herein and such minimum rate shall be due and payable each two month
period, when billed. Water shall be supplied to consumers only through approved
water meters, hereinafter described, except that under unusual conditions and
for temporary purposes, the Director of Public Works may permit the use of
water without the use of meters and may fix the price to be paid therefor.
   B.   Water Rate: Effective June 1, 2025, there shall be charged seven
dollars and eighty-five cents ($7.85) per one hundred cubic feet of metered
water used by each metered account connected to the village water system
including elementary schools, high schools, colleges, churches, the River
Forest Park District, River Forest Public Library, and the community center.
   C.   Minimum Billing: Effective November 1 , 2012, there shall be a minimum
bimonthly billing of three hundred fifty cubic feet of metered water at the
current water rate for each metered account connected to the Village water
system. (Ord. 3445, 7-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3739, 4-22-2019; Ord. 3812, 6-8-2020;
Ord. 3836, 5-10-2021; Ord. 3862, 5-9-2022; Ord. 3894, 5-8-2023; Ord. 3931, 5-
13-2024; Ord. 3956, 5-12-2025)
5-10-5: BILLS FOR WATER AND SEWER CHARGES:
   A.   Statement Of Charges: It shall be the duty of the Village Finance
Director to cause a statement for water and sewer charges to be mailed at least
once every two months beginning November 1, 2012, to each consumer of water or
sewer services. Said statement shall be payable within twenty eight days of its
date. The sum of ten percent of the amount of the statement shall be added
thereto if the statement is not paid within twenty eight days from its date.
(Ord. 3445, 7-9-2012)
   B.   Procedures To Enforce Collection Of Water And Sewer Charges: The
following remedies may be applied severally or cumulatively to enforce
collections of water and sewer charges:
      1.   By sending a delinquent notice reminding the customer of the amount
due.
      2.   By shutting off the water supply to such property if the charges
remain delinquent for more than thirty days. However, water service shall be
shut off only after a notice has been sent to the premises giving the customer
at least another ten days to either pay the bill or to contact the Village to
request a hearing on the matter. Water service shall not be resumed until all
water charges have been paid, including a charge of one hundred dollars for the
services of the Department of Public Works in turning the water off and on if
said reconnection is made during working hours (seven o'clock A.M. to three
thirty o'clock P.M.) and two hundred dollars if said reconnection is made after
working hours, or on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday.
      3.   To sue the occupant or user of the real estate in a civil action to
recover the money due for services rendered, plus a reasonable attorney fee to
be fixed by the court.
      4.   By recording a notice or declaration of lien on the specific
property with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, in compliance with 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-139-8 (1998). A copy of the notice of the lien
shall be sent to the owner(s) of record of the real estate.
      5.   By foreclosure of the lien in compliance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-139-8.
   C.   Delinquent Charges: No person owing water or sewer charges and moving
to another premises within the limits of the Village where there are water or
sewer connections or where connections shall afterward be made shall be
supplied with water until such arrearages are paid in full. (Ord. 3400, 12-12-
2011)
5-10-6: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF WATER AND SEWER BILLS:
   A.   The owner and tenant of premises supplied with water and sewer
services, and the consumers of water and sewer services so supplied, shall be
held jointly and severally liable for the payment of all bills for such
services.
   B.   No reduction shall be made or rebate allowed to any consumer on account
of leakage or alleged leakage in any pipe, tank or other apparatus or device.
(Ord. 3400, 12-12-2011)
5-10-7: WATER METER READINGS:
   A.   The water meter for any premises supplied with water should be read by
the Village every two months and shall be read by the Village at least once
every twelve months; the owner and, in the case of leased premises, the tenant,
shall facilitate such readings. (Ord. 3480, 4-8-2013)
   B.   Any person who shall vacate any premises or any person who shall enter
upon and occupy any premises shall immediately, before vacating such premises
or removing to such premises, notify the Director of Public Works and request a
reading of the water meter. (Ord. 3400, 12-12-2011)
CHAPTER 11
VILLAGE WATER SERVICE
SECTION:
5-11-1: Water Use Rates 1  (Rep. by Ord. 3400, 12-12-2011)
5-11-2: Deposits Required 2  (Rep. by Ord. 3400, 12-12-2011)
5-11-3: Bills For Water Charges 3  (Rep. by Ord. 3400, 12-12-2011)
5-11-4: Liability For Payment Of Water Bills 4  (Rep. by Ord. 3400, 12-12-2011)
5-11-5: Water Service To Different Premises
5-11-6: Water Service Pipes For Automatic Sprinkler Systems
5-11-7: Water Meters
5-11-8: State License Required; Bond
5-11-9: Permit Required For Water Connection
5-11-10: Fee For Permit For Water Connection
5-11-11: Opening Streets; Permit Required
5-11-12: General Specifications For Water Pipes
5-11-13: Repairs And Maintenance Of Water Service Pipes
5-11-14: Water Use Restrictions
5-11-15: Prohibited Acts, Conditions
5-11-16: Cross Connection Control
5-11-17: Use Of Groundwater As A Potable Water Supply Prohibited
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-10-4 of this title.
2 2. See subsection
  5-10-2B of this title.
3 3. See section
  5-10-5 of this title.
4 4. See section
  5-10-6 of this title.
5-11-1: WATER USE RATES 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 3400, 12-12-2011)
 
Notes
1 5. See section
  5-10-4 of this title.
5-11-2: DEPOSITS REQUIRED 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 3400, 12-12-2011)
 
Notes
1 6. See subsection
  5-10-2B of this title.
5-11-3: BILLS FOR WATER CHARGES 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 3400, 12-12-2011)
 
Notes
1 7. See section
  5-10-5 of this title.
5-11-4: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF WATER BILLS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 3400, 12-12-2011)
 
Notes
1 8. See section
  5-10-6 of this title.
5-11-5: WATER SERVICE TO DIFFERENT PREMISES:
   A.   Supply More Than One Premises: No service pipe shall be laid or used to
supply water to two or more distinct premises or buildings unless separate
stopcocks for each of the premises or buildings shall be placed in the parkway
outside of such premises, as provided in this chapter, and a permit fee shall
be charged for each service.
   B.   Two Or More Meters On One Service: Property owners may have, at the
option of the director of public works, more than one meter installed in one
building on one service and controlled by a single stopcock in the parkway;
provided, that the meters are not connected in tandem. Nothing less than the
minimum charge will be made for each meter so installed, and the bills for the
whole supply furnished through such service shall be made to the owner of the
premises. (1981 Code)
5-11-6: WATER SERVICE PIPES FOR AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
Water pipes entering premises and used for fire protection only and connected
with automatic sprinkler devices shall be supplied from a separate pipe having
an independent connection with the main, and shall be provided with an outside
controlling valve and a meter of a type, design and size to be approved by the
director of public works, all at the expense of the person using the same, and
shall be so constructed as to permit, in case of necessity, an uninterrupted
flow of water.
Whenever the owner of a sprinkler system desires to make a test thereof, he
shall first notify both the director of public works and the chief of the fire
department in writing to that effect, at least twenty four hours prior to the
time of such test. All water used in connection with such test shall be
measured and paid for by the owner of such sprinkler system. (1981 Code)
5-11-7: WATER METERS:
All water consumers supplied by the village shall be supplied through meters
only, and shall pay for the water at the rates and in the manner specified in
this chapter.
   A.   All meters must be purchased through the director of public works, and
the kind and pattern of such water meters shall be as determined by the
president and board. No other kind shall be installed or used. All meters shall
be placed in the basement of buildings where service pipes enter the same and
so as to afford easy access for examining and reading. Where there is no
basement, the meter shall be placed in a tile or concrete box inside the curb
line not more than one foot distant from the service cock. The box shall be so
constructed as to protect amply the meter against frost, and shall be easily
accessible to the employees of the village. After the meter is placed, only
officers or employees of the village shall be allowed to repair, remove or in
any manner interfere with the same. A stopcock or valve shall be placed on each
side of the meter.
The cost of such meter and the installation thereof shall be paid by the
applicant or the owner of the premises where the same is placed.
All repairs and renewals of meters caused by neglect or damage by the user
shall be at the expense of the user. It shall be unlawful for any person to
injure, deface, mar, destroy or in any manner interfere with any such meter. It
shall be the duty of such owner of or applicant for such meter to promptly
notify the director of public works of all defects in any such meter or its
failure properly to register the quantity of water used.
   B.   Whenever the meter, by reason of its being out of repair, or for any
cause, fails properly to register the water passing through the same, the
consumer shall be charged at the rate shown for a corresponding time of a
previous year under like conditions. If no record of a previous year exists,
then it shall be the duty of the director of public works to estimate or
determine so far as he can the amount of water consumed during the time such
meter fails to operate, and the consumer shall pay the amount estimated by the
director of public works. (1981 Code)
   C.   It shall be the duty of every owner of premises in the village supplied
with water and in the case of leased facilities, the tenant, to facilitate the
installation of a new water meter when such is deemed necessary by the director
of public works. Unobstructed access to the existing meter as well as access to
run a wire to the outside to accommodate the placement of an outside reader
shall be provided within thirty days of notification of intent to service,
change or install a meter and/or remote reader from the director of public
works.
If access is not provided within the thirty day period, the consumer will be
charged for water at a rate three times the average daily usage from the
corresponding billing period of the previous year, starting from the date of
initial notification and continuing until access is provided to the meter.
(Ord. 2357, 9-11-1989)
5-11-8: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED; BOND:
Any person desiring to engage in the business of water supply plumbing in the
village shall first obtain and exhibit to the village clerk a license from the
state department of registration and education.
A bond shall be required of every person engaging in the business of plumbing
pertaining to the construction of water supply in the village, in the sum of
ten thousand dollars, with sureties approved by the director of public works
conditioned upon the faithful observance and performance of all the provisions
of this code or other ordinances of the village concerning water supply, and
the making or maintaining of any connection thereto or therewith and
conditioned further to save and keep the village harmless from loss, cost,
damage, expense or liability of any kind whatsoever which the village may
suffer or which may accrue against it, or be charged to or recovered from it by
reason of anything done by such person in and about the making of any
alterations or repairs to or any work done in connection with the public water
supply of the village. (Ord. 2756, 3-9-1998)
5-11-9: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR WATER CONNECTION:
No householder or property owner or other person in the village shall connect
any private or house water services with any public water supply in the village
without first having made application in writing to the director of public
works for a permit to make such connection. Such application must be made by
the owner of the property it is desired to provide service, or by his duly
authorized agent, and it must be accompanied by an exact description of the
premises and of the character and location of proposed service, together with
the number and location of all fixtures it is designed to connect with same,
which description must be left and placed on file in the office of the director
of public works for future reference. Upon the approval of such application by
the director of public works, he shall issue to such applicant a permit to
connect such private service with any public water supply; provided, that such
applicant is legally entitled thereto. (Ord. 2309, 9-26-1988)
5-11-10: FEE FOR PERMIT FOR WATER CONNECTION:
The fee for a permit to construct a water service to connect with any public
water supply built in any of the streets, alleys or avenues of the village
shall be in accordance with the following schedule, but such permission shall
not be granted except upon the agreement, in writing, of the persons applying
therefor that such work will be performed by a duly licensed plumber, and that
such applications will comply with the provisions of this code and other
ordinances in relation to excavating the streets and that they will indemnify
the village for any damages or costs to which it may be put by reason of
injuries resulting from neglect or carelessness in performing the work so
permitted; and that no claim will be made by them or their successors in
interest against the village or for exemption from any assessment lawfully
imposed for constructing water services in the vicinity of their property.
SCHEDULE OF WATER CONNECTION FEES
New construction:                                                      
 Single-family residential:                                           
 Up to 1 inch service line                                           $ 500.00
 Greater than 1 inch service line                                    750.00
 Multi-family residential:                                            
 Per living unit                                                     500.00
 All other                                                           1,000.00
Replacing or upgrading existing service:
 Replacing service line with same size line, with or without new tap 50.00
 Replacing service line with increase in size                        300.00
Expanding existing service:
  In multi-family residential where the number of dwelling units is increased,
 the fee shall be based on the number of additional units at the rate for new
  construction.
 
(Ord. 2362, 10-30-1989)
5-11-11: OPENING STREETS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
No street, alley, public ground or place shall be disturbed or opened for the
purpose of laying water pipes or making connections with water pipes unless a
permit so to do is first obtained from the director of public works. Such
permits shall be granted only to licensed plumbers. The provisions of this
section are not intended to apply to the director of public works. (1981 Code)
5-11-12: GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS FOR WATER PIPES:
The connections from the water main shall be constructed in accordance with the
technical requirements of title 4, chapter 4 of this code. Each connection
shall be equipped with a service cock or valve located within the public right
of way at a location approved by the director of public works. All shutoff
valves of four inches and greater in diameter shall be placed in a minimum four
foot diameter vault. (Ord. 2357, 9-11-1989)
5-11-13: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE OF WATER SERVICE PIPES:
It shall be the duty of every owner of premises in the village supplied with
water to maintain the water service pipe on the building side of the buffalo
box, service cock or shutoff valve located within the public right of way in
good condition and defect free. Property owners shall repair or cause to be
repaired defective pipes within seventy two hours of notification by the
director of public works or his or her designee. If a defect, in the opinion of
the director of public works or his or her designee, constitutes a public
safety hazard or nuisance, the director of public works or his or her designee
may direct service to be immediately discontinued until the defect is repaired.
If, after notification, the defect is not repaired within seventy two hours,
the owner will be charged water at a rate three times the average daily usage
from the corresponding billing period of the previous year, starting from the
date of initial notification and continuing until the defect is repaired. (Ord.
3378, 6-13-2011)
5-11-14: WATER USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Lawn sprinkling utilizing Lake Michigan water through the municipal
water system is prohibited from May 15 through September 15 of each year on
consecutive days and between the hours of ten o'clock A.M. and four o'clock
P.M. New lawns (less than three months old) are exempted from this provision.
(Ord. 3572, 8-24-2015)
   B.   The president is duly authorized and empowered, from time to time, as
he in his discretion may see fit, should he find and determine that a water
supply shortage exists in the village, to meet the health, sanitary, safety,
fire protection and public welfare needs of the people of the village, to
declare that a water supply emergency exists and to prohibit or further
restrict the drawing of water from the water supply lines of the village or use
of such water for any of the following purposes during such emergency period:
      1.   Sprinkling.
      2.   Car washing.
      3.   Air conditioning or cooling.
      4.   Commercial or industrial uses beyond requirements for sanitation and
preserving health.
      5.   Any other use that is not directly connected with the preservation
of health, sanitation, safety or public welfare. (Ord. 2396, 7-9-1990)
5-11-15: PROHIBITED ACTS, CONDITIONS:
   A.   Unauthorized Turning On Of Service Cocks: No person not duly authorized
shall turn the water on at any service cock or use water therefrom when so
turned on, under penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and the person so using or wasting water in such unlawful
manner shall be liable to pay therefor at the regular water rates without
discount.
   B.   Defacing Or Breaking Of Seal On Water Meters: No seal placed by the
director of public works for the protection of any meter, valve, fitting or
other water connection shall be defaced or broken, except on written authority
from the director of public works.
   C.   Unauthorized Use Of Water From Fire Hydrant: No person other than
members of the fire department or employees of any department of the village
shall use water from any fire hydrant connected with the village water system,
unless specially authorized by the director of public works. (1981 Code)
5-11-16: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
   A.   The purpose of the cross connection control program is to protect the
public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within
the customer's water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow
through the service connection into the public water supply system; and promote
the elimination or control of existing cross connection, actual or potential,
between the public or consumer's potable water system and nonpotable water
systems containing substances of unknown or questionable quality; and provide
for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which
will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and consumer's
potable water systems. If in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or in
the judgment of the director of public works or his or her designee, an
approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public
water supply system, the director of public works or his or her designee, shall
give notice to the water customer to install and maintain such an approved
device immediately. The water customer shall, at its own expense, install the
device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing
code and all applicable state and village laws, regulations, and ordinances,
and the water customer shall permit inspections and tests made of such approved
devices to be made, as required by the Illinois environmental protection
agency, Illinois plumbing code, or village laws, regulations, and ordinances.
   B.   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the village enters the supply or distribution system of the
village, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by both
the director of public works and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the director of public works to cause surveys
and investigations to be made of all properties served by the public water
supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of
public record and shall be repeated at least every two years, or as often as
the director of public works shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys
shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five
years.
   D.   The licensed cross connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter, upon reasonable prior written notice, at any reasonable time
any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the village for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of
cross connections. The director of public works or his or her designee shall
have the right, upon reasonable prior written notice, to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying information
submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection control
inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served
shall furnish to the director of public works or his or her designee any
information which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or
water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded,
shall, within the discretion of the director of public works or his or her
designee, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as
provided in this section.
   E.   The director of public works of the village is hereby authorized and
directed to discontinue, after reasonable written notice to the occupant
thereof, the water service to any property if any connection in violation of
the provisions of this section is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to
such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated
or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section, and until a
reconnection fee as set forth in subsection 5-10-5B2 of this title, is paid to
the village. An immediate disconnection with oral notice may be ordered by the
director of public works or his or her designee when an imminent danger of
harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action
shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. An
immediate disconnection without notice shall be permitted to prevent actual or
imminent contamination or pollution on the public water supply, provided that,
in the reasonable opinion of the director of public works or his or her
designee, the plumbing inspector, or the Illinois environmental protection
agency, such action is required to prevent actual or imminent contamination or
pollution of the public water supply. If an immediate disconnection without
notice is made, oral or written notice shall be given within a reasonable time
thereafter.
   F.   Any water consumer who causes, permits, or allows back siphoned or back
pressured material, or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the
potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an
improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been
bypassed, shall bear all costs of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section
may be fined up to two hundred fifty dollars for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day during which a
violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 3369, 5-9-2011)
5-11-17: USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED:
   A.   The use of groundwater as a potable water supply by the installation or
use of potable water supply wells or by any other method is prohibited.
      1.   The use or attempt to use as a potable water supply, groundwater
from within the corporate limits of the village by the installation or drilling
of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited, including at points of
withdrawal by the village.
      2.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject
to a fine of up to five hundred dollars for each violation.
   B.   "Person" is any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
"Potable water" is any water used for human or domestic consumption, including,
but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes,
or preparing foods. (Ord. 2814, 3-8-1999)
CHAPTER 12
VILLAGE SEWERS AND DRAINS
SECTION:
5-12-1: State License Required; Bond
5-12-2: Permit Required For Sewer Connection
5-12-3: Fee For Permit For Sewer Connection
5-12-4: Standards Adopted
5-12-5: General Construction Requirements
5-12-6: Water Supply For Sewer Connections
5-12-7: Inspection Of Sewer Connections
5-12-8: Uncovering Sewers
5-12-9: Injuring, Obstructing Sewers
5-12-10: Repairs And Maintenance Of Sewer Service Pipes
5-12-1: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED; BOND:
Any person desiring to engage in the business of plumbing affecting sewers in
the village shall first obtain and exhibit to the village clerk a license from
the state department of registration and education.
A bond shall be required of every person engaging in the business of plumbing
pertaining to the construction of sewers in the village, in the sum of five
thousand dollars, with sureties approved by the director of public works
conditioned upon the faithful observance and performance of all the provisions
of this code or other ordinances of the village concerning sewers, and the
making or maintaining of any connection thereto or therewith and conditioned
further to save and keep the village harmless from loss, cost, damage, expense
or liability of any kind whatsoever which the village may suffer or which may
accrue against it, or be charged to or recovered from it by reason of anything
done by such person in and about the making of any alterations or repairs to or
any work done in connection with the sewer system of the village. (1981 Code)
5-12-2: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR SEWER CONNECTION:
No householder or property owner or other person in the village shall connect
any private or house drains with any public sewer or drain in the village
without first having made application in writing to the director of public
works for a permit to make such connections. Such application must be made by
the owner of the property it is desired to drain, or by his duly authorized
agent, and it must be accompanied by an exact description of the premises and
of the character and location of the drains it is proposed to put in place,
together with the number and location of all water closets, sinks, bathtubs,
receiving basins and other sanitary fixtures it is designed to connect with
same, which description must be left and placed on file in the office of the
director of public works for future reference. Upon the approval of such
application by the director of public works, he shall issue to such applicant a
permit to connect such private or house drain with any public sewer or drain;
provided, that such applicant is legally entitled thereto. (1981 Code)
5-12-3: FEE FOR PERMIT FOR SEWER CONNECTION:
The fee for a permit to construct sewers or drains or to lay pipes to connect
with any sewers or drains built in any of the streets, alleys or avenues of the
village shall be in accordance with the following schedule, but such permission
shall not be granted except upon the agreement, in writing, of the persons
applying therefor that such work will be performed by a duly licensed plumber
or sewer and drain layer, and that such applicants will comply with the
provisions of this code and other ordinances in relation to excavating the
streets 1  and that they will indemnify the village for any damages or costs to
which it may be put by reason of injuries resulting from neglect or
carelessness in performing the work so permitted; and that no claim will be
made by them or their successors in interest against the village or for
exemption from any assessment lawfully imposed for constructing sewers or
drains in the vicinity of their property.
SCHEDULE OF SEWER CONNECTION FEES
New construction:                                     
 Single-family residential:                          
 Up to 1 inch water service line                    $ 500.00
 Greater than 1 inch water service line             750.00
 Multi-family residential:                           
 Per living unit                                    500.00
 All other                                          1,000.00
Replacing or upgrading existing service:
 Replacing sewer service line with same size line   50.00
 Replacing sewer service line with increase in size 300.00
Expanding existing service:                           
  In multi-family residential where the number of dwelling units is increased,
 the fee shall be based on the number of additional units at the rate for new
  construction.
 
(Ord. 2362, 10-30-1989)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 4 of this title.
5-12-4: STANDARDS ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference as part of the ordinances of the village,
for the purpose of prescribing minimum engineering standards governing the
design, construction and maintenance of sewers and sewerage systems, and so
that written procedures be established governing the issuance of sewer permits,
the "Manual Of Procedures For The Administration Of The Sewer Permit
Ordinance", adopted by the metropolitan sanitary district of greater Chicago on
September 3, 1970, and any subsequent amendments thereto; not less than three
copies of said manual have been on file at least fifteen days and are now filed
in the office of the village clerk and are available for public use, inspection
and examination. (Ord. 3177, 11-13-2006)
5-12-5: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
All private or house drains laid in the village must be constructed in
accordance with the following rules and regulations:
   A.   The least inclination that shall be allowed for water closets, kitchen
and all other drains, not over six inches in diameter, liable to receive solid
substances, is one-half inch in two feet and for cellar and all other drains to
receive water, one-fourth inch to two feet. The ends of all pipes not to be
immediately connected with the water closets, sinks, downspouts or catch basins
must be securely guarded against the introduction of sand and earth by brick or
cement or other watertight or imperishable materials.
   B.   All pipes that must be left open in drains, cellars, areas, yards or
gardens must be connected with suitable catch basins, which catch basins shall
be constructed of brick or cement pipe, and be circular in section, and not
less than three feet in internal diameter and at least three feet ten inches in
depth and shall be two feet six inches in the clear from the bottom of the
outlet pipe to the bottom of the basin and trapped. The bottom of the trap
shall be six inches below the bottom of the outlet pipe. The brickwork shall
not be less than four inches in thickness, set upon a bottom of one layer of
brick, and the brick shall be laid flat, and shall not show more than four
inches space on the inner surface of the basin, and shall be laid in a
workmanlike manner, and shall be thoroughly imbedded in hydraulic cement mortar
so as to make the basin watertight.
   C.   No catch basin of any private or house drain shall be built in a public
street, but shall be placed inside of the line of the lots or parcels of ground
sought to be drained. (1981 Code)
5-12-6: WATER SUPPLY FOR SEWER CONNECTIONS:
All connections with sewers or drains used for the purpose of carrying animal
refuse from water closets or otherwise and slop of kitchens shall have fixtures
for a sufficiency of water to be so applied as properly to carry off such
matter. (1981 Code)
5-12-7: INSPECTION OF SEWER CONNECTIONS:
All work in connection with the installation of sewer connections done by state
licensed plumbers or by competent agents or employees of such licensed plumbers
shall be subject to the inspection, supervision and approval of the director of
public works. All sewer pipe and catch basin work shall be left exposed for
thorough inspection as to grades and quality of pipe, brick, cement and
comparison with plans, and shall not be covered up until passed upon by the
director of public works. Any faulty or defective work done by any licensed
plumber or by any servant, agent or employee of such plumber which may at any
time be discovered by the director of public works shall be made satisfactory.
Any licensed plumber who shall neglect, refuse or fail to make good any defects
or faults in his work, which shall be discovered by the director of public
works, shall not be permitted to do any further or additional work until the
defects or faults so discovered have been made good in a manner satisfactory to
the director of public works. Any licensed plumber who shall refuse, neglect or
fail to make good such defects or faults, when requested so to do by the
director of public works, or who otherwise violates or fails to comply with any
of the provisions of this code or the other ordinances of the village, shall
not again be permitted to conduct, carry on or engage in the business of drain
laying until satisfactory assurance shall be given to the director of public
works that such person will thereafter faithfully observe the provisions of
this code and the other ordinances and until such licensed plumber shall have
made good any loss, damage or expense caused by or on account of any negligence
or misconduct on his part. (1981 Code)
5-12-8: UNCOVERING SEWERS:
Any person who shall uncover or excavate under or around any catch basin or
brick or pipe sewers in the village, for any purpose whatsoever, without the
written consent of the director of public works shall be punished as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. The person by whom such work is done, and his employees,
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. (1981 Code)
5-12-9: INJURING, OBSTRUCTING SEWERS:
Any person who shall, by himself or another, directly or indirectly, wilfully
or maliciously damage, injure or obstruct any sewer, house drain, cesspool,
water closet, catch basin, manhole, protection pier or any appurtenance
thereto, now or hereafter to be laid or constructed in the village shall be
liable for each offense, to be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and shall further be liable to pay all expenses incurred on
account of repairs or damages resulting from such wilful or malicious act.
No butcher's offal or garbage, dead animals or obstructions of any kind
whatsoever shall be placed, thrown or deposited in any receiving basin or
sewer. Any person so offending or causing any such obstruction or substance to
be placed so as to be carried into such basin or sewer shall be punished as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1981 Code)
5-12-10: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE OF SEWER SERVICE PIPES:
It shall be the duty of every owner of premises in the village supplied with
sewer service to maintain the sewer service pipe on the building side of the
sewer main, which sewer main may be located within the public right of way,
including, without limitation, in the parkway adjacent to the building, the
street, or the parkway across the street from the building, in good condition
and defect free. Property owners shall repair or cause to be repaired defective
pipes within seventy two hours of notification by the director of public works
or his or her designee. If a defect, in the opinion of the director of public
works or his or her designee, constitutes a public safety hazard or nuisance,
the director of public works or his or her designee may direct service to be
immediately discontinued until the defect is repaired. (Ord. 3378, 6-13-2011)
CHAPTER 13
WATER CONSERVATION
SECTION:
5-13-1: Air Conditioning
5-13-2: Water Saving Plumbing Fixtures
5-13-3: Fixtures For Public Use
5-13-4: Car Wash Facilities
5-13-5: Penalty
5-13-1: AIR CONDITIONING:
   A.   Definitions: Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this
section, the following words shall have the meanings given to them by this
subsection:
   AIR CONDITIONING: The cooling or dehumidification, or both, of space for
human occupancy, food preservation and industrial processing.
   AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM; AIR CONDITIONING INSTALLATION: One or more air
conditioning units, the water for which passes through a common meter, whether
or not the units are owned by the property owner, the tenant or a combination
of both. It is intended that separate submetering for any one property owner or
tenant occupying different space in the same building could create separate
systems; it is not intended that submetering of individual units serving the
same space or adjacent space under one owner or tenant would create separate
systems.
   INSTALLED CAPACITY: The total number of tons of refrigeration installed in
one air conditioning system.
   TON OF REFRIGERATION: The heat required to melt ice at the rate of one ton
in twenty four hours. One compressor horsepower shall be considered equivalent
to one ton of refrigeration.
   WATER CONSERVING DEVICES: A cooling tower, spray pond, evaporation condenser
or other equipment by which water is cooled and recirculated, thereby limiting
the use of water from the mains to that amount lost through evaporation.
   WATER REGULATING DEVICE: A regulating valve or other device, the purpose of
which is to limit the maximum use of water to a predetermined rate.
   B.   Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person to have installed or
to operate air conditioning equipment without first conforming to the following
regulations:
      1.   All water customers who desire to install air conditioning and
refrigeration equipment after the effective date of this Code are required to
make written application therefor, and to obtain approval and a permit therefor
in advance from the Director of Public Works, and are required to give notice
of completion of the installation. All customers who have installed air
conditioning equipment prior to the effective date of this Code shall, in lieu
of a permit, notify the Director of Public Works of such existing installation.
Failure to give notice shall be considered a violation of this Code.
      2.   All air conditioning units shall be equipped with water conservation
devices so that water from the Village mains shall be used for makeup and
flushing purposes only. Any air conditioning system is prohibited from using
water from the mains in excess of two-tenths gallons per minute per ton. Each
air conditioning system shall be submetered using a water meter acceptable to
the Village.
      3.   All air conditioning units installed prior to the effective date of
this Code and contrary thereto must be converted, modified or adjusted to
comply with the same. (1981 Code)
      4.   The Director of Public Works and persons designated by him shall at
all reasonable hours have free access to premises supplied with water for air
conditioning purposes, to examine the equipment and to ascertain if there is
more water being used than allowed by this chapter. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3656,
7-10-2017)
   C.   Fees For Air Conditioning Equipment Permits: Fees shall be paid at the
time the application for a permit required by subsection B of this section is
filed, and shall be twenty five dollars plus one dollar per ton of capacity, as
set forth in the application. (1981 Code)
5-13-2: WATER SAVING PLUMBING FIXTURES:
In all new construction and in all repair and/or replacement of fixtures or
trim, only fixtures and trim not exceeding the following flow rates and/or
water usage shall be installed. These ratings are based on a pressure at the
fixture of forty to fifty pounds per square inch.
 
Water closets, tank type        3.5 gal. per flush
Water closets, flushometer type 3.0 gal. per flush
Urinals, tank type              3.0 gal. per flush
Urinals, flushometer type       3.0 gal. per flush
Shower heads                    3.0 gal. per minute
Lavatory, sink faucets          3.0 gal. per minute
 
(1981 Code)
5-13-3: FIXTURES FOR PUBLIC USE:
In addition to the requirements in section
5-13-2 of this chapter, in all new construction and in all repairs and/or
replacement of fixtures in lavatories intended for public use, the faucets of
such lavatories located in restrooms intended for public use shall be of
metering or self-closing type. (1981 Code)
5-13-4: CAR WASH FACILITIES:
In all new construction and/or replacement of fixtures in car wash facilities,
car wash installations shall be equipped with a water recycling system. (1981
Code)
5-13-5: PENALTY:
Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such
provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day any violation of any
provision of this chapter shall continue. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 14
STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
5-14-1: Purpose And Scope
5-14-2: Definitions
5-14-3: Annual Registration Required
5-14-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
5-14-5: Action On Permit Applications
5-14-6: Effect Of Permit
5-14-7: Revised Permit Drawings
5-14-8: Insurance
5-14-9: Indemnification
5-14-10: Security
5-14-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
5-14-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
5-14-13: General Construction Standards
5-14-14: Traffic Control
5-14-15: Location Of Facilities
5-14-16: Construction Methods And Materials
5-14-17: Vegetation Control
5-14-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
5-14-19: Cleanup And Restoration
5-14-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
5-14-21: Variances
5-14-22: Penalties
5-14-23: Enforcement
5-14-24: Severability
5-14-25: Appeals
5-14-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities by utilities and telecommunication
providers on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, which will
provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe
usage, and visual qualities of the Village rights-of-way and the Village as a
whole.
   B.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license, or similar agreement. Any modification of or addition to an existing
facility shall comply with this chapter.
   C.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village
rights-of-way.
   D.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: In the event of
any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and
the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the
Village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   E.   Conflicts With Other Code Sections: This chapter supersedes all parts
of this Code adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
   F.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations.
(Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois Administrative Code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
   ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
   APPLICANT: A person or entity applying for a permit under this chapter.
   BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO roadside design
guide.
   COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE: The Municipal Code of the Village.
   CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of- way lines
of a right of way.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The village's director of public works or his or
her designee.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: Any work that obstructs the right of way or causes
a material adverse effect on the use of the right of way. Such work may
include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting;
placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or
structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and
shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does
not materially obstruct the flow of traffic.
   EMERGENCY: Any situation requiring immediate measures to protect the health
and safety of the general public.
   ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER: The village engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track
and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video cables and
wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances
thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights
of way, except those owned by the village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to a road or highway where it is precluded by control of access to the road or
highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which is determined by the
director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life,
health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY: A right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban
roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and improvements,
including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures,
signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or
convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
   ILCC: Illinois commerce commission.
   JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of Harlem Avenue, Lathrop Avenue or
Thatcher Avenue with any of the following: Madison Street, Washington
Boulevard, Lake Street, Chicago Avenue, Division Street or North Avenue.
   OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the center line of a right of way.
   PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by a street or
sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE: That entity or person to which or to whom a permit has been
issued pursuant to this chapter.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
   PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or
commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the
village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the
location of facilities other than those of the village. "Right of way" shall
not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically
described in this definition and shall not include village buildings, fixtures,
and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated
in the right of way.
   ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to this chapter.
   SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications
as defined in the Illinois telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et seq. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by it to the ultimate retail consumer
who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access
charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities,
and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a
component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall
not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. "Telecommunications"
shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as
defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and
following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services
subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open
video system as defined in the rules of the federal communications commission
(47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person or entity that installs, owns,
operates or controls facilities in the public right of way used or designed to
be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person or entity
engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH: An open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
   UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility", as
defined in this chapter.
   VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VILLAGE: The village of River Forest.
   WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying potable water.
   WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 2898, 11-
13-2000)
5-14-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies rights of way within the village shall register on
the first business day of January of each year with the director of public
works, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and
telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf
of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's
facilities in the right of way and a twenty four hour telephone number for each
person, and evidence of insurance as required in section
5-14-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. A
telecommunications provider that has registered under this section, shall be
deemed to have satisfied the registration requirement under subsection
3-8-8B1 of this code. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct or modify any facility on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village right of way
without first filing an application with the director of public works and
obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of
the right of way.
   B.   Permit Application Information (Confidentiality): The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name, address, telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         a.   A written traffic-control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois manual
on uniform traffic control devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ILCC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as specified in any franchise agreement then
in effect, or, if there is no agreement, or an existing agreement has no
insurance provision, then as required in this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as specified in any
franchise agreement then in effect, or, if there is no agreement, or an
existing agreement has no security fund provision, then as required in this
chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter; and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements: In addition to the requirements
of subsection C of this section, the permit application shall include the
following items as may be applicable to the specific utility that is the
subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any "Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity" has been issued by the ILCC that the applicant is
required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, the proposed pipe size, design,
construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, a statement that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, a statement that the land
and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection
agency, division of water pollution control and the metropolitan water
reclamation district, have been satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, the type or types of
petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
the applicant shall timely amend its application to reflect any material
changes. In the event an amendment is submitted, no work shall proceed without
the express written permission of the director of public works or his designee,
notwithstanding the previous issuance of a permit. Any change in the actual
locations of any facilities from the locations identified in the plans,
drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application shall be
considered "material" for purposes of this subsection.
   F.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of five hundred dollars. No application
fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer that is paying
the municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to
this code or the optional state telecommunications infrastructure maintenance
fee pursuant to the telecommunications municipal infrastructure maintenance fee
act, or by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee act. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the director of
public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the director of public works shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the director of public works is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter
and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the
director of public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
   B.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to the
commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty days
prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The director of public
works shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which the facility may
be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the director of public works fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a)
ten days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction, or
b) twenty five days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer
in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to this chapter, the telecommunications
retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and
all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to
be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of
subsection A of this section.
   C.   Withholding Action On An Application: The village shall not be required
to take action on any application if the applicant is otherwise in violation of
this chapter, title 3 or 4 of this code or any existing franchise agreement.
Upon correction of such violation, the village shall proceed to review the
application in accordance with this section.
   D.   Limitation On Permit Application For Subsequent Work: No excavation
shall be permitted in any public right of way which has been constructed,
reconstructed, repaired or resurfaced within the previous five years unless the
excavation is shown in a long-range plan submitted to the village at least two
years prior to the application. Upon one hundred eighty days' prior notice, the
village may require any excavation shown in a long- range plan to be done in
conjunction with any proposed work being conducted in the same area. (Ord.
2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights of way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights of way.
   B.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village, and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
The permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village
within ninety days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised
drawings or plans shall be submitted on paper and in an electronic format
approved by the director of public works. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with section
5-14-21 of this chapter. If the village denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility and any contractor or subcontractor
of each utility occupying a right of way or constructing any facility in the
right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed below:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars for all other types of liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars per employee and per accident.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of
a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to
cancel or not to renew.
Within ten days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event
later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and
furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections
B and C of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall so state in
its permit application and provide the village with evidence satisfactory to
the village sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
coverages and limits required under subsection A of this section.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   G.   License And Financial Resources Required: Any insurance company
providing coverage in compliance with this section shall be licensed in the
state of Illinois and have financial resources satisfactory to the village.
(Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
Each permit application shall contain a statement that by occupying or
constructing facilities in the right of way, the utility agrees to defend,
indemnify and hold the village and its elected and appointed officials and
officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any
and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses,
including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out
of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the acts or
omissions of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of
the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement. The utility's
indemnity obligations shall not apply or extend to any injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting
from the negligence of the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents
or representatives. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, the permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an
amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall not relieve the utility of its obligations to insure and
indemnify the village, or to be liable to the village for damages. The security
fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter; and
      2.   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits, and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location within the state of Illinois at which it
can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the director of public works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit is to be performed in
phases and/or in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting
of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations,
and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to
substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the
director of public works may allow the permittee to post a single amount of
security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the
permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal
to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of
this subsection for any single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen days' advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the
fourteen day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to pay or reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs
or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of
any action, inaction or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen days after receipt of written notice
from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified pursuant to
subsection C of this section.
   F.   Interest: The permittee shall be entitled to any interest which may be
generated by its security fund, less estimated costs of administration, and may
request that net interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be
returned to it by the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not
reduce the security fund below the minimum balance stipulated pursuant to
subsection C of this section. The village shall not be required to deposit the
security fund in an interest-bearing account paying prevailing rates.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after an account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the village. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the
security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village provided that amounts in excess of said
costs, loss or damage, if any, shall be refunded to the permittee.
   H.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. The withdrawal of funds by the village
shall be credited to the permittee with respect to any claim which the village
may have, but shall not operate as a waiver, estoppel or satisfaction, or
otherwise prevent the village from recovering additional funds or seeking other
legal relief to which it may be entitled. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter, or any franchise agreement;
      3.   Permittee's activities, physical presence or presence of permittee's
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights of way presents a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit to the permittee stating the
reason(s) for the revocation or suspension.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way and restore the rights
of way to the satisfaction of the village, providing written proof of such
removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, extend the time periods provided in this
subsection.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of
this section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of this section, the village or its designee may,
at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less
than twenty days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or
equipment; 3) after not less than thirty days' notice to the permittee of
failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the
village; 4) exercise its rights under section
5-14-9 of this chapter; or 5) sue the permittee for an injunction and/or
damages, including all costs of removal and professional fees and costs
incurred. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A utility or permittee shall notify the village in writing no less than thirty
days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility located in the right of
way or change in identity of the utility, stating the name, address and
telephone number of the proposed new owner. Any new owner of the utility or the
facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former
owner under any pending permit and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in
the right of way. All required insurance coverage or bonding shall be changed
to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications:
      1.   Standard specifications for road and bridge construction;
      2.   Supplemental specifications and recurring special provisions;
      3.   Highway design manual;
      4.   Highway standards manual;
      5.   Standard specifications for traffic control items;
      6.   Illinois manual on uniform traffic control devices (92 Illinois
administrative code section 545);
      7.   Flagger's handbook; and
      8.   Work site protection manual for daylight maintenance operations.
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the director of public works shall determine which principles apply
and such decision shall be final. If requested, the director of public works
shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction,
maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois manual on uniform traffic control
devices and this code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, and meeting all applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public rights of way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs, the utility shall
provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: Any overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way boundary lines of a highway only if it is
commercially unreasonable to install as an underground parallel facility and
then only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line
and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the
curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right- of-way line and any aboveground
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
   B.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Culverts Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be
located in culverts or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree angle to the center line as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ILCC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Illinois administrative code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR 192.707 (1989)).
   C.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   D.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
   E.   Aboveground And/Or Overhead Installations: Aboveground or overhead
facilities may be installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible;
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable; and
      4.   The village approves the location, size and, at the village's
option, the facility is screened from view.
   F.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routes available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standard Methods And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the director
of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than forty eight hours in advance of boring or jacking
operations and back- filled within forty eight hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced,
and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads
that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved shall be bored under or
around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless written
permission is obtained from the director of public works.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the Illinois
manual on uniform traffic control devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         c.   Tree Drip Line: The utility shall not trench within the drip line
of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled. If so ordered by the utility, at its
expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the
installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as
determined by the director of public works.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as
practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by
the director of public works.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last five
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE
locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of a water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village-approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty psig or less, encasement
may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty psig, encasement may be eliminated only if
extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                           Minimum Cover
Power or communication line (in general)   30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication line installed by the plowed 24 inches (0.6 m)
method
Gas or petroleum products                  30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                                 Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                           protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage   Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                       protection
 
The director of public works may allow or specify different minimum cover
depths to avoid conflicts with existing underground facilities.
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administration code 305 (formerly
general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled "Rules for
Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines", and the national
electrical safety code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boxing or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation, or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers" or other approved methods which
compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of
pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 –
transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety
standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
D 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Sewer Lines Or Drainage
Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines
within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current
"Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois".
      6.   Ground-Mounted Appurtenances: Ground-mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy-duty plastic or
similar material approved by the director of public works. With the approval of
the director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation- free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings
and shall be clearly marked showing the name of the owner and the type of
facility.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the requirements of the ILCC,
or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the
appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
any obstruction of right-of-way maintenance, or damage to the right of way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval
must be obtained from the village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   The village may require that construction operations on rights of
way be suspended, altered or cease when such operations would create hazards to
traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be
discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would
result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction
are those set forth in subsection
6-7-2K of this code.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and the village of River Forest
to ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground
facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities.
The village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose
of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the village or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically
mark its underground facilities within forty eight hours, excluding weekends
and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois underground facilities damage
prevention act 1 . (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
5-14-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this
code.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurances that the work will be accomplished by
competent persons with supervision experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree- trimming permit
and for assessment of damages. The village shall be entitled to compensation
for trees extensively damaged or removed without authorization. The formula
developed by the international society of arboriculture will be used as a basis
for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal. The
village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical
pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
      3.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   B.   Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the director of public works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety days following written notice from the village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate,
change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way
whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction,
repair, maintenance, or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or
the operations of the village in or upon, the rights of way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights of
way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
public rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village
within thirty days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the director of public
works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public
health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the
utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of
abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent
to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another
utility or person. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility
shall remove all excess material and restore all turf, vegetation, sidewalks,
curbs, other structures and/or terrain in a timely manner and to the
satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of entrances and side
roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and
methods approved by the director of public works. Such cleanup and repair may
be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any
other requirement to restore the right of way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project.
(Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all commercially reasonable
means to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village of
a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-21: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the director of
public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The director of public works has the
authority to grant a variance for each provision of this chapter identified in
the variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The director of public works may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
objectives and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-22: PENALTIES:
In addition to any damages and/or costs to which the Village may be entitled
pursuant to this chapter, any person or entity who (which) violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, or an order from the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee,
shall be subject to a fine of up to seven hundred fifty dollars per day for
each day, or part thereof, the violation continues. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-24: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
5-14-25: APPEALS:
Any order, directive or decision of the Director of Public Works made or given
pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the Village Board. Any appeal shall
be in writing, shall state the grounds for the appeal and shall be filed with
the Village Administrator within ten business days of receipt of the order,
directive or decision being appealed. The Village Board shall hear the appeal
no later than the second regular Board meeting after it is filed unless the
appellant agrees otherwise. (Ord. 2898, 11-13-2000)
CHAPTER 15
CABLE TELEVISION
SECTION:
5-15-1: Short Title
5-15-2: Definitions
5-15-3: Rights And Privileges Of Grantee
5-15-4: Agreement And Incorporation; Application By Reference
5-15-5: Franchise Territory
5-15-6: Duration And Acceptance Of Nonexclusive Franchise
5-15-7: Franchise Renewal
5-15-8: Police Powers
5-15-9: Cable Television Franchise Required
5-15-10: Use Of Grantee Facilities
5-15-11: Franchise Costs
5-15-12: Notices
5-15-13: Security Fund And Performance Security
5-15-14: Insurance And Indemnity
5-15-15: Rights Of Individuals
5-15-16: Availability Of Books And Records
5-15-17: System Construction
5-15-18: Construction And Maintenance Standards
5-15-19: Operational Standards
5-15-20: Consumer Protection And Customer Service Standards
5-15-21: Rights Reserved To Village
5-15-22: Continuity Of Service Mandatory
5-15-23: Technical Complaints And Testing
5-15-24: Grantee Rules And Regulations
5-15-25: Franchise Fee
5-15-26: Assignment Or Transfer Of Franchise
5-15-27: Fiscal Reports
5-15-28: Removal Of Cable Television System
5-15-29: Required Services And Facilities
5-15-30: Rules And Regulations
5-15-31: Technological Service And Performance Review
5-15-32: Uniform Rates
5-15-33: Franchise Revocation And Termination
5-15-34: Foreclosure
5-15-35: Compliance With State And Federal Laws
5-15-36: Unlawful Acts; Protection Of Property; Grantee Risks
5-15-37: Application For New Franchise, Excluding Renewed Franchise
5-15-38: Franchise Violation, Notice, Penalties And Procedures
5-15-39: Publication Costs
5-15-40: Waiver
5-15-41: Time Is Of The Essence
5-15-42: Force Majeure
5-15-43: Delegation Of Powers
5-15-44: Severability
5-15-45: No Waiver Of Rights Bestowed By Virtue Of Law
5-15-46: Effective Date
5-15-47: Governing Law And Venue
5-15-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE,
hereinafter "Ordinance". (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
   BASIC SERVICE: All subscriber services provided by the grantee in one or
more service tiers, which includes the delivery of local broadcast stations,
and public, educational and governmental access channels. The basic service
does not include optional program and satellite service tiers, a la carte
services (to the extent such services are not basic service under FCC rules),
per channel, per program or auxiliary services for which a separate charge is
made. However, grantee may include other satellite signals on the basic
service.
   CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, 47 USC 532 et seq.,
including the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992,
and the telecommunications act of 1996, as now and hereafter amended.
   CABLE FRANCHISE: The granting by the village the right and privilege to
establish, construct, operate and maintain a system and facilities in, over,
upon and under the public right of way and within easements or other rights to
use property which are effective for the purpose of that grant; said system
defined in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-42-11 (also franchise).
   CABLE OPERATOR: Any person or persons, including, but not limited to,
corporations, partnerships, and joint ventures, who provide cable services
through means of a cable system, multichannel video providers, which may
include, but is not limited to, open video system providers or video providers
which provide a video signal to their subscribers by means of leased telephone
or other telecommunications lines which are located in a public right of way,
and who own a significant interest in the cable system, or any person or
persons who manage, control, coordinate, or direct the operations of a cable
system.
   CABLE SERVICE: The one-way transmission to subscribers of: a) video
programming, or b) other such programming service, and subscriber interaction,
if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or
other programming service. This agreement shall not include telecommunications
services as defined by the telecommunications act of 1996.
   CABLE SYSTEM: A community antenna television system or CATV system as
defined in section 11-42-11 of the Illinois municipal code, and as amended from
time to time, including a system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers,
wave guides or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed
and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting,
amplifying and distributing audio, data, video and other forms of electric,
electrical or optical signals, which includes cable television service and
which is located in the village. The definition shall not include any such
facility that serves or will serve only subscribers which does not use village
rights of way.
   CHANNEL: A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used
in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as a
television channel is defined by the federal communications commission. Control
and/or actual working control or ownership of a system in whatever manner
exercised.
   CONTROLLING INTEREST: A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control
or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly
or indirectly, by any person or entity (except underwriters during the period
in which they are offering securities to the public) holding twenty percent or
more of a cable system or the franchise under which the system is operated. A
change in the control or controlling interest of an entity, which has control
or a controlling interest in a grantee shall constitute a change in the control
or controlling interest of the system under the same criteria. Control or
controlling interest as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one
person or entity.
   CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency within
the television receiver of a subscriber and by an appropriate channel selector
also permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial
locations.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees of the village of
River Forest.
   FCC: The federal communications commission and any legally appointed,
designated or elected agent or successor.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A written agreement entered into between a grantee and
the village wherein the franchise and the terms thereof are conferred upon the
grantee (also agreement).
   FRANCHISE AREA: Shall be the corporate limits of the village of River Forest
including all territory thereafter annexed to the village of River Forest.
   FRANCHISE FEE: Shall be as defined in the cable act as amended from time to
time.
   FRANCHISEE OR GRANTEE: The natural person, partnership, domestic and foreign
corporation, association, joint venture or organization of any kind granted a
franchise by the corporate authorities under this chapter or its lawful
successor, transferee, or assignee.
   GROSS REVENUES: Includes all revenue received by a grantee, or its
affiliates, derived directly or indirectly from and in connection with the
operation of the grantee's cable system to provide cable service within the
village, including, but not limited to, revenues, fees, receipts or charges
from or for: basic tier cable service; any tier of video programming service
other than basic service; any optional, premium, per-channel or per program
service; high speed internet access service, (such as internet services carried
over the cable system as defined as a cable service under title VI of the cable
act), digital music service, any installation, disconnection, reconnection,
change- in-service or other customer service; rentals of converters, remotes or
other customer premises equipment; commercial leased channels or channel
access; advertising sales revenue, including a per subscriber share of revenues
received for advertising carried on one or more cable systems in addition to
the grantee's cable system within the village; revenues from home shopping
channels; the sales of programming guides; and such other revenue sources as
may now exist or hereafter develop, provided that such revenues, fees receipts
or charges may lawfully be included in the gross revenue base on which the
village may calculate and collect franchise fees. Gross revenues shall not
include any amounts refunded to subscribers, any unpaid subscriber or
advertiser accounts and any sales tax, telecommunications tax, utility message
tax or other taxes imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the village,
the state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee on behalf of
and for remittance to the village, the state or other governmental unit. As
used herein, annual gross revenues shall mean gross revenues attributable to a
twelve month accounting period, or portion thereof.
   INSTALLATION: The connection of the system from feeder cable to the
subscribers' terminals.
   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Means those hours during which similar businesses in
the village are open to serve customers. In all cases, normal business hours
must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend
hours.
   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions that are within the
control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of
the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of
the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view
events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance
or upgrade of the cable system.
   PERSON: Corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or
associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals
supports and foundations for such facilities.
   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS CHANNELS OR PEG ACCESS CHANNELS:
The channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or
governmental access programming.
   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS FACILITIES OR PEG ACCESS
FACILITIES: Those facilities and equipment utilized for the production and
playback of public, educational, and governmental access programming.
   PUBLIC STREET: The surface, the air space, and the area below the surface of
any highway, street, alley, lane, path, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, or bridge,
now or hereafter held by the village, used for motor vehicle or pedestrian
travel under the jurisdiction and control of the village, which has been
acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes but only to the
extent of the village's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license
or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for cable
communications facilities.
   PUBLIC WAY: The surface and the space above and below the surface of any
public parkway, driveway, sidewalk, conduit, tunnel, park, square, waterway,
utility easements, and other public right of way, now or hereafter owned by the
village, but only to the extent of the village's right, title, interest or
authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and
easements for cable communications facilities.
   RENEWED FRANCHISE: Any franchise renewed pursuant to the franchise renewal
procedures in section 626 of the 1984 cable act, as amended.
   REQUESTS FOR PROPOSAL: The village's requests for proposal to initially
construct and operate a cable communication system within the corporate limits
of the village.
   SERVICE INTERRUPTION: The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable
channels.
   STATE: The state of Illinois.
   SUBSCRIBER: Any member of the general public who lawfully receives the
regular subscriber service and/or any one or more of such other services as may
be provided by the grantee's cable system and does not further distribute such
service.
   TRANSFER: Any transactions or series of transactions which, singularly or
collectively, result in the sale, assignment or transfer of all or a majority
of the assets of the grantee or the cable system or a change of twenty percent
or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee, of the ownership or
working control of the franchise or of the ownership or working control of
affiliated entities having ownership or working control of the grantee, the
franchise or cable system. Franchise transfers require village approval as
provided in this chapter. Transactions between affiliates of the grantee are
not exempt from village approval, except as specifically provided in a
franchise agreement between the village and the grantee.
   UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and cable communications facilities located
under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or
supports for overhead facilities.
   USER: A person or organization utilizing a system channel for purposes of
production or transmission of material as contracted with receipt thereof in a
subscriber capacity.
   UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement owned by the village and acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent
with cable communications facilities.
   VILLAGE: The village of River Forest, Cook County, Illinois.
   VILLAGE BOARD: The village president and board of trustees of the village of
River Forest.
   VILLAGE CODE: The village code of ordinances. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-3: RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF GRANTEE:
Any franchise granted by the village pursuant to Illinois statutes and this
chapter shall grant to the grantee, subject to the terms and conditions of the
franchise agreement between the village and a grantee, the right and privilege
to erect, construct, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over
and under the streets now in existence and as may be created or established
during its terms any poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes and
other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and
operation of a cable system. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-4: AGREEMENT AND INCORPORATION; APPLICATION BY REFERENCE:
   A.   Agreement And Execution: Upon adoption of any franchise agreement and
execution thereof by the grantee, the grantee agrees to be bound by all the
terms and conditions contained in this chapter as of the effective date of that
agreement.
   B.   Incorporation By Reference: Any grantee also agrees to provide all
services specifically set forth in its application, if there is one, and to
provide cable television service within the confines of the village and by its
acceptance of the franchise, the grantee specifically grants and agrees that
its application is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the
franchise. Except that the grantee may from time to time change its services in
response to market and financial decisions. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-5: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
All franchises granted shall be for the provision of services to the entire
"franchise area" as defined herein. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-6: DURATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
   A.   Duration And Acceptance: Any franchise and the rights, privileges and
authority hereby authorized shall take effect and be in force from and after
the signing of a franchise agreement by the parties and shall continue in force
and effect for the term specified in the franchise agreement unless otherwise
extended, terminated or revoked. Such franchise shall be nonexclusive. (Ord.
2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-7: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
   A.   Any renewal of a cable television franchise agreement shall be in
accordance with the provisions applicable in 47 USC 546, even if repealed.
   B.   Either party can invoke a mandatory informal process for a period of
one hundred eighty days for good faith negotiations regarding renewal of the
franchise agreement. This notice shall be provided in writing to the other
party at any time prior to the expiration of the franchise.
   C.   Either party shall be entitled to implement the formal process by
providing written notification of their intent to do so. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-
2000)
5-15-8: POLICE POWERS:
Every franchise agreement shall contain a provision that states that the
grantee's rights are subject to the police power of the village to adopt and
enforce generally applicable ordinances necessary to ensure the health, safety
and welfare of the public; and that grantee agrees to comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the village or any other
legally constituted governmental body pursuant to such power. (Ord. 2901, 11-
13-2000)
5-15-9: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
No "cable operator", as defined herein, shall be allowed to operate or to
occupy or use the public streets and public ways for system installation and
maintenance purposes without a franchise. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-10: USE OF GRANTEE FACILITIES:
The village shall have the right to install and maintain free of charge upon
the poles of the grantee any wire or pole fixtures that do not unreasonably
interfere with the cable television system operations of the grantee. The
village shall indemnify and hold harmless the grantee from any claim that might
arise due to or as a result of the village's use. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-11: FRANCHISE COSTS:
Costs to be borne by the grantee shall include any requirements or charges
incidental to the awarding or enforcing of an initial franchise, excluding
renewed franchises, but shall not be limited to, all costs of publications of
notices prior to any public meeting provided for pursuant to this section and
any costs not covered by application fees, incurred by the village in its
study, preparation of proposal documents, evaluation of all applications and
examinations of the initial applicant's qualifications, including reasonable
fees for attorneys and cable television consultants. Said fees shall be up to a
maximum of twenty five thousand dollars. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-12: NOTICES:
All notices from the grantee to the village pursuant to any franchise shall be
to the village administrator's office. The grantee shall maintain with the
village, throughout the term of the franchise, an address for service of
notices by mail. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-13: SECURITY FUND AND PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
Any franchise agreement shall contain adequate provisions to secure the
performance of the operator with respect to the payment of franchise fees,
construction bonds, permits, property restoration and other work to be
completed on the system in the rights of way. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-14: INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY:
Any franchise agreement shall include provisions requiring that the grantee
insure the village, at the grantee's expense, with those coverages and with at
least those limits carried by the village for its own operations and
properties. To the extent permitted by law, any franchise agreement shall
include provisions requiring the grantee to indemnify, defend and hold the
village harmless from and against any claims or liabilities arising from or
related to the performance of the agreement. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-15: RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS:
   A.   State Statutory Requirements: A grantee shall provide certificates that
it has in place a written policy against sexual harassment in accordance with
the Illinois human rights act 1  and that it has not engaged in bid-rigging or
bid-rotating in accordance with 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/33E-3 (1989)
and 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/33E-4 (1989). (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 775 ILCS 5/2-105.
5-15-16: AVAILABILITY OF BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Any franchise agreement shall provide for sufficient record keeping by the
grantee, auditing rights for the village and penalties to ensure prompt and
accurate payment of all franchise fees. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-17: SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   New Construction Timetable: New construction timetable for a new or a
renewed franchise, if applicable.
      1.   Within two years from the date of the award of an initial franchise,
the grantee must make cable television service available to every dwelling unit
within the service area.
         a.   The grantee must make cable television service available to at
least twenty percent of the dwelling units within the franchise area within
twelve months from the date of the award of the franchise.
         b.   The grantee must make cable television service available to at
least fifty percent of the dwelling units within the franchise area within
eighteen months from the date of the award of the franchise.
      2.   The grantee, in its application for a franchise, may propose a
timetable of construction which will make cable television service available in
the service area sooner than the above minimum requirements, in which case the
said schedule will be made part of the franchise agreement, and will be binding
upon the grantee.
   B.   Early Extension: In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory
extension of service, the grantee shall provide, upon the request of a
potential subscriber desiring service, an estimate of the grantee's costs
required to extend service to the subscriber. The grantee shall then extend
service upon request of the potential subscriber. The grantee may require
advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to the grantee within a
specified period to be determined between a grantee and a subscriber.
   C.   Special Agreements: Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
grantee from serving geographical areas not covered under this section upon
agreement with developers, property owners, residents, or businesses. (Ord.
2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-18: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   The general construction and maintenance standards of any cable
operator shall be governed by the village's right-of-way ordinance to the
extent that it does not conflict with the franchise agreement.
   B.   No grantee shall be required to obtain individual permits for the
provision of subscriber drops.
   C.   Grantee shall have the right to obtain general blanket permits for a
reasonable geographic area in order to provide for the rebuild, upgrade,
modification or maintenance of the cable system. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-19: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Maintenance Of The System: A grantee shall maintain all parts of the
system in good condition throughout the entire franchise period. A grantee
shall maintain staff available on a twenty four hour per day, seven day per
week basis to respond to cable system service interruptions.
   B.   Request For Service: Upon the reasonable request for service by any
person located within the franchise territory, the grantee shall, within thirty
days, furnish the requested service to such person within terms of the line
extension policy in subsection
5-15-17B of this chapter. A request for service shall be unreasonable for the
purpose of this subsection if no trunk or feeder line installation capable of
servicing that person's block has been installed.
   C.   Interruption Of Service: The grantee shall render efficient service,
make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the
shortest time possible.
   D.   Interference: The grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations
to interfere with television reception of subscribers or persons not served by
the grantee, nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any
manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents within the
confines of the village nor shall other utilities interfere with the grantee's
system. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-20: CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS:
The grantee shall meet the customer service standards adopted by the federal
communications commission, 47 CFR section 76.309, even if repealed, and, to the
extent the same are more stringent, the customer service standards set forth in
the enabling ordinance. The grantee shall maintain customer service and
complaint records for inspection and review by the village upon request and for
the longest period specified in 47 CFR 76.305(c), even if repealed. (Ord. 2901,
11-13-2000)
5-15-21: RIGHTS RESERVED TO VILLAGE:
   A.   Right To Amend: The village reserves the right to amend this chapter to
incorporate customer service requirements that exceed the standards set by the
FCC, if such standards are deemed to be more beneficial to the village's
residents.
   B.   Every Franchise Subject To Reserved Power: Every franchise awarded
pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to such reserved power whether or not
such franchise is expressly conditioned such reserved power.
   C.   Notice And Opportunity For Comment: The village shall provide a grantee
with ninety days' written notice of such amendment as referred to in subsection
A of this section, and shall offer the grantee an opportunity to enter comments
on such amendment. Said amendments shall be adopted by ordinance.
   D.   Exception To Compliance: In no event shall any grantee be required to
comply with any amendments to the village's cable television ordinance that
would unilaterally amend the rights, duties, or obligations granted by the
franchise agreement and the cable television ordinance in effect at the time.
(Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-22: CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY:
   A.   Continuity Of Service: If there is a change of franchise or if a new
operator acquires the system, the grantee shall cooperate with the village, new
franchisee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers.
During such period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any
period during which it operates the system and shall be entitled to reasonable
costs for its services until it no longer operates the system.
   B.   Failure To Operate: If the grantee fails to operate the system for
seven consecutive days without prior approval of the village or without just
cause, the village may, at its option, operate the system or designate an
operator until such time as the grantee restores service under conditions
acceptable to the village or a permanent operator is selected. (Ord. 2901, 11-
13-2000)
5-15-23: TECHNICAL COMPLAINTS AND TESTING:
   A.   Report On The Performance Of The System: Where there exists recurring
evidence, which, in the judgment of the village, casts doubt on the reliability
or quality of cable service, the village shall have the right and authority to
require the grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the
system. The grantee shall fully cooperate with the village in performing such
testing and shall prepare results and a report, if requested, within sixty days
after notice. Such report shall include the following information:
      1.   The nature of the complaint or problem that precipitated the special
tests;
      2.   The system component(s) tested;
      3.   The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
      4.   The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved;
      5.   Any other information pertinent to the tests and analyses which may
be required.
   B.   Tests: The village may require that tests be observed by an independent
professional engineer or equivalent of the village's choice at the village's
expense. The engineer shall be given records of special tests and may forward
to the village such records with a report interpreting the results of the
tests.
   C.   Failure To Make Improvements: The village's rights under this section
shall be limited to requiring tests, analyses and reports covering specific
subjects and characteristics based on recurring complaints or other evidence
when and under such circumstances as the village has reasonable grounds in its
judgment to believe that the complaints or other evidence require that tests be
performed to protect the public against violations of this chapter and the
attendant franchise agreement. Failure to make such improvements within three
months or such other time frame as is reasonable and customary to effect such
changes will constitute a breach of a condition for which penalties contained
in section
5-15-38 of this chapter are applicable. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-24: GRANTEE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform
its obligations under the franchise and to assure uninterrupted service to each
and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or
applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-
2000)
5-15-25: FRANCHISE FEE:
Any franchise agreement shall provide for a franchise fee payable to the
village up to the maximum rate allowed by law. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-26: ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   Assignment Or Transfer: The grantee's franchise shall not be
transferred or assigned, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent
of the village. As used in this section, the terms "assigned" and "transferred"
shall mean any transaction or series of transactions defined as a "Transfer" in
this chapter.
   B.   Granting Of A Security Interest: No consent from the village is
required prior to the granting of a security interest in any of the grantee's
assets by pledge, mortgage or other hypothecation to secure an indebtedness.
   C.   Notification Of Foreclosure: The grantee shall notify the village in
writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of the franchise or of a
substantial part of the assets of the grantee or of the cable system. Such
notification shall be considered by the village as notice of a franchise
transfer and the provisions of this chapter governing the application for
village consent to the transfer shall apply.
   D.   Written Application: The grantee and any proposed assignee or
transferee of the franchise shall submit a written application to the village
containing or accompanied by such information as is required in accordance with
applicable law and FCC regulations. Where information is determined by the
village to be incomplete, the village shall request such additional information
no later than thirty calendar days from the date of receipt of the request for
approval. Any proposed assignee or transferee shall agree in writing to abide
by all terms and conditions of the franchise agreement.
   E.   Qualifications: For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent
to such franchise transfer, the village may conduct a due diligence inquiry
into the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the prospective
transferee or controlling party to operate and maintain the system, to comply
with all franchise obligations for the remainder of the franchise term, and to
promptly cure any present or ongoing franchise violations or defaults. The
grantee and the prospective transferee or controlling party (the "applicants")
shall provide reasonable information requested by the village in connection
with such inquiry.
   F.   Consent: The consent of the village shall not be unreasonably delayed
or denied. As prescribed by the cable act (47 USC section 537), the village
shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed transfer if the village fails
to render a final decision on the request for approval of the proposed transfer
within one hundred twenty days following the village's receipt of the written
application for consent to the transfer, unless the village and the applicant
agree in writing to extend the time for the village to review the application
and to grant or deny its consent.
   G.   Costs Of Transfer: The village's out-of-pocket costs, up to a maximum
of two thousand five hundred dollars, associated with any transfer of the
franchise shall be paid by either the transferor or by the transferee of the
cable system, and such costs shall be paid in advance with the parties
retaining a right to a refund of the fund not used.
   H.   Acknowledgement Of Franchise Agreement And Commitments: Transferee
shall execute a separate transfer agreement accepting the terms and conditions
of the franchise agreement and the cable television ordinance.
   I.   Payment Required: No such approval of any agreement to sell, transfer,
delegate, or assign shall be granted by the village board unless all monies
accruing to the village, including fees, penalties, damages, or otherwise, as
of the date of sale, transfer, delegation, or assignment, have first been paid
in full or have been guaranteed to be paid by the buyer, transferor, delegator,
or assignor for such transaction.
   J.   Rights Not Waived: The consent of the village to any sale, transfer,
lease, trust, mortgage, or other instrument of hypothecation shall not
constitute a waiver or release of any rights of the village under this chapter
and a franchise.
   K.   Rejection Of Transferee: In the event that the village board rejects
the application for transfer of a franchise agreement to a proposed transferee,
delegee, or assignee, the grantee may sell, transfer, delegate, or assign its
rights under a franchise agreement notwithstanding said rejection, except that
the grantee shall remain obligated to perform, cause the performance of, or
guarantee the performance of all obligations of the transferee, delegee, or
assignee so identified, including, but not limited to, the provision of
additional information required by the village. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-27: FISCAL REPORTS:
The grantee shall file annually with the village no later than one hundred
twenty days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year, a copy of a gross
revenues statement signed by the chief financial officer of the grantee, or a
statement from an outside auditor that such calculations satisfy GAAP. All
financial reports or accounting required by this chapter or the franchise
agreement shall be conducted in accordance with GAAP. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-28: REMOVAL OF CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM:
Upon termination of the rights granted in a franchise agreement, the grantee
shall remove designated portions of the cable television system from the public
streets and public ways within the village as may be required to serve the
public interest. Upon such notice of removal, a bond shall be furnished or an
existing bond maintained by the grantee in an amount sufficient to cover this
expense. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-29: REQUIRED SERVICES AND FACILITIES:
   A.   Minimum Channel Capacity: A grantee's cable television system shall
have a minimum channel capacity of ninety channels and at least seven hundred
fifty MHz of bandwidth or its electronic equivalent in channel capacity
available for future use.
   B.   Two-Way Communications: Such system shall include a plant having the
technical ability to be activated for "two-way" communications.
   C.   Required Services: The grantee shall maintain:
      1.   At least one specially designated, noncommercial public, educational
and governmental (PEG) access channel available on a first-come, first-serve,
nondiscriminatory basis, whose utilization shall be designated by the village
in a franchise agreement.
   D.   Emergency Alert Override: Unless provided for differently in a
franchise agreement:
      1.   A grantee shall configure the cable system to enable carriage of
audio emergency override cablecasting over all channels of the cable system in
accordance with FCC regulations. Said emergency override capability shall be
designed to allow the village president or a designee to activate the emergency
override upon declaration of a public emergency by touch-tone telephone,
including cellular and PCS telephone devices.
      2.   Upon requirement by the FCC to participate in the emergency alert
system, grantee shall provide the following:
         a.   A channel alert system which provides subscribers with
appropriate audio and visual emergency warnings on all channels operated by the
grantee at any given time.
         b.   An emergency alert system (EAS) or its successor, in accordance
with all requirements of the FCC, including, but without limitation, the
requirement currently set forth in FCC regulations that cable systems transmit
a visual EAS message on at least one channel and that cable systems also
provide video interruption and audio EAS messages on all channels with the
video further stating which channel is carrying the visual message. In
establishing its EAS system, the grantee shall, in accordance with FCC or other
applicable regulations, cooperate with the village on the use and operation of
the EAS. The village shall incorporate the EAS into its disaster plans.
   E.   Cable Programming: Categories of service to be provided by a grantee
shall include all over-the-air broadcast stations required to be carried by
federal law or FCC regulations. Grantee shall provide a wide range and
diversity of programming for subscribers. Unless otherwise provided by a
franchise agreement, categories of programming comparable in quality, mix, and
level to be provided to subscribers by grantee shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   Local, regional, national, and international news and information
which may include business and public affairs.
      2.   Sports and sporting events.
      3.   Weather.
      4.   Educational programming.
      5.   Children's programming.
      6.   General entertainment programming.
      7.   Arts, culture, and performing arts programming.
      8.   Ethnic and minority programming.
      9.   Family-oriented programming.
      10.   High speed internet access.
   F.   Content: The content of programs on a government access channel under
the control and supervision of the village shall not be controlled by a
grantee. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-30: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Additional Regulations: In addition to the statutory powers of the
village to regulate and control any cable television franchise, and those
powers expressly reserved by the village, or agreed to and provided for herein,
the right and power is hereby reserved by the village to promulgate such
additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its lawful
police powers provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and
conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions herein, in a franchise
agreement or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
   B.   Adoption Of Regulations: The village may also adopt such regulations at
the request of grantee upon application. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-31: TECHNOLOGICAL SERVICE AND PERFORMANCE REVIEW:
All franchise agreements shall contain adequate provisions for the review of
the performance and technological state of the system operated by the grantee
including consideration for the provision of services, products, and customer
service. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-32: UNIFORM RATES:
Grantee's rates shall be uniform throughout the franchise area; provided,
however, that this section shall not prohibit a grantee from offering discounts
for its programming, installation, or other services in accordance with
applicable law. A grantee shall not, in its rates or charges, or in the
availability of the services or facilities of its cable system, or in any other
respect, discriminate against any person, however, a grantee may offer
promotional discounts in order to attract or maintain subscribers provided that
such discounts are offered on a nondiscriminatory basis to similar classes or
types throughout the village. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-33: FRANCHISE REVOCATION AND TERMINATION:
Any franchise agreement shall provide for the termination of the agreement and
revocation of the franchise under appropriate circumstances. No franchise shall
be revoked or agreement terminated unless the grantee is afforded prior written
notice of the breach or violation and an adequate opportunity to cure. (Ord.
2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-34: FORECLOSURE:
Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the
system, the grantee shall notify the village of such fact at the time
foreclosure or bankruptcy proceedings are initiated. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-35: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS:
   A.   Compliance With Laws: Notwithstanding any other provisions of the
franchise to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws
and regulations of the state and federal government or any administrative
agencies thereof.
   B.   Modification Of Provisions: If the village determines that a material
provision of this chapter is affected by any subsequent action of the state or
federal government, the village and the grantee shall negotiate to modify any
of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry
out the full intent and purpose of this agreement to the extent feasible and
enforceable. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-36: UNLAWFUL ACTS; PROTECTION OF PROPERTY; GRANTEE RISKS:
   A.   Reselling Service Prohibited: No person shall resell, without the
expressed, written consent of both the grantee and the village, any cable
service, program or signal transmitted by a cable television grantee under a
franchise issued by the village.
   B.   Unlawful Use Of Equipment, Devices, Computer Hardware And Software: It
shall be unlawful for any person to install, attach, wire, program, or connect
or cause to connect or to cause to be installed, attached, wired, programmed,
or connected any equipment, device, or computer hardware or software which
enables the use of cable television signals transmitted by a grantee without
compensation to grantee for said cable television signals.
   C.   Protection Of Property Permitted: Nothing in this section shall
prohibit a person from requiring that cable television system facilities
conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect
safety, functioning, appearance and value of premises or the convenience and
safety of persons or property.
   D.   Risks Assumed By Grantee: Nothing in this section shall prohibit a
person from requiring a grantee to agree to indemnify the owner, or his agents
or representatives for damages or from liability for damages caused by the
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of cable television facilities.
   E.   Penalty: Any violation of this chapter will be considered a continuing
and ongoing violation subject to a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars per day.
(Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-37: APPLICATION FOR NEW FRANCHISE, EXCLUDING RENEWED FRANCHISE:
   A.   Receipt Of Application: Applications received by the village from the
applicants for an initial franchise agreement will become the sole property of
the village.
   B.   Rejection Of Application: The village reserves the right to reject any
and all applications and waive informalities and/or technicalities where the
best interest of the village may be served.
   C.   Questions: All questions regarding the meaning or intent of this
section or application documents shall be submitted to the village in writing.
Replies will be issued to and provided to all parties recorded by the village
as having received the application documents.
   D.   Prior To Submittal: The village shall require the submission of
applications for a franchise under this chapter. Initial applications for a
franchise shall include at a minimum:
      1.   A clear and precise description of the identity of the applicant,
including, but not limited to, the name of the applicant, the address of the
applicant, a description of that type of business entity which characterizes
the applicant, a statement of those persons who hold ownership of more than
five percent of the stock of the business entity of the applicant, or more than
five percent of the partnership holdings if the entity is a partnership, a
description of the major activities of the business entity of the applicant,
and evidence of the compliance of the business entity of the applicant with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws. Applicants shall also provide a
detailed corporate structure of the applicant including identities of parent
and subsidiary corporations or partnership and the identities of all officers
and directors of the applicant.
      2.   Plans and specifications relating to all aspects of the applicant's
proposed cable system, as are applicable to the building and zoning laws of the
village.
      3.   Projected financial pro forma for system revenue, expenditures, debt
servicing, and operation for a period of no less than ten years, and evidence
of financial responsibility in the form specified by this chapter.
      4.   Financial statements, annual corporate reports and balance sheets,
profit and loss statements for no less than the previous two years.
      5.   Written documentation of financial support from a financial
institution for issuance of any loans, bonds, notes, or other related
instruments to the applicant for the purpose of defraying the costs of
construction or operation.
      6.   A prepaid nonrefundable application fee shall be paid to the village
in an amount not to exceed twenty five thousand dollars, to be charged against
the actual costs incurred by the village. The fee shall be used by the village
solely to offset direct expenses incurred in the evaluation and awarding of the
franchise sought by said application issued pursuant to this chapter.
      7.   Detailed plans and specifications for the cable system which are
proposed by the applicant showing the routing of trunk and feeder cables and,
if applicable, nodes, reflected by the maps provided, and a schedule for cable
system construction.
      8.   A statement of applicant's technical service and repair capabilities
within the village, and customer service operations for the community.
      9.   A listing of all franchises wholly or partially owned by the
applicant or applicant's business entity within the state of Illinois, and date
of expiration for each such franchise.
         a.   Disclosure Of Pending Applications: Applicants, including all
shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose any
information required by the application documents regarding pending
applications for other cable systems, including, but not limited to, the
following:
            (1)   Location of other franchise applications and date of
application for each system;
            (2)   Estimated dates of franchise awards;
            (3)   Estimated number of miles of construction; and
            (4)   Estimated construction costs.
         b.   Disclosure Of Other Cable Systems: Applicants, including all
shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose any
information required by the application documents regarding other cable systems
in which they hold an interest of any nature, including, but not limited to,
the following:
            (1)   Locations of all other franchises and the dates of award for
each location;
            (2)   Estimated construction costs and estimated completion dates
for each system;
            (3)   Estimated number of miles of construction and number of miles
completed in each system as of the date of this application; and
            (4)   Date for completion of construction as promised in the
application for each system.
      10.   A statement by the applicant indicating if a franchise held by the
applicant or applicant's business entity has been revoked or denied renewal.
Such statement shall also include representations that the owners, partners,
operating officers, principals, or principal stockholders holding more than
five percent of the applicant's business entity have not been convicted of a
crime, or have been placed under investigation or indictment for alleged
illegal or improper activities by any state investigative agency, or federal
investigative or regulatory agency, including, but not limited to, the U.S.
department of justice, federal communications commission, securities and
exchange commission, or the federal trade commission.
   E.   Additional Requirements: Prior to submitting a bid, the applicant
shall:
      1.   Examine this section and the application documents thoroughly;
      2.   Familiarize himself/herself with local conditions that may in any
manner affect performance under the franchise;
      3.   Familiarize himself/herself with federal, state and local laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations affecting performance under the franchise.
   F.   Investigations: The village may make such investigations as it deems
necessary to determine the ability of the applicant to perform under the
franchise, and the applicant shall furnish to the village all such information
and data for this purpose as the village may request. The village reserves the
right to reject any bid if the evidence submitted by or investigation of such
applicant fails to satisfy the village that such applicant is properly
qualified to carry out the obligations of the franchise and to complete the
work contemplated therein. Conditional bids will not be accepted.
   G.   System Disclosure: No initial franchise will be granted to any
applicant until all requirements and demands of the village regarding
financial, contractual, shareholder and system disclosure have been met.
   H.   Contract Disclosure: Applicants, including all shareholders and parties
with any interest in the applicant, shall fully disclose all agreements and
undertakings, whether written or oral or implied with any person, firm, group,
association or corporation with respect to the franchise and the proposed cable
television system. The grantee of a franchise shall disclose all other
contracts to the village as the contracts are made. This section shall include,
but not be limited to, any agreements between local applicants and national
companies.
   I.   Submittal Of Requested Information: Applicants, including all
shareholders and parties with any interest in the applicant, shall submit all
requested information as provided by the terms of this section or the
application documents, which are incorporated herein by reference. The
requested information must be complete and verified as true by the applicant.
   J.   Disclosure Of Stocks: Applicants, including all shareholders and
parties with any interest in the applicant, shall disclose the numbers of
shares of stock and the holders thereof and shall include the amount of
consideration for each share of stock and the nature of the consideration.
(Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-38: FRANCHISE VIOLATION, NOTICE, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   All franchise agreements shall provide for the following:
      1.   Written notice to the grantee of any breach and an opportunity to
cure;
      2.   Stipulated lists of minor and material breaches and the respective
penalties or other consequences;
      3.   That no lawsuit shall be brought or penalty assessed for a breach
without first being approved by the village board at a public meeting, with
prior notice to the grantee; and
      4.   A security fund to be maintained by the grantee for the use and
benefit of the village.
   B.   Except as stipulated in subsections C and D of this section, all
violations of this chapter shall be processed in accordance with the village's
standard ordinance violation procedures. Any violation of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of up to seven hundred fifty dollars. Violations shall be
deemed continuing and each day of any violation shall be a separate offense.
The village may assess any judgment in its favor directly against the security
fund.
   C.   No citation for a violation of this chapter shall issue unless: 1) the
grantee is first given a written notice of the alleged violation and thirty
days to remedy the violation, and 2) the citation is approved by the village
board at a public meeting with prior notice to the grantee.
   D.   The village may seek immediate equitable relief in the event of a
threat to the public health or safety.
   E.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude the village from
enforcing its other ordinances. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-39: PUBLICATION COSTS:
A grantee shall assume any reasonable publication costs of a franchise as such
publication is required by law and such is payable upon grantee's acceptance of
a franchise. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-40: WAIVER:
   A.   Compliance: A grantee or other person may not be excused from complying
with any of the terms and conditions of this chapter or a franchise agreement
by any failure of the franchising authority or an officer of the village, upon
one or more occasions, to require performance.
   B.   Waiving Of Requirements: The village board may, on its own motion or at
the request of an applicant or grantee for good cause shown, waive any
requirement of this chapter. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-41: TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE:
Whenever any provision of this chapter or the franchise agreement shall set
forth any time for any act to be performed by a grantee, such time shall be
deemed to be of the essence. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-42: FORCE MAJEURE:
Whenever a period of time is provided for in this chapter or a franchise
agreement, for either the village or the grantee to do or perform any act or
obligation, neither party shall be liable for any delays due to war, riot,
insurrection, rebellion, unavoidable casualty or damage to personnel,
materials, or equipment, from fire, flood, storm, earthquake, tornado, orders
of a court of competent jurisdiction, an act of God, or any cause beyond the
control of said party. In such event, said time period shall be extended for
the amount of time said party is so delayed. An act or omission shall not be
deemed to be beyond a grantee's control if committed, omitted, or caused by a
corporation or other business entity which holds a "controlling interest", as
defined herein, in the grantee, whether directly or indirectly. Further, the
failure of a grantee to obtain financing shall not be an act or omission which
is beyond the control of the grantee. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-43: DELEGATION OF POWERS:
Any right, power, or duty, except revocation, of the village, or any official
of the village under this chapter may be transferred or delegated by ordinance,
resolution, or other appropriate action of the village to an appropriate
officer, employee, or department of the village, or any legal authority created
for the purpose of regulating the operation and development of the cable
television system. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-44: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the particular application thereof shall be
held invalid by any federal or state law, ordinance, or regulation, or by any
ruling or directive by any administrative agency, regulatory body, or court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions and their application shall
not be affected. It is the legislative intent of the village that this chapter
would have been adopted if such illegal provision had not been included or any
illegal application had not been made. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-45: NO WAIVER OF RIGHTS BESTOWED BY VIRTUE OF LAW:
Neither the village nor any grantee may waive or release rights bestowed upon
either party by virtue of law or statute. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-46: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall become effective upon its passage, approval, and publication
in the manner required by law. The effective date of any franchise agreement
shall be the date executed by both parties. (Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
5-15-47: GOVERNING LAW AND VENUE:
This chapter shall be governed in accordance insofar as applicable with the
laws of the state of Illinois. Where federal jurisdiction applies, this chapter
shall be governed by the applicable laws and agencies of the United States
government. Venue shall either be in the circuit court of Cook County, or the
United States district court, northern district of Illinois, eastern division.
(Ord. 2901, 11-13-2000)
CHAPTER 16
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
5-16-1: Purpose
5-16-2: Interaction With Other Code Provisions And Laws
5-16-3: Definitions
5-16-4: Zoning
5-16-5: Permits; Application Process
5-16-6: Construction
5-16-7: Permit Duration
5-16-8: Height Limitations
5-16-9: General Requirements
5-16-10: Stealth, Concealment And Design Standards
5-16-11: Reservation Of Village Utility Pole Space
5-16-12: Applicability Of Existing Agreements
5-16-13: Collocation On Village Owned Infrastructure
5-16-14: Notice Of Sale Or Transfer
5-16-15: Abandonment
5-16-16: Dispute Resolution
5-16-17: Indemnification
5-16-18: Insurance
5-16-19: Maintenance Of Small Wireless Facilities
5-16-20: Revocation Of Permit
5-16-21: Exceptions To Applicability
5-16-1: PURPOSE:
Consistent with the requirements of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act (Public Act 100-585), and in anticipation of a continued increased demand
for placement of small wireless facilities of the type regulated by the Act
both within the public rights-of-way and in other locations within the
jurisdiction of the Village, the Village Board has found it to be in the best
interests of the public health, safety and general welfare of the Village to
adopt the Code amendments set forth in this chapter in order to establish
generally applicable standards for the design, permitting, location,
construction, deployment, regulation, operation, maintenance, repair and
removal of such small wireless facilities both within the public rights-of-way
and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the Village so as to, among
other things:
   A.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located both within public
rights-of-way and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the Village;
   B.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such small
wireless facilities are installed;
   C.   Minimize any adverse visual impact of small wireless facilities and
prevent visual blight in the neighborhoods in which such facilities are
installed;
   D.   Ensure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to small wireless facilities;
   E.   Provide appropriate aesthetic protections to any designated historic
landmarks or districts within the Village; and
   F.   Ensure that the placement of small wireless facilities does not
negatively impact public safety and the Village's public safety technology.
(Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-2: INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS:
   A.   Other Code Provisions: The provisions of this chapter are intended to
supplement general requirements and standards relative to the siting of
telecommunication facilities and generally applicable requirements for
construction within public rights-of-way set forth elsewhere within this Code,
including but not limited to the regulations set forth in chapter 14,
"Standards For Construction Of Facilities On Public Rights-Of- Way", of this
title. In the event of a conflict, however, the provisions of this chapter
shall control in all matters involving small wireless facilities, as defined
below.
   B.   State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State
laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, a wireless
provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum
extent possible without violating such Federal or State laws or regulations.
(Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   ACT: Means the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-
585).
   ANTENNA: Means communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
   APPLICABLE CODES: Means Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical
Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to
those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT: Means any person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.
   APPLICATION: Means a request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a
permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   AUTHORITY: Means the Village or other unit of local government that has
jurisdiction and control for use of public rights-of-way as provided by the
Illinois Highway Code for placements within public rights-of-way or has zoning
or land use control for placements not within public rights-of-way.
   COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: Means to install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole, whether existing or new.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Means cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(33), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: Means a cable operator, as defined in 47
USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC
153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153
(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC: Means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE: Means a one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: Means a building, property, or site,
or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section
VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked
building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the
Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the
Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation
Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois
State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW: Means a Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation,
order, or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: Means a small wireless facility that is not larger
in dimension than twenty-four inches in length, fifteen inches in width, and
twelve inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer
than eleven inches.
   PERMIT: Means a written authorization required by the Village or other
permitting authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a
project.
   PERSON: Means an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including an
authority.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: Means the functional division of the Federal
government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose
district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has
authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   PUBLIC UTILITY: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 3-105 of
the Public Utilities Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-105.
   RATE: Means a recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: Means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. "Right-of-way" does not include authority-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: Means a wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty-five cubic feet in volume. The
following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER: Means a person licensed under the laws of the State of
Illinois to practice structural engineering.
   UTILITY POLE: Means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
   VILLAGE: Means the Village of River Forest, Cook County, Illinois.
   VILLAGE UTILITY POLE: Means a utility pole owned or operated by the Village
in public rights-of-way.
   WIRELESS FACILITY: Means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
"Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities. "Wireless facility"
does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which
the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or
fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles
or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to
or directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Means any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER: Means a wireless infrastructure provider and/or a
wireless services provider. This does not include, and expressly excludes, any
person who is providing service to or for a private niche market.
   WIRELESS SERVICES: Means any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: Means a person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Means a freestanding structure, such as a
monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing
or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-4: ZONING:
Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and shall not
be subject to zoning review, if collocated in rights-of-way in any zoning
district, or outside rights-of-way in the following zoning districts:
C-1 Commercial Zoning District.
In all other zoning districts, the Village's normal zoning approvals, processes
and restrictions shall apply, if zoning approval, processes or restrictions are
required by the Village's zoning ordinance. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-
2018)
5-16-5: PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCESS:
Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this chapter, a permit to collocate a
small wireless facility within the Village is required in all cases. Permits
are subject to the following:
   A.   Permit Applications: Permit applications for the collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be made on a form provided by the Village for such
purpose. In addition to any generally applicable information required of other
communications service providers or for other installations in the public
right-of-way, applicants must, when requesting to collocate small wireless
facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure, provide the
following information:
      1.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Village utility pole,
make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined
in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
      2.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and digital photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. The photographs shall include a digital
photo simulation of the proposed location providing "before and after" views
demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed small wireless facilities
on the surrounding environment;
      3.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
      4.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      5.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
      6.   Certification that, to the best of the applicant's knowledge, the
collocation complies with the written design standards established by the
Village, and with the various other requirements set forth in this chapter and
Code;
      7.   Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required by or from
the Village (i.e., zoning approval, where required), other agencies and units
of government with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and
operation of said small wireless facility. The applicant shall maintain such
licenses, permits and approvals in full force and effect and provide evidence
of renewal or extension thereof when granted; and
      8.   In the event the small wireless facility is proposed to be attached
to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure owned by an entity
other than the Village, legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner
of such pole or wireless support structure to the proposed collocation.
   B.   Means Of Submission: Permit applications, along with all supporting
information, for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be
submitted by personal delivery or by other means approved by the Village.
   C.   Multiple Applications For Same Location: Multiple applications for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed based on a first fully complete application, first-served basis.
   D.   Permit Application Fees: All applications for collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in
the following amounts:
 
Request to collocate a small wireless
facility that includes the installation of $1,000.00
a new utility pole
Request to collocate a single small
wireless facility on an existing utility   650.00
pole or wireless support structure
Request to collocate multiple small
wireless facilities on existing utility    $350.00 per small wireless facility
poles or wireless support structures
addressed in a single application
 
   E.   Permit Review Timelines:
      1.   Completeness Of Application: Requests for the collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be reviewed for conformance with the requirements of
the Act, this chapter, and other applicable provisions of this Code. Within
thirty days after receiving an application, the Village must determine whether
the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is
incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing information.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends a notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
An application shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to provide
notification to the applicant within thirty days of the date when all
documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the Village's
permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
      2.   Existing Pole Or Wireless Support Structure: Requests for the
collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and
either approved or denied within ninety days of submission of a completed
application. A permit application shall be deemed approved if the Village fails
to approve or deny the application within ninety days, subject to the
following: if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy-five days
after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be deemed
approved on the later of the ninetieth day after submission of the completed
application, or the tenth day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by
the Village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the Village shall not
preclude the Village from denying the permit within the allowed time limit.
      3.   New Utility Pole: Requests for the collocation of small wireless
facilities that include the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied within one
hundred twenty days of submission of a completed application. A permit
application shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny
the application within one hundred twenty days, subject to the following: if an
applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved
basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its intention to
invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five days after
the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be deemed approved
on the later of the one hundred twentieth day after submission of the completed
application, or the tenth day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by
the Village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the Village shall not
preclude the Village from denying the permit within the allowed time limit.
   F.   Tolling: The time limitations for approval or denial of applications
shall be tolled by notice to an applicant that its application is incomplete as
set forth above, upon mutual agreement of the parties, or by a local, State or
Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes a delay.
   G.   Pole Replacement: Permit approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure at the applicant's
sole cost where such replacement is deemed necessary for compliance with the
requirements of this chapter or Code relative to the siting of small wireless
facilities, or other applicable codes and regulations that concern public
safety.
   H.   Denial: The Village shall deny an application that does not meet the
requirements of this chapter. The reasons for any denial of a permit shall be
provided in a written notice of denial sent to the applicant, and shall include
the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based.
   I.   Resubmittal After Denial: In the case of a permit denial, an applicant
may cure the deficiencies identified in the notice of denial and resubmit a
revised application once within thirty days after the notice of denial is sent
without payment of an additional application fee. The Village shall have thirty
days to approve or deny the resubmitted application or it is deemed approved,
if the applicant has notified the Village of its intention to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which notification may be
submitted with the resubmitted application. Review of a resubmitted application
is limited to the deficiencies cited in the original notice of denial. This
subsection does not apply if a revised application is not resubmitted within
thirty days, or curing any deficiencies in the original application requires
review of a new location, new or different structure for collocation, new
antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility. In such cases, a new application and application fee are required.
   J.   Consolidated Applications: Consolidated applications for small wireless
facilities for the collocation of up to twenty-five small wireless facilities
shall be allowed if the collocations each involve substantially the same type
of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. Each
consolidated application shall provide all the information required by this
chapter for each small wireless facility at each location. If such an
application includes incomplete information for one or more small wireless
facility collocations, or includes requests for small wireless facilities that
do not qualify for consolidated treatment, or that are otherwise denied, the
Village may remove such collocation requests from the application and treat
them as separate requests. Separate permits may be issued for each collocation
approved in a consolidated application.
   K.   Alternate Locations: If an applicant is seeking to install a new
utility pole as part of its application, the Village may propose that the small
wireless facility be located on an existing utility pole or existing wireless
support structure within one hundred feet of the proposed collocation. The
applicant shall accept the proposed alternate location so long as it has the
right to use the location on reasonable terms and conditions, unless the
alternate location imposes technical limits or additional material costs as
determined by the applicant. If the applicant refuses an alternate location
based on the foregoing, the applicant shall provide legally competent evidence
in the form of a written certification, under oath, describing the property
rights, technical limits or material cost reasons that prevent the alternate
location from being utilized.
   L.   Exemptions: No application, permit approval or fee shall be required
from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the right-of-way
when the work in question is for:
      1.   Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of wireless facilities
if the wireless provider notifies the Village in writing at least forty-eight
hours prior to the planned maintenance;
      2.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the Village in writing at least ten days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications, including: a) equipment type
and model numbers, for the replacement of equipment consistent with the
equipment specifications information required on a permit application for
original installation; and b) information sufficient to establish that the
replacement is substantially similar. The wireless provider shall provide all
information necessary and requested by the Village to establish that the
replacement is substantially similar. The Village has the sole right and
responsibility to determine if a proposed small wireless facility is
substantially similar to the existing small wireless facility; or
      3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
The foregoing shall not exempt communications service providers from Village
permitting requirements where traffic patterns are affected or lane closures
are required. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-6: CONSTRUCTION:
Collocations for which permits are approved shall be completed within one
hundred eighty days of issuance of the permit, unless the Village agrees to
extend the period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Village utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the applicant has made a timely request within sixty days after the
issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty
days after issuance of the permit. Permits that are not completed within
applicable timelines shall be void absent an extension granted in writing by
the Village. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-7: PERMIT DURATION:
Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this chapter shall be
for a period of five years. Permits are subject to renewal at the end of the
five year permit period for a successive five year term so long as the
installation complies with the applicable code provisions in force at the time
of renewal. A finding by the Village at the time of a request for renewal that
an installation does not comply with the applicable code provisions in force at
the time of the renewal request shall be in writing. If the Act is repealed or
found unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all permits
granted by the Village under this chapter shall terminate at the end of their
current term. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-8: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Antenna Installations: The maximum permitted height of a small wireless
facility is ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
   B.   New Poles: The maximum permitted height of new or replacement utility
pole or wireless support structure on which a small wireless facility is
collocated is the higher of:
      1.   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other
than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on
the date the application is submitted, and that is located within three hundred
feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and
that is in the same right-of-way within the Village. The Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation
for such facility; or
      2.   Forty-five feet above ground level.
   C.   Waiver Process: A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the
Village Engineer or his or her designee from the maximum permitted height of a
new pole set forth in this section, if the wireless provider can establish
that:
      1.   Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular hardship or
practical difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has not been created
by the wireless provider; and
      2.   Existing utility poles or wireless support structures, or a new
utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by this
section cannot accommodate the wireless facility at a height necessary to
function effectively, under reasonable terms and conditions; and
      3.   The use of existing utility poles or other wireless support
structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new
pole allowed by this section, is not technically feasible. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-
2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-9: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Public Safety Technology: A wireless provider's operation of a small
wireless facility may not interfere with the frequencies used by a public
safety agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider must
install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause
unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications
equipment. Unacceptable interference is determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licenses by a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such
interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own
expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the
interference, including, but not limited to, powering down the small wireless
facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent
testing, if necessary. The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless
facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not making a
good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the
abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety
spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973
and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The burden to establish the good faith
effort shall be on the wireless provider, which shall timely deliver to the
Village all information necessary to demonstrate its efforts to resolve the
interference consistent with the Code of Federal Regulations sections cited
above. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a
public nuisance and the small wireless facility may be abated through the
procedures for abatement of such nuisances set forth in this Code.
   B.   Facility Limitations: A wireless provider shall not construct or
maintain any small wireless facility that:
      1.   Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public safety on a
right-of-way;
      2.   Obstructs the legal use of right-of-way by utility users;
      3.   Violates nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
      4.   Violates or conflicts with chapter 14, "Standards For Construction
Of Facilities On Public Rights-Of-Way", of this title, title 4, chapter 15,
"Satellite Dish Antennas, Television Antennas, Amateur Radio Antennas And
Cellular Telephone Towers And Antenna Support Structures", of this Code, or
other applicable regulations set forth in this Code or otherwise adopted by the
Village, except to the extent such chapters, sections or regulations may be
modified by the provisions of this chapter; or
      5.   Violates the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 USC
section 12101 et seq.).
   C.   Contractual Requirements: Wireless providers shall comply with all
requirements imposed by a contract between the Village and any private property
owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles
and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   D.   Ground-Mounted Equipment: Wireless providers shall comply with the
ground mounted equipment spacing requirements within rights- of-way as set
forth in chapter 14, "Standards For Construction Of Facilities On Public
Rights-Of-Way", of this title.
   E.   Undergrounding:
      1.   Code Provision And Regulation Compliance: The wireless provider
shall comply with Village Code provisions or regulations concerning
undergrounding requirements, if any, that prohibit the installation of new or
the modification of existing utility poles or equipment in the right-of-way.
      2.   Above Ground Waiver: A wireless provider may receive a waiver from
the Village Engineer or his or her designee to allow small wireless facilities
to be located above ground in an area where Village ordinances or regulations
prohibit or restrict above ground facilities if the wireless provider can
establish that:
         a.   Underground equipment is not technically feasible and there is no
reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically favorable to
adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of the right-of-
way; and
         b.   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
is necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage in a specified area;
and
         c.   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or constitute a safety
hazard; and
         d.   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies; and
         e.   Space exists within the public right-of-way to accommodate the
above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location; and
         f.   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not create a safety hazard; and
         g.   The above ground small wireless facility is located and designed
in such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on adjacent properties; and
         h.   In any historical area, that the above ground small wireless
facility will not detrimentally affect the historical nature of the area.
      3.   Screening For Ground Mounted Facilities: Where a ground- mounted
facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the perimeter in
accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional landscape engineer.
Plant materials shall include a mixture of deciduous and coniferous planting
materials. The owner or wireless provider shall be responsible for maintenance
of all landscaping as provided in the approved landscape plan.
      4.   Future Undergrounding: The Village may, from time to time, make a
decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type
generally, such as electric utility poles, in all or a significant portion of
the Village. In the event that such a utility pole has a collocated small
wireless facility in place at the time of such a decision, the Village shall
either:
         a.   Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install and maintain a
reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of
the small wireless facility; or
         b.   Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a
reasonable cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole
so it can maintain service from that location.
   F.   Collocation Limits: Wireless providers shall not collocate small
wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric
distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone
of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may
be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on the
top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subsection, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   G.   Code Compliance: Wireless providers shall comply with applicable codes
and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety. (Ord.
3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-10: STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
Every small wireless facility installation shall comply with the following
standards:
   A.   General Stealth, Concealment And Design Standards: Installations shall
comply with any stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic standards applicable
to utility installations in the public right-of-way, as set forth in chapter
14, "Standards For Construction Of Facilities On Public Rights-Of-Way", of this
title, as well as any written design standards that are generally applicable
for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment, design and
aesthetic requirements that are otherwise identified by the Village in an
ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village Board of Trustees, in the
Village's comprehensive plan, or in a written design plan that applies to other
occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a
historic district. In the event of any conflict between such standards or
requirements, the stricter standard or requirement shall apply.
   B.   Historic Districts And Landmarks: For areas designated as historic
districts, or on buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks
pursuant to title 13, chapter 1 of this Code, in addition to the stealth,
concealment and design requirements referenced above, the following additional
restrictions/conditions apply to the installation of small wireless facilities:
      1.   Small wireless facilities and wireless support structures shall be
comprised of materials that are consistent with the surrounding elements so as
to blend architecturally with any buildings or structures designated as
historic landmarks or located within a designated historic district, and shall
be designed to blend with the surrounding historical landmarks and/or district
in design and color.
      2.   Small wireless facilities shall not be mounted upon any portion of
the Village's decorative lantern-style street light poles in the River Forest
Historic District or on any building or structure within the Village designated
as a local landmark or designated as historically significant.
   C.   Historic District Or Landmark Limitations:
      1.   Any stealth, concealment and design standards in a historic district
or on a historic landmark, including restrictions on a specific category of
utility poles, may not have the effect of prohibiting any provider's
technology. Such stealth, concealment and design measures shall not be
considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes of the size
restrictions of a small wireless facility.
      2.   This section shall not be construed to limit the Village's
enforcement of historic preservation in conformance with the requirements
adopted pursuant to the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation
Act or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 54 USC section 300101 et
seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those laws. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-
2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-11: RESERVATION OF VILLAGE UTILITY POLE SPACE:
The Village may reserve space on Village-owned utility poles for future public
safety uses or for Village electric utility uses. Such reservation may preclude
collocation of small wireless facilities if the Village reasonably determines
that the Village's utility pole cannot accommodate both uses. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-
2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-12: APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Existing Installations: Subject to any applicable termination
provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the Village and a
wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.
   B.   Applications Received Between June 1, 2018 And June 1, 2020: Subject to
any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place
between the Village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of
small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such
agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated
on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1,
2018, but prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt by the Village
from the wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to accept the rates,
fees and terms of this chapter and the Act received after June 1, 2020,
whichever is later.
   C.   Applications Received After June 1, 2020: Subject to any applicable
termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the
Village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless
facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall
remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1, 2020, until
receipt by the Village of a notice from the wireless provider that it is
accepting the rates, fees, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 3705, 7-
9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-13: COLLOCATION ON VILLAGE OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE:
   A.   Fee: The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on a
Village-owned utility pole located in a right-of-way shall be the higher of:
      1.   Two hundred dollars per year per small wireless facility; or
      2.   The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless
providers use of space on the pole.
   B.   Exception: Small wireless facilities collocated on Village- owned
utility poles located outside of public right-of-way are not subject to the
rate limitations in this section.
   C.   Attachment Agreement: An attachment agreement in a form approved by the
Village is required for any collocation upon any Village owned utility pole or
wireless support structure. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-14: NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER:
A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership or
control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of the
Village, provide written notice to the Village of such sale or transfer of
control. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-15: ABANDONMENT:
   A.   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of twelve months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety days after receipt of
written notice from the Village notifying it of the abandonment. The notice
shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the
Village to the owner at its last known address. If the small wireless facility
is not removed within ninety days after receipt of such notice, such wireless
facility shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the Village may remove or cause
the removal of such facility, and recover or place a lien for its costs,
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment or other agreement for Village
utility poles or through the procedures for abatement of nuisances set forth in
this Code.
   B.   In the event the Village suspects that the wireless provider is no
longer using the small wireless facilities to provide wireless service, it may
send the wireless provider written notice that requires the wireless provider
to remove the small wireless facility or provide proof that the small wireless
facility is operational and still being used within thirty days, and informs
the wireless provider that failure to provide proof or to remove the small
wireless facility will result in the Village removing the small wireless
facility at the wireless provider's cost. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-16: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning
rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles
within the right-of-way, the Village shall allow the collocating person to
collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars per
year per pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the
dispute. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-17: INDEMNIFICATION:
Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole negligence
of the Village or its employees or agents, a wireless provider shall indemnify
and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from
personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole
or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village infrastructure or improvements,
or right-of-way associated with such infrastructure or improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider proceeding under this chapter waives any claims it may have against
the Village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-
1-2018)
5-16-18: INSURANCE:
At all times during the period in which a wireless provider's facilities are
located on Village infrastructure, improvements or in right-of-way, the
wireless provider shall, at its own sole cost and expense, carry the following
insurance coverages:
   A.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   B.   Workers' compensation insurance within statutory limits as required by
law; and
   C.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the Village infrastructure, improvements or rights- of-way, including
coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with limits not less than:
      1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
      2.   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
      3.   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and shall provide certificates of insurance
and proof of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy
to the Village prior to the collocation of any wireless facility, and shall
keep updated certificates and proof of inclusion on file with the Village at
all times that the provider maintains small wireless facilities within the
Village.
   D.   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limits required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement that the Village be named an additional insured. A wireless
provider that self- insures shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance limits required
by the Village. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-19: MAINTENANCE OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless facilities
installed within the Village in a condition that maintains the safety,
integrity and aesthetics of such facilities. Small wireless facilities shall
not appear to be unkempt. In the event of a failure to properly maintain such
facilities, the Village shall notify the wireless provider, in writing, who
shall have thirty days to correct the identified maintenance violation. If not
corrected within such period, the Village reserves the right to take such
action as it deems necessary, including revocation of the permit. Maintenance
and replacement of small wireless facilities shall be performed by the wireless
provider at the wireless provider's sole cost and expense.
   B.   In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to life or
property, the Village may take corrective action to eliminate such emergency at
the wireless provider's expense. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-20: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   A permit to collocate a small wireless facility may be revoked for one
or more of the following reasons:
      1.   The wireless provider obtained approval by means of fraud or made a
misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the permit application, or
any required documentation or submittal.
      2.   The wireless provider failed to construct the small wireless
facility in accordance with the approved plans.
      3.   The wireless provider failed to comply within any material condition
of a permit issued.
      4.   The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered the use or
the structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was requested in the
permit application or approved, without the approval of the Village.
      5.   The wireless provider failed to notify the Village of the
replacement of small wireless facilities as required by this chapter.
      6.   A substantial change of law has occurred affecting the wireless
provider's authority to occupy or use the property upon which the small
wireless facility is located.
      7.   The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or pedestrian
use of the public right-of-way.
      8.   The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and timely
restoration of the right-of-way or the property upon which the small wireless
facility is located.
      9.   The wireless provider has failed to properly maintain the small
wireless facility as required by this chapter.
      10.   The wireless provider has failed to abate interference with public
safety communications in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
      11.   The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the small
wireless provider has failed to remove the wireless facilities as provided in
this chapter.
   B.   Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by
certified mail or shall be personally delivered to the wireless provider
setting forth the basis for the revocation. The wireless provider shall, within
fourteen days of the notice of revocation, file a written response with the
Village Engineer or his or her designee setting forth the reasons why the
permit should not be revoked along with such evidence in opposition to the
revocation as the wireless provider determines necessary. Failure to file a
response with the Village Engineer or his or her designee shall be deemed an
admission of the facts set forth in the notification of written notification
and shall result in automatic revocation of the permit. The Village Engineer or
his or her designee shall render findings and a decision within twenty-one days
of the date of receipt of the wireless provider's response, if any.
   C.   If the Village Engineer or his or her designee revokes the permit, the
wireless provider may file a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk
within twenty-one days of notification of the permit revocation. Such notice
shall contain a response to the decision of the Village Engineer or his or her
designee. The Village Board shall hear the revocation appeal and render a
decision on such appeal. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
5-16-21: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter authorizes the collocation of small wireless
facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party without the written consent of the
property owner;
      2.   Property owned or controlled by a unit of local government that is
not located within rights-of-way without the written consent of the unit of
local government (local governments are, however, required to authorize the
collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles owned or controlled
by the local government or located within rights-of-way to the same extent the
local government permits access to utility poles for other commercial projects
or uses);
      3.   A privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure,
without the consent of the property owner;
      4.   Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes, without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code 1 ; or
      5.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code 2 , Metra Commuter Rail or any other public
commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of
the Public Utilities Act 3 , without the consent of the rail carrier, public
commuter rail service, or electric utility;
   B.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
      1.   Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such utility's
wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the
Public Utilities Act; or
      2.   Small wireless facilities owned by the Village. (Ord. 3705, 7-9-
2018, eff. 8-1-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/18c-7201.
3 3. 220 ILCS 5/16-102.
TITLE 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Health Department Services
6-1-1: HEALTH DEPARTMENT SERVICES:
The village of River Forest shall provide for health department services
through the village administrator or his/her designee. For the purposes of this
code, the term "health officer" shall mean any person, or persons, authorized
under applicable federal, state, or village law to conduct inspections of food
establishments, and designated by the village administrator, or his/her
designee, to serve as the health officer. (Ord. 3557, 5-11-2015)
CHAPTER 2
CONTAGIOUS DISEASES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Contagious Diseases Reported
6-2-2: Quarantine Generally
6-2-3: Disinfection Requirements
6-2-4: Closing Of Public Buildings During Epidemics
6-2-5: Inspection Of Schools
6-2-1: CONTAGIOUS DISEASES REPORTED:
Every physician who treats or examines, every nurse or attendant who attends,
every householder upon whose premises there resides, every owner, lessee or
keeper of any tenement or lodging house or part thereof, and every person who
has knowledge of any person in or upon any such premises who may be suffering
from, or suspected to be suffering from or afflicted with acute infectious
poliomyeltix, cholera, cerebro-spinal fever, diphtheria (membranous croup),
scarlet fever, smallpox, typhus fever, whooping cough, yellow fever, puerperal
fever, septic sore throat, typhoid fever, tuberculosis, influenza, pneumonia,
venereal disease or any other reportable disease specified by the State
Department of Health, must immediately report the same, in writing, or by
telephone followed by a written report, to the Health Officer. (1981 Code; amd.
Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-2-2: QUARANTINE GENERALLY:
Quarantine must be strictly enforced and observed according to the requirements
set forth in the rules adopted and promulgated by the State Department of
Public Health for the control of communicable diseases 1 . In no instance shall
quarantine be terminated without the permission of the Health Officer or of the
State Department of Public Health, and then only after full compliance with the
rules. The provisions of this Section shall be enforced by the Health Officer.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 410 ILCS 440/1 et seq.
6-2-3: DISINFECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   After the recovery, removal or death of any person affected with any of
the diseases specified in Section
6-2-1 of this Chapter, the infected premises, contents and inmates must be
thoroughly disinfected in a manner and method prescribed by the State
Department of Public Health for each of the several diseases, by or under the
direction of the Health Officer of the Village.
   B.   No person having any of the diseases enumerated in Section
6-2-1 hereof shall be removed from the premises on which he is found when the
case is diagnosed, except by permission of the Health Officer or the State
Department of Public Health, nor shall he be removed from the Village except by
permission of the State Department of Public Health, where such permit is
required by the State Department. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-2-4: CLOSING OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS DURING EPIDEMICS:
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer during the time of any serious
epidemic of any of the contagious diseases enumerated in Section
6-2-1 hereof to close any and all churches, schools, theaters, halls and other
places in which public meetings are held and prevent the holding of assemblies
therein during the time of such epidemic, if in his judgment such action shall
be necessary to prevent the spreading of such disease. (1981 Code; amd. Ord.
2668, 2-12-1996)
6-2-5: INSPECTION OF SCHOOLS:
The Health Officer is hereby empowered to visit any and all public and private
schools in the Village, and to make or cause to be made an examination of the
children and minors in attendance therein as often as he may deem necessary to
secure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. (1981 Code; amd. Ord.
2668, 2-12-1996)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Collection And Disposal By The Village
6-3-3: Collection And Disposal By Private Individuals
6-3-4: Private Waste Disposal
6-3-5: Director Of Public Works To Supervise
6-3-6: Collection Requirements
6-3-7: Preparation For Collection And Disposal
6-3-8: Disposal Of Wastes Other Than By Collection
6-3-9: Accumulation Of Waste On Premises; Frequency Of Removal
6-3-10: Manner Of Transporting Waste Over Streets
6-3-11: Special Village Services
6-3-12: Garbage Collection Service Charges
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
   BUILDING MATERIALS: Shall refer to those articles which are commonly used in
the construction, maintenance and rehabilitation of all structures.
   CURBSIDE: Shall refer to a collection point on the parkway immediately
behind the curb.
   FAMILY UNIT: Same as definition of "family" contained in section
10-3-1 of this code.
   GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   MULTI-FAMILY PROPERTY: A property consisting of one or more "multi-family
structures".
   MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURE: A building with more than three residential living
units which is not included in the village of River Forest refuse, recyclables
and yard waste collection and disposal service.
   OPTIONAL SPECIAL SERVICE: Shall consist of the weekly collection of
unlimited quantities of refuse and up to one can of building materials, as well
as yard waste and recyclables.
   OWNERS: Any persons, corporation, partnership, or entity such as a
condominium or homeowners' association, jointly or severally having an
ownership interest in a multi-family property or otherwise being responsible
for solid waste collection.
   RECYCLABLES: Shall include materials which would otherwise be abandoned or
discarded but which can be utilized in the secondary material market.
   RECYCLING: The process by which materials that would otherwise be disposed
of or discarded are collected, separated or processed and returned to the
economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
   REFUSE: Combustible trash, including paper cartons, boxes and excelsior;
noncombustible trash, including metals, tin cans, dirt, glass, crockery, other
mineral waste; street rubbish, including street sweepings and contents of
litter receptacles; but refuse does not include solid wastes from industrial
processes and manufacturing operations. One covered container with a maximum
capacity of thirty three gallons and maximum weight of fifty pounds of building
materials (not including earth or stone, concrete, bricks or lumber over three
feet in length) per residence per week shall also constitute refuse for
subscribers of optional special service.
   SOURCE SEPARATION: A process that separates recyclable material from other
refuse prior to collection for the purpose of recycling such materials.
   STANDARD BASE SERVICE: Shall consist of the weekly collection of up to two
containers of refuse or building materials when placed in a suitable waste
container not weighing greater than fifty pounds when loaded. Additional refuse
or building materials shall be collected only when a universal solid waste tag
(sticker) is affixed to each additional container to be collected each week.
   TOP OF THE DRIVE: Shall refer to a collection point for recyclables on or
immediately adjacent to the driveway near the front building line of the
residence. Such collection point shall be clearly visible from the street.
   UNIVERSAL SOLID WASTE TAG: Shall refer to a multipurpose sticker to be used
for the disposal of additional containers of refuse, bags of yard waste,
bundles of brush, and bulk/large/oversized items.
   WASTE CONTAINER: A can of galvanized iron, noncorrodible metal, or plastic,
with a tightfitting lid, rodentproof and flyproof, durable and leakproof, of
the type commonly sold as a garbage can, of a suitable gauge and construction
to ensure durability, with suitable handles on the can and lid, and of a
capacity of not less than ten gallons and not more than thirty three gallons,
or for yard waste a biodegradable paper bag (thirty two gallon) with a
universal solid waste tag affixed to each.
   WASTE DISPOSAL CONTRACTOR: The contractor with whom the village has
contracted for the removal of garbage, refuse, recyclables and yard waste from
all residential premises of not more than three family units in the village
using the village's waste disposal services.
   WASTE DISPOSAL FIRM: Any person engaged in the removal of solid waste,
compostable material and/or recyclable material from any location within the
village not covered by either an exclusive collection contract between the
village and a contracted hauler, or a franchise agreement between the village
and a franchised hauler.
   YARD REFUSE: Also referred to as yard waste, shall include all accumulations
of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and other material
accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees, and
other items listed in subsection
6-3-6D of this chapter. (Ord. 2612, 8-29-1994; amd. Ord. 3161, 6-12-2006)
6-3-2: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL BY THE VILLAGE:
All garbage, refuse and ashes, including garden and tree trash, tree trimmings
not exceeding four inches in diameter, and other materials, shall be called for
and disposed of by the village, and shall not be collected or disposed of in
any other manner except by building and other contractors who are removing
garbage, refuse and ashes resulting from the performance of work done by such
contractor within the village, or as hereinafter provided in this chapter. All
waste containers containing any garbage, refuse and ashes shall be emptied and
all such garbage, refuse and ashes removed at least once each seven days, or
more frequently if so determined as necessary by the Director of Public Works
or the Health Officer. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-3-3: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL BY PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS:
   A.   Removal And Disposal By Other Than Contractor Or Licensed Firm: No
garbage shall be burned, dumped or buried within the Village limits, except
upon written permit of the Director of Public Works and the Health Officer and
as they may direct in conformity with recognized sanitation practices. In all
cases in which garbage, refuse and ashes are removed and disposed of by persons
other than the waste disposal contractor or a licensed waste disposal firm, it
shall be done under the direct supervision of the Director of Public Works or
the Health Officer of the Village, or their representatives. (1981 Code; amd.
Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
   B.   Ragpickers And Collectors: No person unless licensed, shall be
permitted to get, collect or remove from any street, alley or other public
place in the Village any "garbage", "refuse", manure or miscellaneous waste, as
defined in Section
 6-3-1 of this Chapter, which shall also include, without limitation, waste
paper, rags, cardboard, metal, brass and any similar refuse or recyclables or
to interfere with or disturb any of the receptacles for garbage, recyclables or
other refuse provided for by this Chapter, or to remove therefrom any of the
contents thereof. (Ord. 2454, 9-23-1991)
6-3-4: PRIVATE WASTE DISPOSAL:
   A.   License Required; Fees: No person operating as a waste disposal firm or
otherwise, unless contracting directly with the Village as its waste disposal
contractor, or except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, shall remove
building materials, garbage, refuse or recyclables from any premises in the
Village or transport such through the streets, alleys or public ways of the
Village, or dump, incinerate or in any other manner dispose of waste
originating in the limits of the Village, or contract for or permit himself to
be employed or engaged for any such removal, transportation or disposal,
without first having secured a license for performing such disposal service
from the Village Clerk. See Chapter 3 of Title 3 relating to the required
license. (Ord. 2454, 9-23-1991; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
   B.   Licensing - Additional Information: In addition to the normal
information required of any applicant for a business license, any applicant for
a waste disposal firm's license shall provide the following information:
The name of the person to be licensed, or in the case of a corporation, the
names of the principal officers, together with the business and home addresses
and telephone numbers of each such person; description of the equipment to be
used in such collection, transportation and disposal; the list by name and
address of persons for whom such removal is made; the specifications of the
vehicle in which the waste is to be transported; the site location of and the
manner in which the ultimate disposition of the waste is to be accomplished; a
complete written description of the solid waste collection program which the
licensee offers to its customers. Also as a condition of maintaining a waste
disposal firm's license, the licensee shall submit quarterly reports
summarizing solid waste activities on forms furnished by the Director of Public
Works. All quarterly report information as well as lists of facilities served
shall be considered proprietary information and shall not be made available to
the general public.
All collection equipment operated in the Village shall be identified with the
name and telephone number of the licensee clearly and permanently shown.
All waste disposal firms desiring to engage in the business of collection of
garbage and refuse shall also offer to its customers a comprehensive
recyclables collection program to include as a minimum all materials currently
being collected by the Village. Further, any waste disposal firm servicing a
multi-family property is hereby required to provide a recycling program in
accordance with subsection
 6-3-4C of this Chapter. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
   C.   On-Site Multi-Family Structure Recycling Program:
      1.   Program requirements:
         a.   All "multi-family properties", as defined in Section
 6-3-1 of this Chapter, shall be required to institute an on-site recycling
program, with collection of recyclables to be no less than one pickup per week.
         b.   Said program shall be instituted by a multi-family property on or
before September 1, 1995.
         c.   Multi-family property owners may contract for recycling and
refuse services with a private waste disposal firm, duly licensed by the
Village. Multi-family property owners shall be billed for recycling and refuse
services directly by the private waste disposal firm.
         d.   An acceptable recycling program shall include, but is not limited
to, the following components:
            (1)   Siting and design of common area collection areas for
recyclables;
            (2)   Recyclable materials collection;
            (3)   Provision of common area recycling containers;
            (4)   Data collection and reporting;
            (5)   Educational campaign and materials; and
            (6)   Recycling program administration and maintenance.
      2.   Specific Requirements:
         a.   Recycling collection areas for residents shall be conveniently
located and maintained within common areas in or near the buildings, and
consist of separate containers for the purpose of temporary storage of
recyclables. Whenever possible, recycling containers should be placed adjacent
to common area solid waste collection containers.
         b.   Indoor common area collection/storage areas shall be established
in accordance with appropriate Village fire and/or safety codes.
         c.   Exterior recyclables storage areas shall be established in
accordance with Village requirements for solid waste enclosures.
         d.   The multi-family property owner shall maintain all recycling
areas, including the containers, in a clean, sanitary, and litter-free manner.
         e.   On-site multi-family structure recycling programs are required to
offer collection of a minimum of five of the following types of recyclables:
corrugated cardboard
telephone books
magazines and catalogs
high-grade paper
aluminum, steel, tin and bi-metal cans
PETE (#1) and HDPE (#2) plastic bottles
newspaper
chipboard
"junk" mail
glass bottles (three colors)
         f.   Recyclables must be source separated from other solid waste prior
to collection for the purpose of recycling such materials. Separate collection
containers and collection vehicles shall be employed.
         g.   The minimum gallon amount of recycling container capacity (total
weekly base recycling container capacity) an owner shall provide weekly for
each structure shall be based on the following formula:
7 gallons x number of studio and 1-bedroom units, +
8 gallons x number of 2-bedroom units, +
9 gallons x number of 3-bedroom or more units
= total base weekly recycling container capacity.
The weekly base recycling container capacity may be met by a combination of
container sizes and number of pick- ups, such as containers totaling half the
base capacity picked up twice a week. Capacity per structure may be shifted
within the multi-family property if necessary, so long as the total required
capacity is met.
         h.   The licensed waste disposal firm providing the on-site recycling
collection service shall be responsible for furnishing, maintaining, and
replacing all common area recycling containers and collection vehicles which
are deemed necessary in the recycling program. The waste disposal firm shall be
responsible for the collection, intermediate storage or transfer,
transportation, and sale of recyclable materials to a processor, broker, or
market desired for reuse of materials.
         i.   Multi-family property owners shall notify residents of the
availability of recycling services through a formal and ongoing educational
campaign, and shall use their best efforts to gain and maintain participation
in the program.
         j.   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized persons to remove or
damage any recyclable materials placed in designated containers, or the
containers themselves. Title to recyclable material shall pass to the private
waste disposal firm when the materials are placed into the collection vehicle.
   D.   Recyclables Collection Requirements For Private Waste Disposal Firms:
      1.   Waste Disposal Firm License: All private waste disposal firms
desiring to receive a waste disposal firm license to collect solid waste,
compostable material and/or recyclable material from multi-family properties in
the Village must comply with all applicable Federal, State, County and local
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. As a condition of receiving, renewing
and maintaining a waste disposal firm license to collect solid waste,
compostable material and/or recyclable material from multi-family properties
within the Village, each licensee or applicant for such license shall:
         a.   Obtain all permits and licenses required by Federal, State and
County laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and maintain the same in full
force and effect.
         b.   Submit to the Village a list of the multi-family properties it
serves within the Village's jurisdiction.
         c.   Provide collection and recycling services for any multi- family
property owner that requests such services in accordance with the on-site
multi-family structure recycling program requirements set forth above.
         d.   Failure to comply with the above provisions shall result in a
denial of receiving, renewing or maintaining a waste disposal firm license
until such time as the applicant complies with all provisions set forth in this
Section.
      2.   Reporting Requirements:
         a.   Each licensed private waste disposal firm shall submit a
quarterly report to both the multi-family property owner(s) or their designee
and the Village and/or its designee that contains the following information:
            (1)   Total weight or volume of refuse collected from multi- family
properties it serves within the Village.
            (2)   Total weight or volume of yard waste collected from multi-
family properties it serves within the Village.
            (3)   Total weight or volume of recyclable materials collected from
multi-family properties it serves within the Village.
            (4)   A summary of recycling services provided to each multi-
family property, to be submitted only on an annual basis with the fourth
quarter report.
         b.   Quarterly reports submitted to the multi-family property by the
licensed waste disposal firm shall only pertain to that property's activity.
         c.   Quarterly reports submitted to the village shall contain
aggregate totals concerning the information listed above for all multi-family
properties the licensed private waste disposal firm serves within the village's
jurisdiction.
         d.   Reports shall be due no later than fifteen days after the close
of each quarter. Quarters are defined as follows: First quarter - January 1
through March 31; second quarter - April 1 through June 30; third quarter -
July 1 through September 30; and, fourth quarter - October 1 through December
31. Reports shall follow the format prescribed by the village.
         e.   The information shall be considered exempt from the Illinois
freedom of information act 1  disclosure by the village or its designee upon
assertion as to its proprietary nature by the licensed private waste disposal
firm. The village or its designee shall only report the information in the form
of statistics and/or volume totals for all multi-family properties in the
village. No specific information on individual licenses shall be divulged.
         f.   The village and/or its designee shall have the right to inspect
and examine the licensed private waste disposal firm's records pertaining to
the collection and disposal or processing of refuse and recyclables upon
request and with reasonable notice. The village or its designee shall further
have the right to require the reporting of other data or information relative
to the recycling program from time to time.
         g.   All such reports, data, and information once received by the
village or its designee shall become the property of the village to be used as
it shall determine without obligation to any person, firm or corporation.
         h.   Failure to submit any required report to the village or its
designee shall be grounds for revocation of the business license and/or
franchise agreement until such time as the licensed private waste disposal firm
or franchised hauler complies with the requirements set forth in this section.
      3.   Implementation And Continuation Of Program Required:
         a.   Implementation of on site multi-family structure recycling
programs shall be required as stated in subsection C1b of this section. Such
recycling programs shall be maintained in effect regardless of any change of
building ownership or private waste disposal firm. Multi-family property owners
shall be required to notify the village in writing within thirty days after a
change in their choice of waste disposal firm. (Ord. 2612, 8-29-1994; amd. Ord.
2668, 2-12-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1-111.
6-3-5: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO SUPERVISE:
   A.   All matters relating to or affecting the accumulation, collection,
removal or disposal of garbage, refuse and ashes, unless specifically otherwise
assigned by the administrative discretion of the director of public works,
shall be subject to and under the supervision of the director of public works.
   B.   For the purpose of fulfilling the requirements of this chapter, the
director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to cause all
"garbage", "refuse" and ashes, as defined in section
6-3-1 of this chapter, to be collected regularly and systematically at least
once each seven days throughout the village, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2287, 4-25-1988)
6-3-6: COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Containers Required: Every person in possession of any premises in the
village where persons reside shall provide for each family unit residing
therein, and at all times maintain in good order and repair, a sufficient
number of waste containers for a weekly accumulation of normal waste. Every
person in possession of any premises shall cause to be deposited in such waste
containers all garbage and refuse produced in or on, or brought into or on,
such premises as soon as practicable after same is produced or brought therein
or thereon, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   B.   Type: Containers shall be as defined in section
 6-3-1 of this chapter, and no other type of container shall be acceptable.
Sunken garbage cans are prohibited. Filthy, leaking or defective receptacles
shall be cleaned, repaired or replaced as directed by the director of public
works or the health officer, or their representatives. All containers shall be
disinfected with an effective antiseptic solution as often as is necessary to
maintain them in a sanitary condition. Evidence of neglect of these
requirements or unsafe containers shall be determined by the director of public
works or the health officer, or their representatives.
   C.   Location:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every person in possession of any premises
in the village to place waste containers at a location designated by the
director of public works or his representative in order that the same may be
conveniently and economically serviced.
      2.   In all cases when a waste container is placed on the rear of a lot
for the purpose of having its contents removed, it shall be entirely within the
lot line of the premises serviced. It shall be unlawful to place waste
containers within an alley, street, parkway or walkway at homes serviced by
alleys. (Ord. 2454, 9-23-1991)
   D.   Yard Waste:
      1.   "Yard waste" is trees or tree branches (not exceeding four inches in
diameter), brush, plant stalks and shrubs cut up and bound into bundles of no
more than four feet in length and fifty pounds in weight, which bundles shall
be bound with biodegradable twine and shall have one universal solid waste tag
affixed to each bundle. Yard waste is also grass clippings, leaves, twigs,
weeds and all other materials of similar nature placed in biodegradable paper
bags (up to thirty two gallons in capacity) as described in section
6-3-1 of this chapter affixed with one universal solid waste tag. It shall be
unlawful for any person to mix yard waste with other garbage and refuse.
      2.   For nonalley collections, properly packaged yard waste will be
picked up "curbside", as defined in section
6-3-1 of this chapter. Materials placed for such collection shall not be put
out prior to six o'clock P.M. on Monday (the day before yard waste collection)
and will be picked up on Tuesday. For alley collection, properly packaged yard
waste shall be placed for collection next to the regular garbage collection
point. It shall be unlawful to place yard waste within the street, alley or
walkway.
      3.   Christmas trees and wreaths shall be placed curbside for collection
on Tuesdays through the end of January by the village's contractor.
   E.   Recyclables: Recyclables shall be placed in the recycling container
issued by the village and placed at the "top of the drive" location as defined
in section
6-3-1 of this chapter and collected at the same time as refuse collection.
(Ord. 3161, 6-12-2006)
   F.   Filing Of Liens: The village is hereby authorized pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-13, to remove garbage or refuse (including
yard refuse) from private property in the event the owner of said property, or
from public property in the event the owner of the garbage or refuse (including
yard refuse) after reasonable notice, refuses or neglects to remove such
garbage or refuse (including yard refuse) and to collect from such owner the
reasonable cost thereof, which cost and expense are a lien upon the property
affected or upon the property of the owner of the garbage or refuse (including
yard refuse) as the case may be; provided, that notice of lien is filed as
provided in said 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-13. (Ord. 2454, 9-23-
1991)
6-3-7: PREPARATION FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL:
   A.   Garbage To Be Drained, Wrapped And Deposited In Containers: It shall be
the duty of every person in possession of any premises to cause all garbage
brought on or produced on the premises to be thoroughly drained of all surplus
liquid, securely wrapped in paper or packaged in a covered box or carton of
such dimensions as will permit its free passage into and out of the waste
container, and finally deposited, after such wrapping, in such waste container,
as soon as practicable after the same is produced or brought therein or
thereon. Waste containers to which garbage is frozen through failure to observe
these regulations and all containers which are other than as specified in this
chapter will not be serviced by the waste disposal crews of the village waste
disposal contractor.
   B.   Waste Materials To Be Wrapped Or Bound And Stacked: Materials of every
character shall be securely wrapped or bound in such manner as may be necessary
to prevent the scattering of same by the wind and shall be deposited in a waste
container or otherwise deposited as prescribed herein.
All garbage and refuse of a size or nature which renders it unsuitable for
deposit in waste containers shall be placed on the ground at the designated
pick up point in neat and orderly bundles or stacks not to exceed fifty pounds
in weight or one foot six inches in size, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 2384, 4-23-1990)
   C.   Yard Refuse: Yard refuse shall be placed for collection as described in
section
6-3-6 of this chapter.
Yard refuse generated off premises with the exception of materials consisting
entirely of wood may not be stored anywhere within the village for more than
twenty four hours. All such yard refuse must be stored in covered containers
intended for transporting the material. Said yard refuse may not be transferred
from one container to another or from a container to a transport vehicle. (Ord.
2700, 12-9-1996)
6-3-8: DISPOSAL OF WASTES OTHER THAN BY COLLECTION:
   A.   Open burning of leaves and of garbage and refuse is prohibited upon any
private lot or upon any public ground within the village limits.
The prohibition contained in this subsection A shall not apply to any person or
entity who (which): 1) has a current permit from the county and state to
conduct a "controlled burn" of landscaping; 2) has written approval from the
fire department specifying the time(s) and conditions of such activity; and 3)
has circulated the following notice to properties within one hundred feet of
the proposed burn area:
Please be advised that a controlled burn of landscaping will be conducted on
the premises at       on      ,       at       a.m./p.m. Dense smoke may be
emitted from the burn area during the indicated times.
Such notice shall be circulated at least twenty four hours in advance of the
proposed activity. (Ord. 2962, 4-8-2002)
   B.   Garbage and other combustible wastes may be disposed of within the
building where it is accumulated or within a closed building accessory thereto
situated on the same premises, by complete incineration of such garbage or
waste in such manner as to create no noxious odors, smoke or other nuisance, or
by grinding or shredding such waste finely and disposing of it through pipes
leading to a public sanitary sewer. All garbage or combustible matter disposed
of in pipes leading to a public sanitary sewer shall have been ground or
shredded to such a degree that all particles are carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in the sewers into which such is deposited, with
no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. All incinerators or
grinders used for such disposal of wastes shall be approved by the director of
public works. (1981 Code)
   C.   Grass clippings, leaves, tree trimmings or any other yard or landscape
waste shall not be deposited in any street, alley or other public place, except
leaves may be deposited in the street adjacent to the curb from September 15
through November 30. (Ord. 3303, 9-14-2009)
6-3-9: ACCUMULATION OF WASTE ON PREMISES; FREQUENCY OF REMOVAL:
   A.   No person shall permit any garbage, refuse and ashes to accumulate on
his premises except in covered waste containers or except as otherwise provided
in this chapter. Yard wastes may be left on site for the sole purpose of
mulching or composting provided such composting operation is properly
maintained so that it does not create a "nuisance" as defined in chapter 8 of
this title.
   B.   All commercial and industrial establishments, and all apartments or
other buildings occupied by more than three family units shall remove or cause
to be removed all garbage, refuse and ashes at least once each seven days, or
more often if necessary, to protect the health and safety of the inhabitants of
the village. Such properties may utilize the yard refuse disposal services as
provided through the village's waste disposal contractor but are responsible
for making specific collection arrangements directly with said contractor.
(Ord. 2384, 4-23-1990)
6-3-10: MANNER OF TRANSPORTING WASTE OVER STREETS:
No person shall transport garbage, refuse or ashes or cause the same to be
transported over the streets or other public ways in the village, unless such
garbage, refuse and ashes being transported are entirely and securely covered;
garbage shall not be transported over or along the streets of the village or
other public property thereof, except in a liquidtight bed approved by the
director of public works. (1981 Code)
6-3-11: SPECIAL VILLAGE SERVICES:
Buildings containing more than three units and commercial, school and
industrial establishments shall not have waste removed by the village waste
disposal contractor, except with the approval of the director of public works,
and only when such removal is deemed to be to the best interests of the
village. (1981 Code)
6-3-12: GARBAGE COLLECTION SERVICE CHARGES:
   A.   Village Services: Garbage collection charges equal to the monthly
service rates included in the village's solid waste collection and disposal
agreement, made between the village and its solid waste collection and disposal
contractor, shall be billed to the living unit receiving standard base service
or optional special service, respectively, in buildings containing three or
less family living units. Such service charges include the collection of
recyclables but do not include the collection and disposal of yard waste and
bulk items.
Failure to pay the garbage collection charge authorized by this subsection A
shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifteen dollars nor more than five
hundred dollars for each offense.
Users of universal solid waste tags will pay a fee per sticker in accordance
with the village's solid waste collection and disposal agreement. Such fee
shall include all applicable service charges associated with the collection and
disposal of the solid waste collected through the program. The number of
universal solid waste tags needed to dispose of additional containers of refuse
(for base service customers only), bags of yard waste, bundles of brush, and
bulk items shall be in accordance with the village's solid waste collection and
disposal agreement. (Ord. 3445, 7-9-2012)
   B.   Schedule Of Fees Of Licensed Firms: A schedule of the fees charged by
every licensed waste disposal firm shall be on file at the village hall and
shall require the approval of the director of public works, based upon the
provisions of this chapter, before becoming effective. (Ord. 3019, 4-14-2003)
   C.   Statement Of Charges: It shall be the duty of the village finance
director to cause a statement for garbage service charges to be mailed to each
consumer of garbage collection service. Said statement shall be payable within
twenty eight days of its date. The sum of ten percent of the amount of the
statement shall be added thereto if the statement is not paid within twenty
eight days from its date. (Ord. 3445, 7-9-2012)
CHAPTER 4
CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Regulations
6-4-2: Definitions
6-4-3: Application For License
6-4-4: Issuance Of License; Fee
6-4-5: Inspection
6-4-6: Revocation Of License
6-4-1: REGULATIONS:
The Illinois Department of Children and Family Services, Licensing Standards
for Day Care Homes, part 406, effective July 1, 1983, and Illinois Department
of Children and Family Services, Licensing Standards for Day Care Centers, part
407, effective August 15, 1983, including amendments to or replacements of such
regulations, are hereby adopted by reference and filed in the office of the
Village Clerk. (Ord. 2144, 3-26-1984; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
   CHILD DAY CARE CENTER: A child care facility which regularly provides day
care for less than fourteen hours per day in a facility other than a dwelling.
The term is further construed to include day nurseries, nursery schools, child
play groups or other similar units operating under any other name whatsoever.
The term shall not include child day care homes (as herein defined) nor
kindergartens and nursery schools established under proper public school
auspices, as provided by law, or kindergartens or nursery schools established
in connection with parochial or other properly established elementary schools.
   CHILD DAY CARE HOME: A dwelling operated by the property owner to provide
child day care services between the hours of five o'clock A.M. and nine o'clock
P.M. for no more than eight children provided that: 1) any children of the
owner, either natural, foster or adopted, under the age of twelve shall be
included in determining the maximum number of children allowed in a child day
care home; 2) the facility is licensed by the Village and the State of
Illinois. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-4-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a child day care center or child day care home license shall
be made to the Health Officer, which shall be in the same form as applications
for licenses as provided in Title 3, Chapter 1 of this Code. In addition, the
applicant shall state the present or proposed location of the child day care
center or child day care home, the purpose for which it is to be opened,
operated or conducted, the present or proposed accommodations for the care of
children, the nature of the care to be given therein, the name and address of
the superintendent or of the person or persons to be in charge thereof, and the
name and address of the physician who is to be employed for the child day care
center or child day care home or who is to advise or attend therein.
The Health Officer, when such application is made, shall make or cause to be
made a strict inquiry of the statements therein contained and a thorough
inspection of the premises proposed to be used for a child day care center or
child day care home, to determine whether the facility is suitable and properly
located, that it will afford proper and adequate accommodations for the
children to be received therein, that the applicant is making the application
in good faith for the care and betterment of children and is a suitable person
for that purpose, that the superintendent or person to be in charge thereof is
of good moral character and has sufficient knowledge, experience and ability
properly to conduct and maintain such facility and that such place and such
center complies in all respects with the requirements hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 2144, 3-26-1984; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-4-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; FEE:
Upon approval of such application, the Health Officer shall issue, or cause to
be issued, a license authorizing such applicant to conduct and operate a child
day care center or child day care home at the place specified, which license
shall state the maximum number of children that may be cared for at one time.
The annual fee for such child day care center or child day care home shall be
as set out in Section
3-2-3 of this Code. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-4-5: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to inspect as often as he shall deem
necessary for adequate supervision of the same, or whenever he shall have
received a complaint of two or more persons that any child day care center or
child day care home is not managed in compliance with the provisions of this
Code or for the best interests of the children received therein. The Health
Officer and the Director of Public Works are hereby given the right to enter or
cause to be entered all such places for the purpose of making inspections.
(Ord. 2144, 3-26-1984; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-4-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
If, upon such inspection, the Health Officer shall find that any child day care
center or child day care home is conducted or managed in violation of the
provisions of this Code, or in violation of any of the regulations of the
Village or of the laws of the State, he may recommend to the Village President
that the license issued be revoked. The President may then invoke the
suspension, hearing, revocation and appeal provisions set forth in Sections
 3-1-11 and 3-1-12 of this Code. (Ord. 2144, 3-26-1984; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-
1996)
CHAPTER 5
FOODS AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: General Provisions
6-5-3: Adulterated And Misbranded Food
6-5-4: Enforcement
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby
defined, as follows:
   ACCESSIBLE: Capable of being exposed for cleaning and inspection with the
use of simple tools such as a screwdriver, pliers or open-end wrench.
   APPROVED: Acceptable to the health department of the village of River Forest
based on its determination as to conformance with appropriate standards and
good public health practice.
   CLEANING: The physical removal of residues of foods, ingredients and other
soiling materials.
   DEPARTMENT: River Forest health department.
   DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE CONTAINER: Any serviceware designed for one-time
use. "Disposable food service container" includes, but is not limited to,
serviceware for take-out foods, bakery products, and leftovers from partially
consumed meals. "Disposable food service container'' does not include
polystyrene foam coolers or ice chests that are used for the processing or
shipping of seafood or serviceware that is used to contain, transport, or
otherwise package raw, uncooked, or butchered meat, poultry, fish or seafood.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: Includes every person, firm or corporation engaged in
conducting or operating any of the following businesses as defined in this
chapter, but excludes home kitchen operations as defined in 410 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 625/3.6:
         Bakeries: Any establishment for mixing, compounding or baking for
sale, or purpose of a restaurant, any bread or breadstuffs, or any food product
of which flour or meal is the principal ingredient; provided that places where
such foodstuffs are baked in restaurant kitchens for consumption on such
premises only, shall not be considered as bakeries.
       Food Delivery Vehicles: Includes, but not necessarily limited to, the
following: any vehicles, wagons, motor vehicles propelled by manpower, for the
storage or transportation of any meat or meat products, milk or milk products,
fish or fish products, bread or bakery products or any other provision intended
for human consumption, excluding carbonated beverages and alcoholic liquors,
within the village for the purpose of delivering the above commodities to any
premises within the village.
        Food Processing Establishment: An establishment in which food is
processed, prepared, packaged or distributed for human consumption. This does
not include a food service establishment or retail food store.
         Food Refrigeration Locker Plant: An establishment in which space in
individual lockers is rented for the storage of food at or below a temperature
of minus eighteen centigrade degrees (zero Fahrenheit degrees), and which may
contain any of the following facilities: a chill room, locker room, sharp
freezing facilities and equipment for cutting, preparing, wrapping and
packaging of meat and meat products, poultry and poultry products and food and
food products.
         Food Service Establishment: Any place where food which is intended for
individual service, consumption and/or is routinely provided completely
prepared; this shall include restaurants and any place, regardless of whether
consumption is in, on or off the premises, and regardless of whether there is a
charge for the food; however, this shall not include the following:
      A private home where food is prepared for individual noncommercial
consumption; or
      The location of food vending machines; or
      A retail store which does not cook, prepare or otherwise combine ready to
eat food which could be potentially hazardous for human consumption if not
properly handled or stored.
       Mobile Food Unit: Any food service establishment capable of being
readily moved from location to location; one without a fixed location.
       Restaurant: Any place that keeps for sale, sells and serves to the
general public, for consumption on the premises, any article of food or drink
for human consumption. Restaurants, ice cream parlors, lunchrooms, tea rooms,
lunch stands, box lunch deliveries, cafeterias and retail drugstores serving
counter lunches and drinks, caterers and industrial food servers dispensing
food or drinks to office personnel or employees of an industrial plant, shall
be included under the term "restaurant".
       Retail Food Store: Grocery store; meat market; poultry market; fresh
fruit and vegetable market; confectionery; nut store; or any other
establishment whether fixed or moveable where food, intended for human
consumption off the premises, is manufactured, produced, prepared, handled,
transported, sold or offered for sale at retail to the general public. A
delicatessen or other facility by whatever name, where foods are cooked or
prepared, located, within a food store, shall have to comply with such other
food sanitation regulations that apply to such food preparation operations.
         Sharp Freezing Facility: A facility capable of maintaining
temperatures of minus eighteen centigrade degrees (zero Fahrenheit degrees) or
lower on still air or contact, and temperatures of minus eighteen centigrade
degrees (zero Fahrenheit degrees) or lower when forced air circulation is used
(with a tolerance of minus fifteen centigrade degrees (five Fahrenheit degrees)
for either type of cooling) for twelve hours after fresh food is put in the
facility for freezing.
   FROZEN FOODS: Any food or food product which has been preserved by freezing
or subjected to a process of refrigeration sufficient to reduce every portion
to minus eighteen centigrade degrees (zero Fahrenheit degrees) or lower.
   GOOD REPAIR: The absence of any deterioration, damage or wear which may
harbor dirt or food; items not in good repair would display property which
impedes cleaning.
   HEALTH OFFICER: A person, or persons, authorized under applicable federal,
state, or village law to conduct inspections of food establishments, and
designated by the village administrator, or his/her designee, to serve as the
health officer.
   HERMETICALLY SEALED CONTAINER: A container designed and intended to be
secure against the entry of microorganisms and to maintain the commercial
sterility of its contents after processing.
   HOME KITCHEN OPERATION: As defined in 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/3.6
(a), as amended from time to time.
   PERISHABLE FOOD: Any food of a type or in such condition as may spoil, but
does not include foods or beverages enclosed in hermetically sealed containers,
unless such container is labeled so as to indicate that the contents are
perishable.
   POLYSTYRENE FOAM: Any blown polystyrene and expanded or extruded foams using
a styrene monomer.
   POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD: Any food that consists in whole or in part of
milk or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish, edible crustacea
or other ingredients, including synthetic ingredients, and which is capable of
supporting rapid progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms.
This term does not include clean, whole, uncracked odor free shell eggs.
   SAFE MATERIALS: Articles manufactured from or composed of materials that may
not reasonably be expected to result, directly or indirectly, in their becoming
a component or otherwise affecting the characteristics of any food with which
they may contact. If materials used are food additives or color additives as
defined in section 201(s) or (t) of the federal food, drug and cosmetic act,
they are "safe" only if they are used in conformity with regulations
established pursuant to section 409 or section 706 of the act. Other materials
are "safe" only if, as used, they are not food additives or color additives as
defined in section 201(s) or (t) of the federal food, drug and cosmetic act and
are used in conformity with all applicable regulations of the food and drug
administration.
   SAFE TEMPERATURES: As applied to potentially hazardous foods, temperatures
at seven centigrade degrees (forty five Fahrenheit degrees) or below, and sixty
centigrade degrees (one hundred forty Fahrenheit degrees) or above.
      As applied to frozen perishable foods, temperatures at minus eighteen
centigrade degrees (zero Fahrenheit degrees) or below except for a variation of
minus ten centigrade degrees (fifteen Fahrenheit degrees) during transit,
unloading or defrosting during a mechanical defrosting cycle. Temperatures
shall be determined by measurement of the actual product temperature or the
ambient air temperature in the storage device.
   SELF-SERVICE STATION: An area dedicated to customers taking away single-use
foodware and condiments.
   SINGLE-USE FOODWARE: Any eating utensil or other item to be used as part of
food or beverage service that is designed and intended by the manufacturer for
only one usage before being discarded, including forks, spoons, sporks, knifes,
chopsticks, other eating utensils, plastic straws, stirrers, drink stoppers,
splash sticks, cocktail sticks, toothpicks, napkins, wet-wipes, cup sleeves,
beverage trays, disposable plates, and condiment packets. "Single-use foodware"
does not include paper straws, beverage lids, or items used to contain or
package food or beverages for delivery or take-out orders.
   WHOLESOME: In sound condition, clean, free from adulteration and otherwise
suitable for use as human food. (Ord. 2283, 3-28-1988; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-
1996; Ord. 3557, 5-11-2015; Ord. 3815, 6-22-2020; Ord. 3864, 6-27-2022; Ord.
3905, 9-11-2023)
6-5-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   License Required, Posting; Duration: It shall be unlawful for any
person who does not possess a valid license obtained from the village clerk,
which is neither revoked nor suspended, to establish, maintain or operate a
food establishment within the village. Such license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at the food establishment. The license for a food
establishment shall be valid for the licensing period unless revoked or
suspended as provided herein and must be renewed annually. Licenses are not
transferable from one person to another or from one location to another. Every
person licensed and operating vehicles under the provisions of this chapter
shall have securely fastened on the windshield of each vehicle used in the
conduct of the business licensed under this chapter a decal for the current
year issued by the village clerk, having stamped thereon the words "Food
Vehicles" and a number corresponding to the number of license issued for such
vehicle.
   B.   Application For And Issuance Of License; License To Remain In Force:
The application for a food establishment license shall be made in conformity
with the general requirements of this code. The application shall convey to the
village clerk such pertinent information as may be necessary and required in
order to inform that office fully as to the size and nature of the place to be
used for the purpose of the business and the conditions, equipment and
facilities for conducting the business therein. Before any license shall be
issued, and before any food may be dispensed, the village clerk shall refer all
applications for a license to operate a food establishment to the health
department for inspection. The health department shall inspect the premises for
which the license application is made and report the findings thereon to the
village clerk within seven days with a recommendation for either approval of
the license or advising against the issuance of the license applied for.
When a person who has applied for a license has complied with all of the
requirements of this chapter and title 3, chapter 1 of this code, the village
clerk shall issue the license requested.
All licenses for the operation of a food establishment now held by any person
shall continue in force for the period for which they are issued.
All licenses for the operation of a food establishment now held by any person
shall continue in force for the period for which they are issued.
   C.   Transferability: No license issued for the operation of any food
establishment shall be assigned or transferred to any other person, nor to any
other location; but a new license shall be obtained and the fees therefor must
be paid. No refund shall be granted for an unexpired period of the former
license.
   D.   Suspension And Revocation Of License: The village administrator and/or
health officer may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend for a period
not to exceed twenty days, any license to operate a food establishment if the
holder of the license does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, or
if the operation of the establishment does not comply with the requirements of
this chapter, or if the operation of the food establishment otherwise
constitutes a substantial hazard to public health.
When a license is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. The
holder of the license shall be notified in writing that the license, upon
service of the notice, is immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a
hearing before the health officer will be provided if a written request for a
hearing is filed within ten days. The village administrator and/or health
officer may end the suspension at any time if reasons for the suspension no
longer exist.
The board of trustees may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a
license for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this
chapter or for interference with the health officer or his duly appointed
representative in the performance of duty.
The board of trustees shall make findings of fact and render a decision which
shall be entered upon record of the board.
Whenever a revocation of a license has become final, the holder of the revoked
license may make written application for a new license.
   E.   Location Of Food Establishments: Each food establishment shall be so
located as to permit prompt receipt and distribution of perishable foodstuffs.
   F.   Constructing And Remodeling Food Establishments: Any person who desires
or proposes to remodel an old building or portion thereof which is being used
or is proposed to be used to conduct a food establishment, or who desires or
proposes to construct a new building which is to be used in whole or in part to
conduct a food establishment, shall, prior to such remodeling or construction,
submit plans and specifications therefor in triplicate to the Health Officer
for approval. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout,
arrangement, mechanical plans and construction materials of work areas, and the
type and model of fixed equipment and facilities. The Health Officer shall
review the plans, and if they conform to the sanitation and construction
requirements of this Code, he shall approve them and return one copy thereof
with his approval written thereon. He shall retain the other copies for the
files and records of the Health Department.
If the Health Officer finds that the plans do not conform to the sanitation and
construction requirements of this Code, he shall note on all three copies of
the plans the items therein which do not conform and the manner in which such
items do not conform. Thereupon he shall hold one copy in the files and return
two copies of the plans so marked to the person submitting them. Whenever plans
and specifications have been approved by the Health Officer, he shall cause to
have made such inspections as may be necessary prior to the start of operation,
to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the
requirements of this Code.
   G.   Reopening Of Discontinued Food Establishments: If any food
establishment which is now being maintained and operated shall be vacated,
discontinued or unused for a period of six consecutive months or more and shall
thereafter be reopened or reestablished as a food establishment, it shall be
considered a new food establishment for the purpose of this Chapter and treated
accordingly.
   H.   Inspection Of Food Establishments: The Health Officer shall make or
cause to have made an inspection of all food establishments at least once each
six months. Other inspections, surveys, investigations and studies of food
establishments shall be performed as may be necessary to determine that all
food establishments are constructed, operated and maintained in compliance with
the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter. In case a violation
of any item of sanitation shall be discovered by the Health Officer he shall
make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems necessary for
the defect to be remedied, and the second inspection shall be used in
determining compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
   I.   Report Of Inspections: Whenever an inspection of a food establishment
is made, the findings shall be recorded on an inspection report form provided
by the Health Officer. The inspection report form shall summarize the sanitary
requirements of this Chapter and set forth a weighted point value for each
requirement. The rating score of the food establishment shall be the total of
the weighted point value for all violations subtracted from one hundred. A copy
of the completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the license
holder at the conclusion of the inspection.
The copy of the inspection report provided to the license holder shall be
posted upon the inside wall of the food establishment under the license. The
most recent inspection report shall not be defaced or removed by any person
except the Health Officer or his representative. Another copy of the inspection
report shall be filed with the records of the Health Department. The completed
inspection report form is a public document and shall be made available for
public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.
      1.   The inspection report shall state the penalty (including license
revocation) for failure to correct inspection determined deficiencies within
the time limits for corrections. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection
findings or the time limitations or both will be provided if a written request
is filed with the Health Officer within ten days after delivery of the
inspection report. If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be
held by the Health Officer within twenty days of receipt of the request.
      2.   Whenever a food service establishment is required under the
provision of Section
6-5-2 to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is shown on
reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no
longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable
time.
   J.   Correction Of Violations: The completed inspection report shall specify
a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found; and
correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified,
in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of
refrigeration or sewage backup into an establishment, the establishment shall
immediately cease food service operations. Operations shall not be resumed
until authorized by the Health Officer.
      2.   All violations of four or five point weighted items shall be
corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten days following
inspection. Within fifteen days after the inspection, the holder of the license
shall submit a written report to the Health Officer, stating that the four or
five point weighted violations have been corrected. A follow up inspection
shall be conducted to confirm corrections.
      3.   All one or two point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection.
      4.   When the rating score of the food establishment is less than sixty,
the license holder shall initiate corrective action on all identified
violations within forty eight hours. One or more reinspections will be
conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure correction.
      5.   In the case of temporary food service establishments, all violations
shall be corrected within twenty four hours. If violations are not corrected
within twenty four hours, the food establishment shall immediately cease food
service operations until authorized to resume by the Health Officer.
   K.   Access: Free access to all food establishments shall be accorded to the
Health Officer or his representatives at all reasonable times for the purpose
of inspection and examination of such places and of the food stored,
manufactured, processed, prepared, displayed, handled, served, sold or offered
for sale therein or thereon. No person holding a valid license, including such
person's agents and employees, shall obstruct or otherwise hinder, delay or
detain the Health Officer or his representative in making such inspections in
pursuance of his duty. Free access to any or all records of food received, used
or purchased shall also be accorded the Health Officer or his representative.
   L.   Food Establishments Located Outside The Village: Food establishments
not located in the Village but whose products are sold or served in the Village
must be approved by the State Department of Public Health in the state in which
such food establishment is located, or by other properly constituted enforcing
agencies. At the direction of the Health Officer, such extraterritorial food
establishments may be required to have placed on file with the Department the
latest copy of an inspection report from the State Board of Health or other
proper enforcing agency having cognizance over the nonlocal establishment
stating this food establishment is in compliance with all the requirements of
the applicable code relating to sanitation. On receipt of such reports, the
Department may permit the sale or serving of the products from such food
establishments in the Village as long as such establishment remains in
compliance with the requirements of the applicable code.
   M.   Sanitation Requirements For Food Establishments: The sanitation
requirements for food establishments shall be regulated in accordance with the
terms of the 1983 edition of the Illinois Department of Public Health's "Food
Service Sanitation Rules and Regulations Pertaining to the Sanitation of Food
Service Establishments", and the terms of the 1983 Illinois Department of
Public Health Rules and Regulations for Retail Food Stores, and as may from
time to time thereunder be amended, three copies of which are and shall remain
on file in the office of the Village Clerk; provided, that the following
additions to the Illinois Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations
shall have precedence.
   N.   Toilet And Lavatory Facilities: Conveniently located toilet facilities
with lavatory, shall be provided for employees in accordance with the
following:
 
Maximum Number Of Persons Employed Minimum Number Of Toilets
1 to 9                             1
10 to 24                           2
25 to 49                           3
                                  1 for each additional 30 persons
 
If there are five or more male employees and five or more female employees,
separate toilet facilities, according to the above schedule, shall be provided
for each sex.
The number of toilets for males may be reduced by one-third (but never to less
than one, minimum); provided, that one approved urinal shall be installed for
each toilet omitted from the total required. Where toilet rooms are accessible
only through the kitchen, they shall not be used by guests of the food
establishment.
Toilet facilities shall be provided for customers of any restaurant designed to
seat twenty five or more customers at one time. Such facilities shall be easily
accessible to the customer, separate for each sex, and shall provide at least
one toilet and one handwashing facility for each sex. An adequate supply of
soap, sanitary towels and toilet paper shall be available for use at all times.
   O.   Health And Education Of Food Establishment Employees: Food
establishment license holders and their employees may be required to attend a
foodhandlers' educational program at a time and place designated by the Health
Officer.
No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form or is a
carrier of such disease shall work in any food establishment, and no food
establishment shall employ any such person or any person suspected of being
affected with any disease in a communicable form or of being a carrier of such
disease. If the food establishment manager suspects that any employee has
contacted any disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such
disease, he shall prohibit further work by such employee and shall notify the
Health Officer immediately.
When suspicion arises as to the possibility of transmission of infection from
any food establishment employee, the Health Officer is authorized to require
any or all of the following measures:
      1.   The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food
establishments.
      2.   The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until in
the opinion of the Health Officer no further danger of disease outbreak exists.
      3.   Adequate medical examination of the employee and his associates with
such laboratory examinations as may be indicated.
      4.   Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the food
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease.
   P.   Home Kitchen Operations: Home kitchen operations are authorized in the
village, subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Home kitchen operations shall obtain and maintain a village-issued
business license pursuant to section
3-1-2 of this code.
      2.   Home kitchen operations shall submit a written disclosure to the
village yearly, on or before each May 1, including a Federal Employer
Identification Number, a copy of a current Food Protection Manager
Certification from the Illinois Department of Public Health and such other
information and materials as the health officer may require.
      3.   Home kitchen operations shall comply with the following
requirements:
         a.   Packaging or production is limited to non-potentially hazard
baked goods, as defined in 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/4(a), as amended
from time to time, which shall occur in a kitchen of a primary domestic
residence for direct sale by the owner or a family member.
         b.   Baked goods, such as, but not limited to, breads, cookies, cakes,
pies, and pastries are allowed. Only high-acid fruit pies that use the
following fruits are allowed: apple, apricot, grape, peach, plum, quince,
orange, nectarine, tangerine, blackberry, raspberry, blueberry, boysenberry,
cherry, cranberry, strawberry, red currants, or a combination of these fruits.
         c.   Monthly gross sales do not exceed one thousand dollars.
         d.   The food is a non-potentially hazardous baked good, as defined in
410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/4(a), as amended from time to time.
         e.   A notice is provided to the purchaser that the product was
produced in a home kitchen.
         f.   The food package is affixed with a label or other written notice
is provided to the purchaser that includes:
            (1)   The common or usual name of the food product; and
            (2)   Allergen labeling as specified in federal labeling
requirements by the United States Food and Drug Administration.
         g.   The food is sold directly to the consumer.
         h.   The food is stored in the residence where it is produced or
packaged.
         i.   A Food Protection Manager Certification from the Illinois
Department of Public Health shall be maintained.
         j.   Additional requirements, if any, from 410 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 625/3.6, as amended from time to time.
      4.   Upon receipt of a complaint regarding a home kitchen operation, the
health officer shall make or cause to have made an inspection of a home kitchen
operation. Other inspections, surveys, investigations and studies of home
kitchen operations shall be performed by the health officer as may be necessary
to determine that home kitchen operations are constructed, operated and
maintained in compliance with the standards and requirements set forth herein.
   Q.   Single-Use Foodware:
      1.   Requirements. In connection with any delivery or take-out order of
food or beverage, a food establishment may only provide single-use foodware
upon request from the customer or at a self-service station. Food
establishments shall provide options for customers to affirmatively request
single-use foodware when ordering food and beverages for delivery or take-out
across all ordering or point of sale platforms, including internet enabled
applications, digital platforms, phone orders, and in-person ordering. The
Village Administrator is authorized to establish, by rule, a standard sign for
use by food establishments in connection with this Subsection. Providing
single-use foodware contrary to these requirements is declared to be a nuisance
and is detrimental to the public's health, safety and welfare.
      2.   Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to:
         a.   Single-use foodware necessary to address safety concerns, such as
lids, drink stoppers, beverage trays and cup sleeves for beverages served at an
average temperature greater than 170 degrees Fahrenheit;
         b.   A food vending machine, as defined in Section
6-6-1 of the Village Code;
         c.   Any single-use foodware that is prepackaged with or attached to
any food or beverage products by the manufacturer prior to receipt by the food
establishment;
         d.   Any charitable food establishment; and
         e.   A food establishment granted a waiver by the Village
Administrator. Any waiver granted by the Village Administrator shall be
reported, in writing, to the Village President and Board of Trustees.
      3.   Other Plastics. Businesses in the Village are encouraged to make
every effort to reduce use of plastic bags, and excess packaging.
   R.   Polystyrene Foam Foodware:
      1.   Except as provided in subsections 2 and 3 of this Subsection R, food
establishments may not sell or distribute disposable food service containers,
composed in part or in whole of polystyrene foam packaging, on or after January
1, 2024.
      2.   A food establishment with an annual total income of $500,000 or less
per location, as stated on the food establishment's income tax filing for the
most recent tax year as provided to the Village, shall comply with this
Subsection R on or after January 1, 2025.
      3.   Exceptions: The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not
apply in the following situations:
         a.   Supplies and services provided in response to a public health or
other emergency that is declared by a governmental body with jurisdiction in
the Village.
         b.   Any polystyrene foam that is prepackaged with or attached to any
food or beverage products by the manufacturer prior to receipt by the food
dispensing establishment;
         c.   Any not-for-profit corporation; or
         d.   A federal, state, or local governmental agency that provides food
to economically disadvantaged individuals at no or nominal charge.
      4.   Enforcement: The Village shall perform education and outreach
efforts regarding the prohibition contained in this section during the first
four (4) months of 2024, through April 30, 2024. No citations shall be brought
against food establishments for violations of this section during said time.
Thereafter, a food establishment in violation of this section shall be given
one (1) written warning beginning on May 1, 2024 prior to a citation being
issued against the food establishment. Beginning January 1, 2025 and
thereafter, citations may be issued against any food establishments pursuant to
subsections 1 and 2 above without receiving a prior warning or notice of said
violations.
      5.   Conflict With State Law: If any provision of this section conflicts
or is otherwise inconsistent with a provision of state law, the more stringent
or restrictive provision shall prevail and shall be enforced by the Village.
(Ord. 2283, 3-28-1988; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996; Ord. 3815, 6-22-2020; Ord.
3864, 6-27-2022; Ord. 3905, 9-11-2023)
6-5-3: ADULTERATED AND MISBRANDED FOOD:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this Chapter, an article of food shall
be deemed to be adulterated:
      1.   In Case Of Confectionery:
         a.   If it contains terra alba, barytes, talc, chrome yellow,
paraffin, mineral fillers or poisonous substances or poisonous color or flavor.
         b.   If it contains any ingredient deleterious or detrimental to
health or any vinous, malt or spirituous liquor or compound or narcotic drug.
      2.   In Case Of Food:
         a.   If any substance has been mixed or packed with it so as to reduce
or lower or injuriously affect its quality, strength or purity.
         b.   If any substance has been substituted wholly or in part for such
food.
         c.   If any valuable constituent of such food has been wholly or in
part abstracted or left out; provided, that in the manufacture of skim milk or
separated cheese, the whole or part of the butterfats in the milk may be
abstracted.
         d.   If it is mixed, colored, powdered, coated, polished or stained in
any manner whereby damage or inferiority is concealed or it is made to appear
better or of greater value than it really is; or if a substance has been added
thereto or mixed or packed therewith so as to increase its bulk or weight or
reduce its quality or strength.
         e.   If it contains any poisonous or deleterious ingredient which may
render such article injurious to health; provided, that when in preparation of
food products for shipment they are preserved by an external application,
applied in such a manner that the preservation is necessarily removed
mechanically, or by maceration in water, or otherwise, and directions for the
removal of the preservatives shall be printed on the covering of the package,
the provisions of this Section shall be construed as applying only when such
products are ready for consumption; and formaldehyde, hydrofluoric acid, boric
acid, salicylic acid, sulfuric acid and all compounds and derivatives thereof
are hereby declared unwholesome and injurious.
         f.   If it consists in whole or in part of an infected or tainted
animal or vegetable substance or article, or any portion of an animal unfit for
food, whether manufactured or not, or if it is the product of a diseased animal
or one that has died otherwise than by slaughter.
         g.   If it has been produced, prepared, packed or held under
unsanitary conditions whereby it may have become contaminated with filth, or
whereby it may have been rendered diseased, unwholesome or injurious to health.
      3.   In Case Of Foods, Beverages Or Confectionery: If it is colored with
any coloring matter or dye other than harmless vegetable colors or coal tar
colors permitted and approved by the United States Department of Agriculture
and/or the U.S. Food and Drug Administration provided, however, that no color
permitted herein is used contrary to the other provisions of this Section.
   B.   When Article Deemed Misbranded: For the purpose of this Chapter, an
article of food shall be deemed to be misbranded:
      1.   In Case Of Food:
         a.   If it is an imitation of or offered for sale under the
distinctive name of another article or if it does not conform to the standards
set forth in this Chapter.
         b.   If it is so labeled as to make the identity of the manufacturer,
packer or dealer who sells or offers the same for sale uncertain or doubtful,
or which is so labeled or branded as to indicate on the receptacle, vessel or
container the name of any firm or corporation other than the firm or
corporation actually manufacturing, packing or dealing in the article or
product so sold or offered for sale; or if it is labeled or branded so as to
deceive or mislead the purchaser, or purports to be a foreign product when not
so, or if the contents of the package as originally put up shall have been
removed in whole or in part and refilled by contents of a different quality or
of a different manufacturer, packer or dealer, or if it shall fail to bear a
statement on the label of the quantity or proportion of any morphine, opium,
cocaine, heroin, alpha or beta eucaine, chloroform, chloral hydrate or
acetanilid or any derivatives or preparation of any such substance contained
therein.
         c.   If in package form, the true quantity of the contents is not
plainly and conspicuously marked on the outside of the package in terms of
weight, measure or numerical count; provided, however, that reasonable
variation shall be permitted and tolerance and also exemptions as to small
packages shall be established by rules and regulations made in accordance with
the provisions of the statutes of the State.
         d.   If it is a manufactured article of food or food sold in package
form, and is not distinctly labeled, marked or branded with the true name of
the article and with either the name of the manufacturer and place of
manufacture, or the name and address of the packer or dealer who sells the
same, or if its label does not conform to the regulations set forth in this
Chapter.
         e.   If the packaging containing it or its label shall bear any
statement, design or device regarding the ingredients of the substance
contained therein, which statement, design or device shall be false or
misleading in any particular; provided, that an article of food which does not
contain any added poisonous or deleterious ingredients shall not be deemed to
be adulterated or misbranded in the following cases.
            (1)   In the case of mixtures or compounds which may now or from
time to time hereafter be known as articles of food under their own distinctive
name, and which mixture or compound is not an imitation of or offered for sale
under the distinctive name of another article, if the name is accompanied on
the same label or brand with the name and address of the packer or dealer, and
the net measure of the contents.
            (2)   In case of articles labeled, branded or tagged so as to
plainly indicate that they are compounds, imitations or blends and the word
"compound", "imitation" or "blend" as the case may be, is plainly stated on the
package in which it is offered for sale; provided, that the term "blend" as
used herein, shall be construed to mean a mixture of like substances, not
excluding harmless coloring or flavoring ingredients used for the purpose of
coloring or flavoring only; provided further, that nothing in this Chapter
shall be construed as requiring or compelling proprietors or manufacturers of
proprietary foods, which contain no unwholesome added ingredients to disclose
their trade formulas, except insofar as the provisions of this Chapter may
require to secure freedom from adulteration or misbranding.
            (3)   In the case of mixtures of corn syrup (glucose) or corn sugar
(dextrose) or corn sugar syrup, with cane or beet sugar (sucrose) or cane or
beet sugar syrup.
   C.   Specifications For Labels: The label on any bottle, package or
container of food shall correspond in size and purpose with that required by
the State.
   D.   Defacing And The Like Of Marks, Labels Or Brands: It shall be unlawful
for any person to deface, change, erase or remove any mark, label or brand
required by law with the intent to mislead or deceive or to violate any of the
provisions of this Chapter or statutes of the State.
   E.   Eggs: No person shall buy, sell or offer for sale, within the Village,
eggs for human consumption that are unfit for human food.
For the purpose of this Section, an egg is unfit for human food if it is addled
or moldy; if it contains black rot, white rot or a blood ring; if it has an
adherent yolk or a bloody or green-white color or if it consists in whole or in
part of a filthy, decomposed or putrid substance.
In all advertising of shell eggs for sale at retail, the grade and size or
"ungraded" shall be stated.
No person other than those who sell only eggs produced by their own flock,
shall sell, offer for sale or advertise for sale shell eggs as "fresh eggs" or
under the words of similar import (such as "new laid eggs") any eggs which do
not meet the minimum requirements for consumer Grade A as prescribed by State
standards for individual shell eggs.
   F.   Slaughterhouses Prohibited: No slaughterhouse shall be constructed or
permitted in any part of the Village.
   G.   Rules And Regulations; Enforcement Of Chapter: It shall be unlawful for
any person within the Village to manufacture for sale or sell any article of
food which is adulterated, misbranded or insufficiently labeled or otherwise
violates the provision of this Chapter.
The provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer who
shall adopt such measures, prepare and prescribe such rules and regulations, as
he may deem necessary, to facilitate proper enforcement and to carry out the
purpose and intent of this Chapter.
   H.   Examination And Condemnation Of Food And Other Articles:
      1.   Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Department as often as
necessary for enforcement of this Chapter. The Health Department may, upon
written notice to the license holder or person in charge, specifying with
particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it
believes is in violation of any section of this Chapter. The Health Department
shall tag, label or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No
food subject to a hold order shall be used, sold or moved from the
establishment without permission from the Health Department.
      2.   The Health Department shall permit storage of food under conditions
specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the
public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and
accomplished.
      3.   The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed
with the Health Department within ten days, and that if no hearing is
requested, the food shall be destroyed. If a request for a hearing is received,
the hearing shall be held within five days after receipt of the request. On the
basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated or
the license holder or person in charge of the food may be directed by written
order to denature or destroy such food or bring it into compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2283, 3-28-1988; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996;
Ord. 3789, 12-9-2019)
6-5-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Issuance Of Citations: Whenever existing violations have not been
corrected within the time periods specified in this Chapter, the Health Officer
or his duly appointed representative is authorized to issue citations to any
person who fails to undertake or cause the correction of violations specified
in the inspection report.
The citation may be delivered to the license holder personally, may be
delivered to a member of the license holder's household of age ten years or
older or may be delivered to the license holder's address by registered or
certified mail.
   B.   Penalty: Whoever violates any of the provisions, or resists the
enforcement, of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine not exceeding five hundred dollars. Specifically, a separate offense shall
be deemed committed for each day any violation of any provision shall continue
and shall be punishable under this Section. (Ord. 2283, 3-28-1988; amd. Ord.
2668, 2-12-1996)
CHAPTER 6
FOOD VENDING MACHINES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Definitions
6-6-2: License Required
6-6-3: Licensing - Special Conditions
6-6-4: Periodic Inspection
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
   FOOD: Any cooked or uncooked article of food, drink, condiment or confection
used for, or intended to be used for, human consumption.
   VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical container or device used for the sale of any
article, including food, the operation of which is governed or controlled by
the deposit of a coin or token. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing,
keeping or maintaining vending machines within the Village without first having
obtained a license in accordance with Title 3. It shall be unlawful for any
person to install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the installation, keeping,
maintenance or use of upon his premises, any vending machine owned or operated
by a person who has not obtained a license as herein provided. (Ord. 2668, 2-
12-1996)
6-6-3: LICENSING - SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   Business Decal: The Village Clerk shall issue a business decal for each
vending machine licensed pursuant to this Code, said decal shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the machine.
   B.   Identification: It shall be the duty of each licensee to properly
identify each vending machine by affixing to each such machine a card, emblem
or similar device which shall contain the name and address of the licensee.
   C.   Prohibited In Washrooms: No vending machine shall be installed or kept
for use in any toilet or washroom. (Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-6-4: PERIODIC INSPECTION:
The Health Officer shall have the right to make periodic inspections of the
place of business, the vending machines and the articles of any food purveyed
therefrom, for the purpose of determining the purity and wholesomeness of the
product vended and the preparation, wrapping and handling of the same, and to
see that all requirements of the U.S. Department of Health, Education and
Welfare regarding the vending of food and beverages are complied with,
including the operation and use of such machines, to guard against improper
handling, distribution and contamination of food purveyed thereby. (Ord. 2668,
2-12-1996)
CHAPTER 7
NOISE POLLUTION
SECTION:
6-7-1: Loud And Disturbing Noise Prohibited
6-7-2: Work Conducted Outdoors Prohibited
6-7-3: Specific Activities Prohibited
6-7-4: Emergencies; Other Laws
6-7-5: Penalty
6-7-1: LOUD AND DISTURBING NOISE PROHIBITED:
Except as set forth in sections
6-7-2 through
6-7-4 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or
cause to be made or continued any noise from any of the following sources which
can be heard by the unaided human ear seventy five feet or more from the source
of the noise: a horn or signaling device; radio; television; stereo;
loudspeaker; human voice; musical instrument; animal; internal combustion or
steam engine; loading or unloading of containers; fan or blower; train engine
or other train component including refrigeration units, if for a period of more
than fifteen minutes. (Ord. 2920, 3-12-2001)
6-7-2: WORK CONDUCTED OUTDOORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any outdoor work not requiring a
Village- issued permit involving the construction or repair of any building or
structure, or for any person to conduct any mechanized landscaping activity
anywhere in the village except between the hours of seven o'clock A.M. and six
o'clock P.M. Monday through Friday, or between the hours of eight o'clock A.M.
and five o'clock P.M. on Saturday, and nine o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M.
on Sundays. Any person performing outdoor work under a Village-issued permit
shall only be allowed to perform said contracting work during the hours listed
in section
3-3-7  of this code.
No person shall engage in any work covered by this section at times other than
those set forth above unless a permit for such work has first been issued.
Application for such permits shall be made in writing to the director of public
works, and shall state the name of the applicant and his address, the location
of the proposed work, and the reason for seeking a permit to do such work at
times other than those set forth above, as well as the estimated time of the
proposed operations. No such special permit shall be issued excepting where the
public welfare will be enhanced by such issuance or will be harmed by failure
to perform at the time indicated. (Ord. 3437, 6-18-2012; amd. Ord. 3774, 8-26-
2019)
6-7-3: SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED:
Except as set forth in sections
 6-7-2 and
6-7-4 of this chapter, no person shall make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any noise from any of the following sources which can be heard by the
unaided human ear from any contiguous residence: electric or electronic devices
(e.g., telephones, televisions, radios, stereos or other household appliances);
motors, horns or whistles not attached to a motor vehicle or railroad vehicle;
musical instruments; animals; shouting or yelling.
All other noises not described in this section shall be subject to section
6-7-1,
6-7-2 or
6-7-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2920, 3-12-2001)
6-7-4: EMERGENCIES; OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make unlawful any noise from any
emergency vehicle or activity necessary to prevent injury to persons or
property at any time. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make
unlawful any noise from any source the operation of which is required by local,
state or federal law or regulation. (Ord. 2920, 3-12-2001)
6-7-5: PENALTY:
Every person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars and not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars for each offense. (Ord. 2920, 3-12-2001)
CHAPTER 8
NUISANCES
SECTION:
6-8-1: Common Law And Statutory Nuisances
6-8-2: Enumeration Of Nuisances Generally
6-8-3: Abatement Of Nuisances
6-8-4: Refusal To Obey Order
6-8-5: Procedure When Responsible Person Unknown
6-8-6: Violation Notices And Notices To Appear In Court
6-8-1: COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES:
In all cases where no provision is made in this chapter defining what are
nuisances and how the same may be removed, abated or prevented, in addition to
what may be declared such in this chapter, those offenses which are known to
the common law of the land and the statutes of the state as nuisances may, in
case the same exist within the village limits or within one mile thereof, be
treated as such and proceeded against as is provided in this code or in
accordance with any other provision of law. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-
1996)
6-8-2: ENUMERATION OF NUISANCES GENERALLY:
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting the health, peace and
comfort of the village, as well as and in addition to any other act, omission
of act, occupation or use of property or premises, equipment or structure,
deemed to be a menace to the health, peace and comfort of the inhabitants of
the village, as declared in any other section of this code:
   A.   Creating Offensive Smells: To conduct any business or use any premises
so negligently as to create such an offensive smell as may taint the air and
render it unwholesome or disagreeable to the neighborhood.
   B.   Allowing Carcasses, Garbage To Collect: To cause or allow the carcass
of any animal or vegetable matter, slops, swill, suds, garbage, filth or offal
or noisome substance of any kind to be collected, deposited or to remain in any
place in the village to the prejudice of others.
   C.   Depositing Manure Upon Lots: To deposit any manure, dead animal or
other filthy, offensive or noisome substance upon any lot, street, alley or
other place 1 .
   D.   Establishing Cemetery: To establish a cemetery within the corporate
limits of the village.
   E.   Keeping Stables, Vaults In Offensive Condition: To keep or allow to be
kept, in a foul, offensive, nauseous or filthy condition any cellar, vault,
drain, pool, privy, sewer or sink upon any premises belonging to or occupied by
any inhabitant of the village, or any railroad car, building yard, grounds or
premises belonging to or occupied by any person.
   F.   Use Of Substances Dangerous To Health In Connection With Business, Work
Or Labor: To allow to exist any substance, matter or thing of any kind
whatsoever dangerous or detrimental to health in connection with any business
or to use therein, or be used in any work or labor performed in the village. No
nuisance shall be permitted to exist in connection with any business or in
connection with any such work or labor.
   G.   Conduct Or Operation Of Business: To conduct or operate any business,
whether licensed or not, so as to amount to a nuisance in fact.
   H.   Emitting Dense Smoke: To cause or permit the emission of dense smoke
from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency in the village
so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof.
The prohibition contained in this subsection H shall not apply to any person or
entity who (which): 1) has a current permit from the county and state to
conduct a "controlled burn" of landscaping; 2) has written approval from the
fire department specifying the time(s) and conditions of such activity; and 3)
has circulated the following notice to properties within one hundred feet of
the proposed burn area:
Please be advised that a controlled burn of landscaping will be conducted on
the premises at       on      ,       at       a.m./p.m. Dense smoke may be
emitted from the burn area during the indicated times.
Such notice shall be circulated at least twenty four hours in advance of the
proposed activity.
   I.   Buildings: To construct or maintain any building or structure in
violation of any of the provisions of title 4 of this code, or any building
which is in an unsanitary condition or in an unsafe or dangerous condition, or
which in any manner endangers the health or safety of any person. Every
building or part thereof which is in an unsanitary condition by reason of the
basement or cellar being damp or wet or by reason of the floor of such basement
or cellar being covered with stagnant water, or by reason of the building being
infected with disease or being unfit for human habitation, or which by reason
of any other unsanitary condition is a source of sickness or which endangers
the public health, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   J.   Buildings, Vehicles, Detrimental To Health: No building, vehicle,
structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premises or part thereof shall be made, used,
maintained or operated in the village if such use, maintaining or operating
shall be the occasion of any nuisance or shall be dangerous or detrimental to
health.
   K.   Importing Or Keeping Animals: To bring into the village or keep
therein, for sale or otherwise, either for food or for any other purpose, any
dead or live animal or any matter, substance or thing which shall be a nuisance
or which shall occasion a nuisance in the village or which may or shall be
dangerous or detrimental to health.
   L.   Weeds: To permit weeds or other underbrush which have grown to a height
of eight inches or more. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or
controls any premises to suffer or permit the growth of weeds or underbrush to
eight inches or more thereon, and he shall cut or cause the same to be cut
within five days after being notified so to do by the health officer.
It shall further be unlawful for any person to permit the growth upon any
premises of any noxious weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistles,
cockleburs and other like weeds.
If such person shall fail to cut such weeds or underbrush within five days
after such notice, the health officer shall notify the director of public works
of such default, and said director of public works shall cut same at once, at
the expense of the owner.
   M.   Inoperable Motor Vehicles: For any person to fail to obey a notice from
the village to dispose of an inoperable motor vehicle under his control,
whether on public or private property; provided, however, that this subsection
shall not apply to any motor vehicle which is kept within a building when not
in use or to historic vehicles over twenty five years of age. As used in this
subsection, "inoperable motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle from which, for
a period of at least sixty days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been
altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being
driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include
a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven
under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair
operations.
   N.   Executive Orders: To violate an executive order in furtherance of the
public's health, safety and welfare issued by the Governor of the State of
Illinois pursuant to the authority granted in article 5 of the Illinois
Constitution and in section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act,
20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3305/1, et seq., as amended. (1981 Code; amd.
Ord. 2103, 9-27-1982; Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996; Ord. 2962, 4-8-2002; Ord. 3805, 4-
13-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  5-2-6E of this code.
6-8-3: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
Whenever any declared public nuisance affecting health shall be found by the
village to exist on any private or public property in violation of this code,
which violation injuriously affects or may affect the health of the residents,
the health officer shall have the power and authority to order in writing the
owner or occupant or user thereof, by appropriate action, at the expense of
such owner, occupant or user, to correct and remove such nuisance within twenty
four hours or within such reasonable time as the health officer may order;
provided, that it shall not be necessary in any case for the health officer to
specify in such notice the manner in which the nuisance shall be abated. (1981
Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-8-4: REFUSAL TO OBEY ORDER:
If the person referred to in the preceding section, notified accordingly, shall
refuse or neglect to comply with such order within the time and in the manner
specified, the health officer shall cause the summary abatement of such
nuisance at the expense of the party responsible for or permitting the same,
and he shall be subject to the penalties provided for violations of the
provisions of this chapter. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-8-5: PROCEDURE WHEN RESPONSIBLE PERSON UNKNOWN:
Whenever the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession, charge or control
of premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found is unknown or cannot be
found, the health officer shall proceed to abate such nuisance without notice.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-8-6: VIOLATION NOTICES AND NOTICES TO APPEAR IN COURT:
Whenever the public works director, the building and zoning code inspector, the
electrical inspector, and plumbing inspector, the health department sanitarian,
or any other employee or authorized representative of the village observes or
otherwise becomes aware of a violation of the health and sanitation code or the
building code, he or she may issue a violation notice or a notice to appear in
court to the person committing the violation.
   A.   The violation notice shall be signed by the employee or representative,
shall be in writing and shall include the following:
      1.   The name of the person violating this code and his address, if
known.
      2.   The nature of the offense. (Ord. 2453, 9-23-1991; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-
12-1996)
      3.   A fine in the amount as established in section
 1-4-4 of this code. (Ord. 3031, 5-12-2003)
      4.   After final notice date, appearance of the person in the fourth
municipal district of the circuit court of Cook County at a certain time and
place. If the person so notified fails to appear in court, then a summons or
warrant of arrest shall be issued.
   B.   The notice to appear in court shall include:
      1.   The name of the person violating this code.
      2.   The nature of the offense.
      3.   The date, time and location of the required court appearance.
Such notice shall be issued only by employees or representatives authorized to
do so by the president. (Ord. 2453, 9-23-1991; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
CHAPTER 9
HOMELESS SHELTERS
SECTION:
6-9-1: Interpretation
6-9-2: Certificate Of Occupancy Required
6-9-3: Application
6-9-4: Requirements
6-9-5: Inspection
6-9-1: INTERPRETATION:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements with respect to homeless shelters. Where
this Chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or
premises for homeless shelter purposes than is imposed or required by the
provisions of any other part of this Code, the provisions of this Chapter shall
control. (Ord. 2538, 3-8-1993; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-9-2: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to conduct, keep, manage or
operate, or cause to be operated, a homeless shelter without a certificate of
occupancy therefor. Such certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the
Director of Public Works and there shall be no fee for such certificate of
occupancy. (Ord. 2538, 3-8-1993; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-9-3: APPLICATION:
A written application shall be submitted which includes the following
information:
   A.   Name and address of person responsible for the homeless shelter
operation;
   B.   Address of homeless shelter;
   C.   Written statement and plans indicating compliance with the provisions
of this Chapter as well as those contained in Title 4, Chapter 16 entitled
"Homeless Shelters". (Ord. 2538, 3-8-1993; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
6-9-4: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Environmental Health Protection:
      1.   Toilets, urinals, showers, sinks and cots shall be hygienically
maintained by cleansing with a sanitizing chlorine agent. Cleaning of such
equipment is required to be done once a day in the morning subsequent to the
departure of the evening occupants.
      2.   Toilet articles such as combs, hairbrushes, toothbrushes, washcloths
or cosmetics shall not be shared between guests or workers.
      3.   Shelters shall provide individual soap and clean individual bath
cloths and towels. Common towels are prohibited. Clean bed linen in good repair
shall be provided for each person who is provided accommodations and shall be
changed between persons and as often as is necessary to keep the linen in a
clean and sanitary condition. Clean linen shall be stored and handled in a
sanitary manner. Used linens shall be bagged in a clean sack. To effectively
remove topical debris, vectors and/or organisms, used linens and the sack they
were stored in shall be washed in hot water where a temperature of one hundred
seventy five degrees for at least twenty minutes is maintained.
      4.   Effective measures intended to minimize the presence of rodents,
flies, cockroaches and other insect pests on the premises shall be utilized.
The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or
feeding of insects or rodents.
      5.   All garbage and refuse shall be stored and collected in accordance
with the provisions of Title 6, Chapter 3 of this Code.
      6.   Containers of poisonous or toxic materials necessary for operational
maintenance of the establishment shall be prominently and distinctly labeled
according to law. Insecticides and rodenticides shall be stored and physically
separated and not commingled with detergents, sanitizers, related cleaning or
drying agents and other chemicals. To preclude potential contamination,
poisonous or toxic materials shall not be stored above or intermingled with
food, food utensils and equipment and single-service articles.
      7.   Shelter facilities shall be provided with adequate heat in
accordance with the provisions of Title 4, Chapter 7 of this Code.
      8.   Shelters which provide food to the homeless shall comply with the
following standards:
         a.   Food shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage, free from
adulteration and misbranding and safe for human consumption. Containers of food
shall be stored above the floor, on clean racks, shelves or other clean
surfaces in such a manner as to be protected from splash or other
contamination. Milk of only pasteurized Grade A may be used. Use of home canned
food is prohibited except for jams and jellies.
         b.   Food shall be protected from contamination while being stored,
prepared and served and during transportation. Perishable foods shall be stored
at temperatures that will protect them against spoilage. Potentially hazardous
food shall be maintained at safe temperatures of forty five degrees or below,
or one hundred forty degrees or above, as appropriate, except during necessary
periods of preparation and serving. Frozen food shall be kept at temperatures
that will keep them frozen, except when being thawed for preparation.
Potentially hazardous frozen foods shall be thawed at refrigeration
temperatures or below, quick thawed as part of the cooking process, or thawed
by another method approved by the Health Department. An indicating thermometer
shall be located in each refrigerator. Raw fruits and vegetables shall be
washed thoroughly before use. Stuffing, poultry and pork products shall be
cooked to heat all parts of the food to at least one hundred sixty five degrees
before being served. Salads made of meat, poultry, potatoes, fish, shellfish or
eggs and other potentially hazardous prepared food, shall be prepared from
chilled products with a minimum of manual contact. Portions of food once served
to an individual may not be served again. Laundry facilities shall be separated
from the food preparation areas. Live animals shall be excluded from food
preparation areas.
         c.   No person suspected of infection with a communicable disease that
may be transmitted by food handling may work in a shelter for the homeless.
         d.   If the facility's shelter coordinator suspects that any employee,
or the coordinator himself/herself has a reportable communicable disease, as
defined in the Illinois Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations for
the control of communicable diseases, the coordinator shall notify the Health
Department immediately.
         e.   All shelter food service coordinators shall be certified in food
service sanitation, certification shall be achieved by successfully completing
an examination offered by the Illinois Department of Public Health, as
described in the current edition of the State of Illinois Food Service
Sanitation Rules and Regulations.
         f.   Persons preparing or serving food or washing utensils shall wear
clean outer garments and maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness. They
shall wash their hands thoroughly before starting work and as often as
necessary while working to remove soil and contaminants. After visiting a
toilet room, persons shall wash their hands thoroughly in a lavatory, but never
in the kitchen sink.
         g.   No one, while preparing or serving food, may use tobacco in any
form.
         h.   Utensils shall be kept clean and in good repair.
         i.   Multi-use eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly
cleaned after each use. Facilities needed for the operation of washing, rinsing
and sanitizing shall be provided.
         j.   Pots, pans, and other utensils used in the preparation or serving
of food or drink and all food storage utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned
after each use. Cooking surfaces of equipment, if any, shall be cleaned at
least once each day. Nonfood contact surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at
intervals that will keep them in a clean and sanitary condition.
         k.   Residential sinks and home-style mechanical dishwashing machines
are acceptable facilities for washing multi-use eating and drinking utensils.
Sinks and dishwashing machines shall be supplied with hot and cold potable
running water. For manual cleaning and sanitizing, multi-use eating and
drinking utensils shall be washed in a hot detergent solution that is kept
clean and shall be rinsed free of detergent in clean water.
         l.   Immediately following either manual or mechanical washing of
eating or drinking utensils, and pots, pans and other cooking utensils, these
utensils shall be effectively sanitized by being submerged in a hypochlorite
solution with a chlorine concentration continuously maintained in one hundred
parts per million, or another approved sanitizing solution which shall be used
at the concentration tested and approved by the Health Department. Dish pans
may be used to accomplish the final sanitizing rinse. Utensils shall be air
dried.
         m.   The reuse of single-service utensils is prohibited.
   B.   Personal Health Protection And Communicable Disease Control:
      1.   If a guest upon arrival exhibits medical symptoms such as, but not
limited to, persistent coughing or sneezing, fever, diarrhea, abdominal
cramping and/or skin rashes, such guest shall be isolated from other guests and
shelter workers, and medical intervention shall be immediately secured to
determine if a communicable disease is present. Such actions shall prevent the
potential transmission of a communicable disease in the shelter and protect the
ill guest, who may be immune compromised, from contracting other diseases from
other persons.
      2.   Shelter workers shall be in good health while serving in the shelter
to protect themselves from contracting opportunistic disease and to prevent
possible spread of undiagnosed diseases to others and are subject to the
following requirements:
         a.   Administration of a two-step tuberculosis Mantoux test prior to
serving in the shelter, and every six months thereafter.
         b.   Workers in the childbearing years shall have a history of having
contracted measles and rubella disease, or of having had the measles and
rubella immunization.
      3.   Prevention of contracting a disease or spreading a disease can be
accomplished by vigilant handwashing. Hand soap, paper towel and toilet paper
shall be available in toilet and/or kitchen areas at all times.
   C.   Physical Security:
      1.   Guests shall be screened upon entering a shelter and shall not be
allowed to enter if they:
         a.   Exhibit symptoms of intoxication by alcohol or any illegal drug.
Such symptoms might include but are not limited to: incoherent or slurred
speech, inability to stand or walk unsupported (in the absence of a permanent
disability), inability to stay awake or presence of a strong odor of an alcohol
beverage.
         b.   Possess alcohol or any illegal drugs.
         c.   Possess a firearm, firearm ammunition or any other weapon.
         d.   Are disorderly or abusive.
      2.   Each shelter shall maintain reasonable security rules and procedures
as determined by the shelter's security service coordinator so as not to
negatively impact on the guests, workers or surrounding property owners. The
security service coordinator of each facility shall attend or have attended a
security training program approved by the Chief of Police.
      3.   The Police Department shall be immediately notified whenever any
guest is refused admission to the shelter. (Ord. 2538, 3-8-1993; amd. Ord.
2668, 2-12-1996; Ord. 3789, 12-9-2019)
6-9-5: INSPECTION:
At least once a year after such certificate of occupancy has been issued as
herein provided, or more often if deemed necessary, it shall be the duty of the
Director of Public Works, Fire Chief and the Health Department to authorize the
inspection of said premises and determine that the provisions of this Code are
being complied with. (Ord. 2538, 3-8-1993; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
TITLE 7
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
7-1-1: Composition
7-1-2: Organization; Operation Of Department
7-1-3: Adoption Of Firemen's Pension Fund 1  (Rep. by Ord. 3596, 4-25-2016)
7-1-4: Fire Chief; General Authority
7-1-5: Power To Destroy
7-1-6: Removal Of Property Saved From Fire
7-1-7: Fire Control Measures And Regulations
7-1-8: Ambulance Service, Department To Provide
7-1-9: Vehicle Fires
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 11 of this code.
7-1-1: COMPOSITION:
   A.   Officers: The fire department shall consist of the fire chief, one
deputy chief, five lieutenants and fifteen firefighters, and such additional
members of the fire department as may be, from time to time, provided for by
the president and board. (Ord. 3073, 4-26-2004)
The position of firefighter/paramedic is hereby created in the fire department.
Said position shall be filled by paid on call firefighter/paramedics until such
time as the current regular firefighters become licensed and certified
paramedics able to function in the emergency medical system under which the
fire department operates an advanced life support service.
Effective July 1, 1997, all new firefighters employed by the fire and police
commission shall be licensed paramedics by the Illinois department of public
health and certified to function in the emergency medical system under which
the fire department operates an advanced life support service as a condition of
employment. All firefighters hired after July 1, 1997, shall maintain their
paramedic license and certification as a condition of continued employment.
   B.   Paid On Call Firefighter/Paramedics: There may be appointed by the fire
chief, with approval of the president and board, fourteen or more persons who
shall be designated "paid on call firefighter/paramedics". The paid on call
firefighter/paramedics shall be subject to such rules and regulations as shall
be prescribed by the fire chief and approved by the president and board. (Ord.
2750, 12-8-1997)
7-1-2: ORGANIZATION; OPERATION OF DEPARTMENT:
The fire department shall be organized and shall function as provided by the
rules and regulations, and subject to the control of the fire and police
commissioners 1  and the president and board. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 4 of this code.
7-1-3: ADOPTION OF FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 3596, 4-25-2016)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 2, chapter 11 of this code.
7-1-4: FIRE CHIEF; GENERAL AUTHORITY:
The fire chief 1  shall have sole and absolute control and command over all
persons connected with the fire department while on duty. He shall possess full
power and authority over the organization, government and discipline of the
fire department, and the direction and control of the bureau of fire prevention
pursuant to chapter 2 of this title, and he may prescribe and establish from
time to time such rules and such regulations as he may deem advisable, subject
to the periodic approval of and adoption by the president and board. (Ord.
2115, 4-11-1983)
   A.   Suspend, Remove Officers: The fire chief shall have power to suspend
any fireman from duty for a maximum of five days, but he shall report such
suspension to the village board and to the fire and police commissioners at
their next regular meeting and the reasons for his action. On such report being
made, the fire and police commissioners shall take such action thereon as shall
seem to them just and right in the premises. Any fireman so suspended shall not
be entitled to receive pay while so suspended, nor until he shall be returned
to duty.
   B.   Reports: Five days before the second Monday in every month, the fire
chief shall submit his written report to the village clerk, which shall
include:
      1.   The payroll containing the names of all the personnel of the fire
department and the amount due each of them set opposite each name.
      2.   The number of fires attended, the date of each and its cause, as
nearly as can be ascertained, and all other relevant information pertaining
thereto.
   C.   Custody Of Property: The fire chief shall have the custody of the
engines, hose, trucks, ladders and all other equipment belonging to the fire
department.
   D.   Enter Premises For Investigation: The fire chief shall have power to
enter upon the premises wherein any fire has occurred, if necessary, in order
to investigate the origin of the fire, and shall have power to stop the
construction of any building when the same is being done in a reckless or
careless manner, or in violation of any provisions of this code or any other
ordinance.
   E.   Examine Dangerous Buildings: The fire chief shall examine all buildings
and walls reported dangerous or damaged by fire or accident and shall, when
requested by the president, also examine all buildings under application for
permit to raise, enlarge, alter or rebuild, and may make a report of the
condition thereof to the director of public works. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 3. See title 1, chapter 18 of this code.
7-1-5: POWER TO DESTROY:
The fire chief, or in his absence the officer in command, may direct the
members of the fire department to cut down and remove any building, erection or
fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire. (1981 Code)
7-1-6: REMOVAL OF PROPERTY SAVED FROM FIRE:
No person shall be entitled to take away any property in the possession of the
Fire Department saved from any fire until proof of ownership is made
satisfactory to the Fire Chief or acting officer. (1981 Code)
7-1-7: FIRE CONTROL MEASURES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Authority At Fires And Other Emergencies: The Fire Chief or duly
authorized representative, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other
emergency involving the protection of life and/or property, is empowered to
direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any
suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or
situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable
performance of their duty. The Fire Department official may prohibit any
person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to
be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or
interfere with the operation of the Fire Department. The Fire Department
official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from
hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so
immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the
Fire Department official.
   B.   Interference With Fire Department Operations: It shall be unlawful to
interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct
or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any Fire Department
emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere with,
conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any Fire Department operation.
   C.   Compliance With Orders: A person shall not wilfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Department official or to
interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual.
   D.   Vehicles Crossing Fire Hose: A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled
over any unprotected fire hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any
street, alley, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent
of the Fire Department official in command of said operation.
   E.   Definition Of Authorized Emergency Vehicle: Authorized emergency
vehicles shall be restricted to those which are defined and authorized under
the laws of the State.
   F.   Operation Of Vehicles On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles:
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and
visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the
same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand curb of
the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in
such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have
passed, unless otherwise directed by the Fire Department official or a police
officer.
   G.   Vehicles Following Fire Apparatus: It shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer
than three hundred feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire
alarm, or to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire
apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
   H.   Unlawful Boarding Or Tampering With Fire Department Emergency
Equipment: A person shall not without proper authorization from the Fire Chief
or official in charge of said Fire Department emergency equipment, cling to,
attach themselves to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any Fire
Department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or
sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or to
manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers,
valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or
protective clothing on, or a part of any Fire Department emergency vehicle.
   I.   Damage Or Injury To Fire Department Equipment Or Personnel: It shall be
unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage
or deface, any Fire Department emergency vehicle at any time or to injure, or
attempt or conspire to injure, Fire Department personnel while performing
Departmental duties.
   J.   Emergency Vehicle Operation: The driver of any emergency vehicle, as
defined in subsection E of this Section, shall not sound the siren thereon or
have the front red lights on or disobey any existing traffic regulations,
except when said vehicle is responding to an emergency call or when responding
to, but not upon returning from, a fire. Tactical strategies such as, but not
restricted to, "move-ups" do not constitute an emergency call. The driver of an
emergency vehicle may:
      1.   Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations.
      2.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
      3.   Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not
endanger life or property.
      4.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
      5.   The exemption herein granted to any emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal
by bell, siren or air horn whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the
vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred
feet to the front of such vehicle.
   K.   Blocking Fire Hydrants And Fire Department Connections: It shall be
unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, or restrict the access to any
fire hydrant or any Fire Department connection for the pressurization of fire
suppression systems, including fire hydrants and Fire Department connections
that are located on public or private streets and access lanes, or on private
property. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of
violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the Fire Chief shall
proceed to remove same. Cost incurred in the performance of necessary work
shall be paid from the Village Treasury on certificate of the Fire Chief and
with the approval of the Chief Administrative Official and the legal authority
of the Village shall institute appropriate action for recovery of such costs.
   L.   Hydrant Use Approval: A person shall not use or operate any fire
hydrant intended for use of the Fire Department for fire suppression purposes
unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the Fire Chief and
the Director of Public Works. This subsection shall not apply to the use of
such hydrants by a person employed by and authorized to make such use by the
Department of Public Works.
   M.   Public Water Supply: The Fire Chief shall recommend to the Village
Administrator the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and
the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon public
property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and distribution
pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from service until
approved by the Fire Chief.
   N.   Yard Systems: All new and existing shipyards, oil storage plants,
lumberyards, amusement or exhibition parks, and educational or institutional
complexes and similar occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards,
and which are located more than one hundred fifty feet from a public street or
which require quantities of water beyond the capabilities of the public water
distribution system shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such
fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the Fire
Chief and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted
engineering practices. The Fire Chief shall designate and approve the
installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with
the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire brigade
when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants shall not be
placed into or removed from service until approved by the Fire Chief.
   O.   Maintenance Of Fire Suppression Equipment: A person shall not obstruct,
remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance
required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or
testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by
the Fire Chief. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it
shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was
removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or
equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the Fire Chief.
   P.   Approved Fire Extinguishers: A person shall not sell, trade, loan or
give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved by
the Fire Chief, or which is not in proper working order, or the contents of
which do not meet the requirements of the Fire Chief. The requirements of this
subsection shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or
damaged equipment for junk when said units are permanently disfigured or marked
with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk.
   Q.   Street Obstructions: A person or persons shall not erect, construct,
place, or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal
horses or any other type of obstruction in or on any street, within the
boundaries of the Village. The word "street" as used in this section, shall
mean any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but
not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets
and highways within the boundaries of the Village.
   R.   Impersonating A Firefighter: It shall be unlawful for any person, not a
member of the Fire Department, to impersonate a firefighter. (Ord. 2499, 6-22-
1992)
7-1-8: AMBULANCE SERVICE, DEPARTMENT TO PROVIDE:
   A.   The Fire Department shall provide ambulance and rescue service in cases
of emergency requiring the prehospital care and transportation of persons who
are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless at the time
of the dispatch of a Fire Department vehicle.
   B.   The response area shall be limited to the territory within the
corporate limits of the Village. Service outside said corporate limits shall be
limited to: 1) circumstances governed by contract or mutual aid agreement,
pursuant to this section; and 2) extreme lifesaving necessity.
   C.   Except when personnel or equipment is needed for continued lifesaving
support, the Fire Chief shall assure that neither personnel nor equipment is
unduly delayed in: 1) its dispatch to or departure from the scene, 2)
transportation to and/or from the hospital, or 3) within a hospital.
   D.   The Fire Department shall transport persons only to one of the
following hospitals:
      1.   Oak Park Hospital, Oak Park, Illinois.
      2.   Westlake Hospital, Melrose Park, Illinois.
      3.   West Suburban Hospital, Oak Park, Illinois.
      4.   Loyola Hospital, Maywood, Illinois.
      5.   Hines Hospital, Hines, Illinois.
      6.   Gottlieb Hospital, Melrose Park, Illinois.
      7.   Madden, Maywood, Illinois.
      8.   Riveredge Hospital, Forest Park, Illinois.
Provided, however, that in exceptional circumstances, the Fire Chief may
authorize the transportation of persons to other hospitals that have specialist
physicians or special equipment and facilities not available at the above
mentioned hospitals.
   E.   The fee for ambulance service and prehospital care provided by the
River Forest Fire Department shall be the amount included in the most recent
annual report submitted by the Village for the previous year to the Illinois
Department of Healthcare and Family Services and/or the Federal Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services reflecting the actual cost incurred for
transport of residents and nonresidents, without further action of the Village
President and Board of Trustees. A fee of twenty-five dollars per mile will be
charged for transportation to a medical facility. (Ord. 3691, 4-23-2018; amd.
Ord. 3866, 7-11-2022; Ord. 3890, 4-24-2023)
7-1-9: VEHICLE FIRES:
   A.   Definitions:
   FIRE: Actual fire in or emitting from any portion of the vehicle or trailer,
hot wheel or brake drums and any ignited flammable material leaked from a
defined vehicle onto the ground.
   VEHICLE: Any motorized vehicle or wheeled trailer, including railcars and
locomotives.
   B.   Response: Motor vehicle fires which require a fire service response
also require special training and equipment to be maintained by the Fire
Department to safely and professionally respond to these special incidents.
   C.   User Fees: Users of these fire services shall pay for such services at
a rate as defined in 70 Illinois Compiled Statutes 705/11f, for both resident
and nonresident. These fees shall include, but shall not be limited to, actual
manpower costs for all personnel that respond to the incident (minimum of one
hour) and the cost on a per hour basis for each fire apparatus or other Village
mechanical equipment that responds to the incident (minimum of one hour per
unit), after extinguishment, investigation and cleanup is completed at the
scene. (Ord. 3281, 4-27-2009)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
7-2-1: Fire Limits Established, Regulations (Rep. by Ord. 2317, 11-7-1988)
7-2-2: Definitions
7-2-3: Establishment, Duties Of Bureau Of Fire Prevention
7-2-4: Flammable Liquids, Gas; Storage
7-2-5: Rules And Regulations
7-2-6: New Materials, Processes Or Occupancies; Permits
7-2-7: Fuel
7-2-8: Smoking Prohibited In Certain Places
7-2-9: Hazardous Materials Response And Control
7-2-10: Violation Notices
7-2-11: Permits
7-2-12: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See section
   4-1-6 of this code, for adoption of fire prevention code.
7-2-1: FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED, REGULATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2317, 11-7-1988)
7-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall
be held to mean the village of River Forest. Wherever the words "chief of the
fire department" and "chief of the bureau of fire prevention" are used in the
fire prevention code, they shall be held to mean the fire chief of the village.
(1981 Code)
7-2-3: ESTABLISHMENT, DUTIES OF BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in
the fire department, which bureau is hereby established, and it shall be
operated under the supervision of the fire chief. (1981 Code)
7-2-4: FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS, GAS; STORAGE:
   A.   Storage of flammable liquids in outside, aboveground tanks is
prohibited, except as provided in section F-2805 of the BOCA national fire
prevention code/1990. (Ord. 2499, 6-22-1992)
   B.   Bulk, processing and industrial plants for flammable or combustible
liquids are prohibited within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2236,
1-26-1987)
   C.   The limits referred to in section F-3002.1 of the BOCA national fire
prevention code/1990, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
prohibited, are hereby established as the corporate limits of the village.
Multiple container installations as provided for in section F-3002.2 of the
BOCA national fire prevention code/1990, are prohibited within the corporate
limits of the village. (Ord. 2499, 6-22-1992)
7-2-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The fire official shall have authority as may be necessary in the interest of
public safety, health and general welfare to promulgate rules and regulations,
to interpret and implement the provisions of the fire prevention code, to
secure the intent thereof and to designate requirements applicable because of
climatic or other conditions, but no such rules have the effect of waiving any
fire safety requirements specifically provided in the fire prevention code, or
violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety. (1981 Code)
7-2-6: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES; PERMITS:
The fire chief shall determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which
shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire
prevention code. The fire chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in
his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (1981 Code)
7-2-7: FUEL:
No hot water heater, furnace, stove or other appliance for furnishing heat,
steam, hot air or hot water shall use as fuel gas, compressed gas or liquefied
petroleum gas, other than that furnished by a public utility furnishing this
service under the jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce commission. "Liquefied
petroleum gas" shall mean any material which is composed predominantly of any
of the following hydrocarbons, or mixtures of them: propane, propylene, butane
(normal butane or isobutane) and butylenes. (1981 Code)
7-2-8: SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
It is hereby found and declared that public elevators and large retail stores
where merchandise is displayed and offered for sale attract crowds within
relatively small areas, and that smoking in such places is a menace to public
health, safety and property. It is unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a
lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe in any public elevator or in any retail store
in which more than fifteen persons are employed, or in any gasoline service
station, excluding areas set apart for serving food or beverages, waiting and
rest rooms, executive offices, beauty parlors, and other rooms or areas where
merchandise is not exposed.
Every person found guilty of violating this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars nor
more than five hundred dollars for each offense. (1981 Code)
7-2-9: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE AND CONTROL:
   A.   Hazardous Materials Defined: "Hazardous materials" means any material
or mixture of substance that is toxic, corrosive, flammable, combustible, an
irritant, asphyxiant, a strong sensitizer, or that generates pressure through
decomposition, heat or other means and that may cause substantial personal
injury, illness or property damage during customary or reasonably anticipated
handling or use, or may cause an unreasonable threat of damage to property, the
public health or safety, or the ecological balance of the environment.
"Hazardous materials" includes, but is not limited to, explosives, radioactive
substances, petroleum or petroleum products, poisons, toxic gases, flammable
substances, corrosive substances and pathogens.
   B.   Deposits Prohibited: No person, firm, corporation or entity shall
place, spill, or otherwise deposit, or cause or permit to be placed, spilled or
otherwise deposited, any hazardous materials on any property within the village
of River Forest or in any building, facility or right of way owned by the
village of River Forest, without securing, in advance, proper authorization
therefor from the village of River Forest.
   C.   Abatement: The fire chief, or authorized representative, shall cause
any unauthorized deposit of hazardous materials to be immediately removed.
   D.   Cost Of Abatement: Any person, firm, corporation or entity which causes
or permits to cause any unauthorized deposit, placement or spill of any
hazardous materials shall pay to the village of River Forest all costs of
abatement, mitigation and removal thereof, including all payments made by the
village of River Forest to third parties for services rendered in connection
therewith and for supplies and the use of equipment used in connection
therewith. These costs shall be paid within thirty days of the mailing or the
delivery of an invoice therefor.
   E.   Penalty: Every person found guilty of violating this section shall be
guilty of a petty offense or a misdemeanor and be punished by a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for each
offense. (Ord. 3201, 7-23-2007)
7-2-10: VIOLATION NOTICES:
Whenever an authorized employee of the village observes a violation of this
code, he may issue a violation notice to the person committing the violation.
The violation notice shall be signed by the employee, shall be in writing, and
shall include the following:
   A.   The name of the person violating this code, and his address if known.
   B.   The nature of the offense. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3201, 7-23-2007)
   C.   A fine in the amount as established in section
1-4-4 of this code. (Ord. 3031, 5-12-2003; amd. Ord. 3201, 7-23-2007)
   D.   After the final notice date, appearance of the person in the fourth
municipal district of the circuit court of Cook County at a certain time and
place. If the person so notified fails to appear in court, then a summons or
warrant of arrest shall issue.
Such notice shall be issued only by employees authorized to do so by the
president. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3201, 7-23-2007)
7-2-11: PERMITS:
Permits issued in compliance with section F-106.0 of the BOCA national fire
prevention code/1990 shall not be issued until an annual fee of thirty dollars
has been paid. The permit shall expire annually on April 30. (Ord. 2499, 6-22-
1992; amd. Ord. 3201, 7-23-2007)
7-2-12: PENALTY:
Every person found guilty of violating any provision of the BOCA national fire
prevention code/1990 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished by a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day any
violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue. (Ord. 3201, 7-23-
2007)
CHAPTER 3
FAMILY FALLOUT SHELTERS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Permit Required
7-3-2: Construction Requirements
7-3-3: Use Restrictions
7-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall construct a family fallout shelter upon private property unless
a permit shall have been issued therefor. Application for such permit shall be
made to the Director of Public Works. Such application shall be accompanied by
plans and specifications, subject to approval of the Director of Public Works,
the Coordinator of Emergency Services and Disaster Operations and the Fire
Chief.
7-3-2: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
Family fallout shelters shall comply with the minimum standards set forth by
the office of Civil and Defense Mobilization in a publication designated DOD-
OCD-TR-36-66. No such shelter shall be constructed above yard grade.
7-3-3: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Family fallout shelters shall be used for the sole protection from fallout
during a national emergency, and for no other purpose.
CHAPTER 4
MOTOR FUEL SERVICE STATIONS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definition
7-4-2: License Required
7-4-3: License Fees
7-4-4: License Nontransferable
7-4-5: Fire Prevention Generally
7-4-6: Change of Location
7-4-7: Frontage Consents
7-4-8: Repair of Motor Vehicles
7-4-9: Construction Requirements
7-4-1: DEFINITION:
The term "motor fuel service station" shall mean a structure, building or
premises or any portion thereof where a flammable fluid is stored, housed or
sold for supply to motor vehicles.
7-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a service
station without first having obtained a license therefor, as provided in this
Chapter. The applicant for the license required by this Chapter for the
business of managing, conducting, operating or carrying on a service station
shall conform to the general provisions of Title 3, Chapter 1 of this Code
relating to applications for licenses, and shall specify the location of the
building, structure, premises, enclosure or other place in which it is proposed
to keep such service station, and the capacity in gallons of the containers or
tanks. Every such application shall be approved by the Chief of Police,
Director of Public Works and the Fire Chief before a license shall be issued.
(1981 Code)
7-4-3: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee for each service station shall be as set forth in
Section
3-1-7. For each service station the total storage capacity of all tanks shall
not exceed thirty thousand gallons. (Ord. 2236, 1-26-87)
7-4-4: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
No license granted under the provisions of this Chapter shall be assigned or
transferred to any person other than the licensee named therein to do business
or act under such license. (1981 Code)
7-4-5: FIRE PREVENTION GENERALLY:
   A.   Inspections: All service stations shall be conducted and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of this Title with regard to fire
prevention and storage of flammable liquids, and shall be inspected by the Fire
Chief or his duly authorized representative. (Ord. 2236, 1-26-87)
   B.   Storage of Flammable Liquids: Storage of flammable liquids shall comply
with article 28 of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code/1990. (Ord. 2499, 6-
22-92)
7-4-6: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
If any person licensed under the provisions of this Chapter shall, before the
expiration of such license, desire to change the location of the business
conducted thereunder, the licensee shall notify the Village Clerk and shall
furnish all of the information which is required to be furnished on an original
application for license. Every such application for change of location shall be
approved by the Chief of Police, Director of Public Works and the Fire Chief
before a change in location shall be authorized.
7-4-7: FRONTAGE CONSENTS:
No person shall locate, build, construct or maintain any service station
without obtaining the written consent of Village property owners within a
radius of eight hundred feet of such service station, representing a majority
of the foot frontage within such radius.
No person shall locate, build, construct or maintain any service station within
two hundred feet of any building used as a church or school unless the consent
in writing of the owners thereof be first obtained.
7-4-8: REPAIR OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business of a motor vehicle
repair shop on the premises of any service station unless:
   A.   Such motor vehicle repair work is done within the confines of a
completely enclosed building or structure on such premises.
   B.   A license is first obtained for the carrying on of the business of a
motor vehicle repair shop as provided in Title 3, Chapter 16 of this Code.
(1981 Code)
7-4-9: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
Gasoline service stations and structures of similar business uses, not
including high hazard (H) uses, may be erected of unprotected noncombustible
(Type 2C) construction within the height and area limits of use group B of
Table 501 of the BOCA National Building Code/1990. (Ord. 2499, 6-22-92)
CHAPTER 5
PUBLIC GARAGES
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definition
7-5-2: License Required, Fees
7-5-3: Construction and Maintenance
7-5-4: Periodic Inspections
7-5-1: DEFINITION:
The term "public garage" shall be defined as a building or structure for the
storage or parking of more than four passenger motor vehicles or motor powered
boats, or more than one commercial motor vehicle; and in which provision may be
made for the dispensing of gasoline, oil or similar products for the servicing
of such vehicles. Public garages shall be classified according to their
specific use in one of the following groups:
   Group 1: A public garage in which provision is made for the care, storage,
repair or painting of motor vehicles.
   Group 2: A public garage used exclusively for passenger vehicles that will
accommodate not more than nine passengers.
7-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEES:
No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a public
garage without first having obtained a license therefor. Public garages located
within a residential building and used only for the storage of private vehicles
are excepted from these licensing provisions. Applications for licenses
required by this Section shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk, and
shall state the location of the garage and the number of cars which can be
accommodated therein. The annual fee shall be thirty five dollars. No license
shall be issued until this fee is paid and until the application has been
approved by the Chief of Police, Fire Chief and the Director of Public Works.
The maintenance fee for a commercial driveway need not be paid where the
driveway is for a licensed garage. (1981 Code)
7-5-3: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Construction: All garages shall be constructed in accordance with
section 609.0 of the BOCA National Building Code/1990. (Ord. 2499, 6-22-92)
   B.   Cleanliness; Storage and Disposition of Combustible Materials: All
garages must be kept clean. Grease, oil, paint soaked rags, waste or other
combustible materials of like character shall be kept in approved self-closing
metallic receptacles having metallic legs at least three inches high and
securely braced. One such receptacle shall be provided for each two thousand
five hundred square feet or fractional part thereof of floor area on floors
where workshops are located or vehicles containing volatile inflammable liquids
are housed. Such receptacles shall be safely clear of all combustible
surroundings and their contents shall be safely cleared at least once each day.
Oily and greasy clothing shall be cared for in noncombustible and well- vented
closets, safely located. (Ord. 2236, 1-16-87)
7-5-4: PERIODIC INSPECTIONS:
All public garages shall be inspected by the Fire Chief or his representative
in accordance with section F-107.0 of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code/
1990. (Ord. 2236, 1-16-87; amd. Ord. 2499, 6-22-92)
CHAPTER 6
RIVER FOREST EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
7-6-1: Agency Established
7-6-2: Coordinator
7-6-3: Functions
7-6-4: Service As Mobile Support Team
7-6-5: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
7-6-6: Emergency Action
7-6-7: Compensation
7-6-8: Reimbursement By State
7-6-9: Purchases And Expenditures
7-6-10: Oath
7-6-11: Office
7-6-12: Appropriation, Levy Of Taxes
7-6-1: AGENCY ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created in the village a local emergency services and disaster
agency organization to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage
resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile
action, or from manmade or nature disaster, in accordance with "the Illinois
emergency services and disaster agency act of 1975" 1 .
This emergency services and disaster agency organization shall consist of the
coordinator of the River Forest emergency services and disaster agency and such
additional members as may be selected by the coordinator with the approval of
the president and board. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3305/1.
7-6-2: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator of the River Forest emergency services and disaster agency
organization shall be appointed by the president and board and shall serve
until removed by said board.
The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the emergency services and disaster
agency organization, subject to the direction and control of the president as
provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve of the
coordinator, the president or any person designated by him shall be and act as
coordinator until a new coordinator is appointed as provided in this chapter.
(1981 Code)
7-6-3: FUNCTIONS:
The emergency services and disaster agency organization shall perform such
emergency services and disaster relief functions within the village as shall be
prescribed in and by the state emergency services and disaster agency plan and
program prepared by the governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may
be promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall perform such duties
outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid
agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-
municipality entered into as provided by "the Illinois emergency services and
disaster agency act of 1975". (1981 Code)
7-6-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the emergency services and disaster agency organization
may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the state
director of the Illinois emergency services and disaster agency as provided by
law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the coordinator
of the emergency services and disaster agency organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state director, shall receive
the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the village, while so serving, shall receive from the state
reasonable compensation as provided by law. (1981 Code)
7-6-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The coordinator of the emergency services and disaster agency organization may
negotiate mutual aid agreements with other municipal corporations or political
subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it
has been approved by the board of trustees and by the state director of the
Illinois emergency services and disaster agency. (1981 Code)
7-6-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the governor declared that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or
from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the emergency
services and disaster agency organization to cooperate fully with the state
emergency services and disaster agency and with the governor in the exercise of
emergency powers as provided by law. (1981 Code)
7-6-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the emergency services and disaster agency organization who are paid
employees or officers of the village, if called for training by the state
director of the emergency services and disaster agency, shall receive for the
time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held. Members who are not such village employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the board. (1981
Code)
7-6-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The finance director may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the emergency services and disaster agency organization, as
prescribed by the state director, compensation for services and expenses of
members of a mobile support team while serving outside the village in response
to a call by the governor, or state director of the emergency services and
disaster agency, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to
emergency services and disaster relief activities as provided by law. (Ord.
3362, 2-28-2011)
7-6-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The board may, on recommendation of the village coordinator of the emergency
services and disaster agency, authorize any purchases or contracts necessary to
place the village in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting
from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and, to protect the
public health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance to
victims in the case of such disaster, or from manmade or nature disaster.
In the case of enemy caused or other disaster, the village coordinator of the
emergency services and disaster agency is authorized, on behalf of the village,
to procure such services, supplies, equipment or materials as may be necessary
for such purposes or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to
municipal contracts or obligations, as authorized by "the Illinois emergency
services and disaster agency act of 1975"; provided, that if the board meets at
such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by
that body. (1981 Code)
7-6-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the River Forest emergency
services and disaster agency organization shall, before entering upon such
duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the village
coordinator:
"I,                , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government
of the United States, or of this State, by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the Village of River Forest Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency organization, I will not advocate nor become a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence."
(1981 Code)
7-6-11: OFFICE:
The president is authorized to designate space in the village hall, or
elsewhere as may be provided by the president and board, for the River Forest
emergency services and disaster agency organization as its office. (1981 Code)
7-6-12: APPROPRIATION, LEVY OF TAXES:
The board may make an appropriation for emergency services and disaster agency
purposes, in the manner provided by law, and may levy therefor, a tax of not to
exceed five cents per one hundred dollars of the assessed value of all taxable
property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by "the Illinois emergency
services and disaster agency act of 1975"; however, the amount collectible
under such levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents per capita. (1981
Code)
CHAPTER 7
ILLINOIS FIRE PROTECTION TRAINING ACT
SECTION:
7-7-1: Participation by City
7-7-1: PARTICIPATION BY CITY:
   A.   The Village hereby elects to participate in the programs provided for
in the Illinois Fire Protection Training act.
   B.   Before an individual may commence regular full-time employment as a
firefighter, he must have been certified by the Illinois State Fire Marshal as
a Firefighter II, as having successfully completed an approved training course
as provided in said Act.
   C.   The Firefighter II training must be completed by the trainee within his
probationary period of twelve months, except for volunteers, part-time and
paid-on-call personnel.
   D.   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners are hereby instructed and
directed to make the necessary amendments to the Personnel Rules, the Manual of
Rules of the Village of River Forest Fire Department, and Rules of said Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners in order to require that any person appointed
to the Fire Department of River Forest shall not become a regular member of the
River Forest Fire Department unless he shall complete, pursuant to said
Illinois Fire Protection and Training Act, the approved training course within
twelve months of the date of his initial employment. (Ord. 2104, 9-27-82)
CHAPTER 8
SMOKE DETECTORS IN MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
SECTION:
7-8-1: Owner and Tenant Responsibilities
7-8-2: Location
7-8-3: Interference
7-8-1: OWNER AND TENANT RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Responsibility: It shall be the responsibility of the owners of new and
existing multiple-family dwellings, which are buildings designed for or
occupied by more than one family, within the Village to supply and install
smoke detectors in each such dwelling unit as hereinafter provided. Said smoke
detectors shall be capable of sensing visible or invisible products of
combustion and provide a suitable audible alarm. All smoke detectors required
shall be either battery-powered or 110 volt A.C. and shall comply with the
requirements of the Underwriter's Standard U.L. 217 as written as of the date
of adoption of this Chapter.
The owner shall be responsible for supplying, installing, testing and
maintaining detectors in common areas. It shall be the responsibility of the
tenant to provide and maintain functional batteries for each detector, test and
maintain detectors within dwelling units and to notify the owner or authorized
agent in writing of any deficiencies. The owner shall be responsible for
providing each tenant with written information regarding detector testing and
maintenance.
   B.   New Construction: In any building constructed after the passage of this
Chapter for which smoke detectors are required, smoke detectors shall be
installed at the time of construction and must be 110 volt A.C. hard-wired.
   C.   Compliance: In all multiple-family dwellings, smoke detectors shall be
installed within six months after passage of this Chapter.
7-8-2: LOCATION:
   A.   Sleeping Areas: At least one smoke detector shall be installed to
protect each sleeping area. A sleeping area is defined as the area or areas of
the family living unit in which the bedrooms or sleeping rooms are located.
Where bedrooms or rooms ordinarily used for sleeping are separated by other-use
areas (such as kitchens or living rooms, but not bathrooms or closets), they
shall be considered as separate sleeping areas for the purposes of this
Section.
   B.   Common Areas: At least one smoke detector shall be installed in the
interior common area at each level of the multiple-family dwelling containing
sleeping areas, in such a manner as to assure that rising smoke is not
obstructed in reaching the detector and the detector intercepts rising smoke
before it reaches any sleeping area. In furtherance of this goal, smoke
detectors shall be located on the ceiling not less than four inches (100mm)
from a side wall to the near edge, or if on a sidewall, between four inches and
twelve inches (100mm and 300mm) down from the ceiling to the top of the
detector, and within fifteen feet of all rooms used for sleeping purposes, with
not less than one detector per living level (common areas).
7-8-3: INTERFERENCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove batteries or in any way make
inoperable a smoke detector, except that this provision shall not apply to any
owner or agent in the normal procedure of replacing batteries. (Ord. 2167, 1-
14-85)
CHAPTER 9
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
SECTION:
7-9-1: Officers
7-9-2: Election
7-9-3: Full Time Employment Status Required
7-9-4: Duties And Powers
7-9-5: Terms Of Office
7-9-6: Rules And Regulations
7-9-7: Payment Of Funds (Rep. by Ord. 3362, 2-28-2011)
7-9-8: Budget
7-9-9: Annual Accounting Of Expenditures
7-9-10: Agents To Render Account, Pay Tax
7-9-11: Business In Default
7-9-12: Failure To Make Report
7-9-1: OFFICERS:
There shall be elected by the regular full time members of the fire department
certain officers of that department. These officers shall include the
following:
   A.   President;
   B.   Vice president;
   C.   Secretary;
   D.   Treasurer. (Ord. 2400, 8-13-1990)
7-9-2: ELECTION:
The election for said officers shall take place annually during the final
quarter of each calendar year. Any officer elected after the passage of this
chapter shall serve up to and including December 31, 1990. The term of each
officer, thereafter, shall be from January 1 through December 31 of the same
calendar year. (Ord. 2400, 8-13-1990)
7-9-3: FULL TIME EMPLOYMENT STATUS REQUIRED:
The president, vice president, secretary and treasurer shall be regular, full
time members of the fire department at the time of their election and during
the entire time each may serve as an officer. However, no probationary member
of the department may hold such office during the time of his probation. (Ord.
2400, 8-13-1990)
7-9-4: DUTIES AND POWERS:
   A.   President: The president shall preside at all meetings of the officers.
The president shall have such other powers as he may be given from time to time
by action of the board of trustees, consistent with the Illinois municipal
code.
   B.   Vice President: The vice president shall carry out the duties of the
president during the absence or inability of the president to perform such
duties and shall carry out such other functions as are assigned from time to
time by the fire department president or the board of trustees.
   C.   Secretary: The secretary shall take minutes at any and all meetings of
the officers. The secretary shall keep these minutes in a manner identical to
the manner in which village board minutes are kept. The secretary shall also
perform any other such duties and functions as are assigned from time to time
by the fire department president or the board of trustees.
   D.   Treasurer: The treasurer shall:
      1.   Have charge and custody of and be responsible for all funds
collected by the village from the foreign fire insurance company fees as
described in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-2;
      2.   Deposit all such monies in the name of the village fire department
in such banks, savings and loan associations or other depositories as shall be
selected by the board of trustees;
      3.   Invest said funds as are not immediately required in such securities
as the board of trustees shall specifically or generally select from time to
time;
      4.   Maintain the financial books and records of the department.
Provided, however, that all investments of the foreign fire insurance company's
fees shall be made only in those securities which may be purchased by Illinois
nonhome rule municipalities under the provisions of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes;
      5.   In general, perform all duties incident to the office of treasurer
and such other duties as, from time to time, may be assigned to him by the fire
department president or the board of trustees;
      6.   The treasurer of the fire department shall give a sufficient bond to
the village. This bond shall be approved by the village president, conditioned
upon the faithful performance by the treasurer of his or her duties under this
chapter and the rules and regulations provided herein; said bond shall be paid
for from the funds collected from the foreign fire insurance company fees;
      7.   The treasurer of the fire department shall receive the foreign fire
insurance company fees so paid and shall pay out the money upon the order of
the fire department officers for the maintenance, use and benefit of the
department. (Ord. 2400, 8-13-1990)
7-9-5: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The president, vice president, secretary and treasurer shall serve for one year
terms, and shall be elected by the regular, full time members of the fire
department. The first election for said officers shall take place within thirty
days of the passage of this chapter. No officer shall serve in the same office
for more than two consecutive full year terms. (Ord. 2400, 8-13-1990)
7-9-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The officers shall make all needful rules and regulations with respect to the
management of the foreign fire insurance company fees to be paid to the
treasurer. All such rules and regulations promulgated by the fire department
officers must be passed by the affirmative vote of at least three of the four
presiding officers. All rules and regulations promulgated by the fire
department officers must be approved by the board of trustees in the same
manner as a village ordinance must be passed. (Ord. 2400, 8-13-1990)
7-9-7: PAYMENT OF FUNDS:
(Rep. by Ord. 3362, 2-28-2011)
7-9-8: BUDGET:
   A.   The fire department officers shall, by December 31 of each year prior
to the start of each fiscal year adopt a budget for the collection and payment
of the foreign fire insurance company fees. The budget shall be approved by the
board of trustees.
   B.   The budget referred to in subsection A of this section may be amended
at any time by the unanimous vote of the fire department officers and a
majority vote of the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2400, 8-13-1990)
7-9-9: ANNUAL ACCOUNTING OF EXPENDITURES:
The fire department officers shall, by May 31 of each year, provide to the
board of trustees an annual accounting of the expenditures made by the
department during the previous fiscal year from the foreign fire insurance
company fees. (Ord. 2400, 8-13-1990)
7-9-10: AGENTS TO RENDER ACCOUNT, PAY TAX:
Every person acting as agent or otherwise for or upon behalf of such
corporation, company or association shall, on or before July 15 of each and
every year, render to the treasurer of the foreign fire insurance board a full,
true and just account verified by oath, of all the premiums which, during the
year ending July 1 of each year, shall have been received by him/her or any
other person for him/her on behalf of such corporation, company or association,
and shall fully and specifically set out in said report the amount received as
premiums for fire insurance.
The said agent or agents shall also, at the time of the making of the above
mentioned report, pay to the secretary of the fire protection district two
percent of the gross receipts of such corporation, company or association
obtained as premiums for effecting fire insurance in the village, as herein
specified.
If this account is not rendered on or before the fifteenth day of July of each
year, or if the sum due remains unpaid after that day, it shall be unlawful for
any corporation, company, or association, so in default, to transact any
business in the municipality or fire protection district until the sum due has
been fully paid. But this provision shall not relieve any corporation, company,
or association from the payment of any loss upon any risk that may be taken in
violation of this requirement.
The amount of this tax or license fee may be recovered from the corporation,
company, or association which owes it, or from its agent, by an action in the
name and for the use of the village as for money had and received. If the
village initiates an action to recover monies owed hereunder, the corporation,
the company, or association which is found liable to pay the monies shall also
be liable for the full amount of the village's costs and attorney fees in
bringing the action. (Ord. 3362, 2-28-2011)
7-9-11: BUSINESS IN DEFAULT:
If such account be not rendered on or before the day herein designated for that
purpose, or if the above mentioned rates for said tax or license fee shall
remain unpaid after that day, it shall be unlawful for any such corporation,
company or association to transact any business of fire insurance in the
village until the requirements hereof have been fully complied with;
nevertheless this provision shall in no way affect the validity of any risk
that may be taken in violation thereof between such corporation, company or
association and the person so insured. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996;
Ord. 3416, 4-9-2012)
7-9-12: FAILURE TO MAKE REPORT:
If any such corporation, company or association shall fail to render the
account or report herein designated, by the day required herein, or if the
above mentioned rates as a tax or license fee shall remain unpaid after July
15, every such corporation, company or association shall forfeit and pay to the
village the sum of five hundred dollars upon conviction, for each and every
offense, and in addition to such penalty, the village shall recover in any
action in its name, for its use against such corporation, company or
association, so failing to make such report or pay such license fee or tax, the
full amount of said license fee or tax which would be due under the provisions
hereof. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996; Ord. 3416, 4-9-2012)
TITLE 8
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
8-1-1: Composition Of Department
8-1-2: Oath And Bonds Of Members
8-1-3: Compensation
8-1-4: Police Pension Fund 1  (Rep. by Ord. 3596, 4-25-2016)
8-1-5: General Duties Of Police
8-1-6: Additional Regulations
8-1-7: Authority To Arrest
8-1-8: Duty To Aid Police
8-1-9: Offenses Against Peace Officers
8-1-10: Special Police, Auxiliary Police
8-1-11: Ordinance Enforcement Officer
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 10 of this code.
8-1-1: COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT:
The police department of the village of River Forest shall consist of the chief
of police and up to two deputy chiefs, one lieutenant, seven sergeants, twenty
two police officers, one ordinance enforcement officer, two clerk/typists, and
such additional members of the police department as may be from time to time
provided for by the president and board. (Ord. 3209, 10-9-2007)
8-1-2: OATH AND BONDS OF MEMBERS:
   A.   Before entering upon the duties as policemen, all members of the police
department shall take and subscribe an oath of office in the following form:
I do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States
and of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties
of the office of policeman of the Village of River Forest to the best of my
ability.
Such oath shall be subscribed and sworn to before some officer authorized by
the laws of this state to administer oaths and the certificates thereof shall
be filed in the office of the village clerk.
   B.   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, each
officer shall execute a bond to the village in the amount to be prescribed by
the president and board at the time of his appointment. (1981 Code)
8-1-3: COMPENSATION:
Each member of the police department shall receive such compensation as the
president and board shall, from time to time, determine. (1981 Code)
8-1-4: POLICE PENSION FUND 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 3596, 4-25-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 10 of this code.
8-1-5: GENERAL DUTIES OF POLICE:
   A.   In General: The several members of the police department of the
village, including the chief of police, shall devote their whole time and
attention to the discharge of their duties, according to the provisions of this
code and other ordinances, and the rules and regulations which the president
and board may, from time to time, adopt and prescribe. It shall be the duty of
each member of the police department of the village to preserve order, peace
and quiet, and enforce the provisions of this code and other laws and
ordinances, throughout the village.
   B.   Reports: The several members of the police department shall report to
the chief of police all cases where buildings may be in the process of erection
prior to the issuance of a permit, all cases of unlawful obstruction of streets
and alleys and other public grounds, all cases of contagious diseases, all
cases of unsanitary conditions, all thefts and robberies and other infractions
of the provisions of this code and other laws and ordinances, and all
accidents. The chief of police shall record such reports in a record to be
provided for such purpose. He shall immediately report in writing to the
department having control of the respective matters all such defective,
unsanitary and illegal conditions, and shall make a complete and full report
thereof to the president and board at the first regular meeting of said board
thereafter.
   C.   Record Of Persons Arrested: It shall be the duty of the chief of police
to keep a record of the names of all persons arrested or committed to the
village jail or county jail in a book to be provided for such purpose. Such
record shall show the date of arrest or committal, the number of days
imprisoned, the amount of the fine, when and to whom paid, and the date of
discharge or other disposition of such person.
   D.   Powers Relative To Service And Execution Of Warrants And Other Legal
Processes: The chief of police and all policemen shall have power and authority
within the village to serve and execute all warrants, writs and other processes
for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with an offense, crime
or misdemeanor or held for examination or trial for the violation of any
provision of this code or other law or ordinance. They shall also have power
and authority within the village to serve and execute any and all writs,
warrants, summons or other processes, or in assisting the same. Such policemen
shall have and possess all the powers and authority conferred on constables at
common law and by law.
   E.   Duty Of Arresting Officers To Appear As Witnesses: All officers making
arrests shall attend as witnesses before the court where the trial may be had,
and shall procure all necessary evidence in their power and furnish a list of
witnesses to the court. No village officer shall be entitled to any witness
fees to be taxed against the village in any action for the violation of an
ordinance where the village is plaintiff.
   F.   Aid To Fire Department: It shall be the duty of the police department
to aid the fire department by giving alarms in case of fire and clearing the
streets or grounds in the immediate vicinity of the fire, so that the members
of the fire department shall not be hindered or obstructed in the performance
of their duties. (1981 Code)
8-1-6: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
The members of the police department shall, in addition to other provisions of
this code, be subject to the following:
   A.   The general administration and control of the police department is
vested in the chief of police, who shall be responsible for the government,
efficiency and general good conduct of the department. (1981 Code)
   B.   The chief of police, in the exercise of his duties, shall have the
power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the
members and employees of the department, subject to the periodic approval of
and adoption by the president and board. (Ord. 2115, 4-11-1983)
   C.   The chief of police shall have full power and authority in his
discretion to reprimand or suspend any member of the police department without
pay for a period of not to exceed five days. However, if any person so
suspended shall feel aggrieved, he may apply to the board of fire and police
commissioners for a hearing 1 .
   D.   The chief of police shall cause to be kept such books and records as
may be specifically provided by ordinance and the Illinois state statutes, and
shall report to the board at the end of each month the number of arrests made
during such month, together with the causes of arrest, and shall give such
other information as the village board may require from time to time. He shall
also cause to be made and kept such other books and records of the proceedings
of the department as he may deem necessary.
   E.   The chief of police shall file an annual report with the village clerk
to be presented at the may meeting of the board, covering the fiscal year, as
to all arrests, lists of violation, amounts of fines, including the amount of
property stolen and recovered by the department, and such other information as
may be requested by the board.
   F.   The chief of police shall have the custody and control of all books,
records, machines, tools, apparatus or equipment of every kind necessary for
the use of the department.
   G.   In the absence of the chief of police from the village, or in case of
his inability to act, the acting chief of police shall have and be permitted in
such case to exercise the powers and duties and discretions as hereinbefore
stated. Such orders shall not, except in the case of extreme emergency, be
countermanded or set aside.
   H.   No member of the police department of the village shall, for his own
benefit, share in any present, gift or emolument for police services without
the consent of the chief of police and the president and board.
   I.   Every member of the police department shall have a suitable badge, star
and gun to be furnished by the village, and any member who shall destroy the
same shall be required to pay the cost of replacement. Whenever any member of
the department shall leave, resign, be suspended or discharged, he shall
immediately deliver them to the chief of police.
   J.   The provisions of 705 Illinois Compiled Statutes 405/1-1 et seq.
(Juvenile court act) are adopted by reference. The chief of police may appoint
one or more full time members of the police department as juvenile officers.
(1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 4 of this code.
8-1-7: AUTHORITY TO ARREST:
The several members of the police department of the village are hereby
severally authorized to arrest, with or without process, or on view, any person
who shall break the peace or is found violating any ordinance or any criminal
law, and to take such person before the proper official, or if necessary,
detain such person in custody overnight or Sunday in the village jail, or any
other safe place, until he can be brought before the proper court for trial.
(1981 Code)
8-1-8: DUTY TO AID POLICE:
It shall be the duty of all persons, when called upon by a policeman, to
promptly aid and assist him in the discharge of his duties. (1981 Code)
8-1-9: OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE OFFICERS:
   A.   Resisting Arrest; Hindering Police; Aiding In Escape: It shall be
unlawful for any person to resist any member of the police department of the
village in the discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder or
prevent any policeman from discharging his duty, or to endeavor so to do, and
to assist in any manner any person in custody of any policeman to escape or
attempt to escape from such custody.
   B.   Impersonating Police 1 : It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely
represent himself or assume or pretend to be a policeman of the village or a
member of the police department, or with the intent to deceive, use or wear in
public or imitate any of the signs, signals or devices adopted and used by the
police department, or to wear in public the uniform or badge adopted or used as
the police uniform or badge of the village, or any other which shall be similar
in appearance. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-6-15  of this code.
8-1-10: SPECIAL POLICE, AUXILIARY POLICE:
   A.   Salaried Firemen: All regularly salaried members of the fire department
of the village are hereby constituted conservators of the peace in accordance
with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-9-4. Same shall not, however, receive
any additional compensation for such services.
   B.   Special Police: With the approval of the president and board, the chief
of police may, on the application of any person showing the necessity therefor,
appoint any number of regular police officers or special police to do special
duty at any fixed place within the village at the expense of the person or
persons by whom the application was made.
   C.   Auxiliary Police: The provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-
6-5, are adopted by reference. All regularly salaried administrative service
officers are hereby constituted auxiliary police officers. They shall not,
however, receive any additional compensation for such services. (1981 Code)
8-1-11: ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
   A.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the ordinance enforcement officer to
issue written parking, rubbish and sign violation notices as may be from time
to time prescribed by the chief of police. In addition, the ordinance
enforcement officer shall perform other related work as required involving the
enforcement of various sections of this code.
   B.   Limitations: The ordinance enforcement officer shall not have the
general power or authority of a police officer and shall be strictly limited to
the exercise and performance of the duties provided in subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 2166, 1-14-1985)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMALS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Keeping Of Certain Animals Prohibited
8-2-2: Cruelty To Animals
8-2-3: Dangerous Animals
8-2-1: KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall keep or allow to be kept upon or about the premises or upon any
vacant property or public street within the Village any cattle, horses, swine,
sheep, goats, ducks, geese, chickens or other poultry. (1981 Code)
8-2-2: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall cruelly treat in any way any animal in the Village. Any person
who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this section. (1981 Code)
8-2-3: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor in the Village any bear, lion, wildcat,
catamount, orangutan, chimpanzee, tiger, poisonous or otherwise dangerous
reptile, or any other animal which is ferae naturae or wild by nature in the
eyes of the law and dangerous to mankind. Bees kept pursuant to a permit issued
by the Village under chapter 14 of this title, and kept in compliance with that
chapter, shall not be considered ferae naturae or wild for purposes of this
section.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any vicious animal in the
Village or any animal which is dangerous because of a propensity to injure
persons. Bees kept pursuant to a permit issued by the Village under chapter 14
of this title, and kept in compliance with that chapter, shall not be
considered dangerous because of a propensity to injure persons for purposes of
this section, however, if the bees are vicious, even if kept in compliance with
chapter 14 of this title, the bees may be declared vicious and unlawful. (Ord.
3666, 11-27-2017)
CHAPTER 3
DOG CONTROL
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definition
8-3-2: License Required
8-3-3: License Fees And Tags
8-3-4: Inoculation Certificate Required
8-3-5: Limitation On Number Of Dogs Kept
8-3-6: Dogs Running At Large; Leash Requirements
8-3-7: Impounding Regulations
8-3-8: Redemption Of Impounded Dogs
8-3-9: Dogs Damaging Property
8-3-10: Female Dogs In Heat
8-3-11: Dangerous Dogs
8-3-12: Biting Dogs
8-3-13: Rabies
8-3-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, "owner" means a person having a right of
property in a dog, or who keeps or harbors a dog, or who has a dog in his care,
or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about
any premises occupied by him. (1981 Code)
8-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be the owner of a dog within the village
unless he shall procure a license therefor. Said license shall be obtained on
or before May 1 in each year, except for a dog less than four months old, in
which case a license shall be procured when the dog attains such age. If a dog
is acquired after May 1, a license shall be obtained within five days after
acquisition or when the dog is four months old, whichever event is the later.
(1981 Code)
8-3-3: LICENSE FEES AND TAGS:
Every owner of a dog within the village shall pay an annual license fee of ten
dollars for each dog and shall receive from the village clerk a metal tag
bearing the words "River Forest Dog Tag", as well as the license number and the
year issued, stamped thereon. Any owner of a licensed dog whose license tag has
been lost may obtain a replacement tag by payment of a fee of one dollar to the
village clerk. (Ord. 3229, 4-14-2008)
Every owner of a dog within the village shall keep such license tag securely
attached to a collar or harness fastened around the neck or body of such dog at
all times when said dog is off the premises of the licensed owner. It shall be
unlawful for any person, other than the owner, his agent or a member of the
police department, to remove a license tag from a dog. (1981 Code)
8-3-4: INOCULATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
A certificate of inoculation against rabies for each dog, issued by the county
rabies inspector or by his deputy, or by a licensed veterinarian, shall be
submitted to the village clerk for inspection at the time of application for
license. No license shall be issued for any dog unless such inoculation
certificate is valid. (1981 Code)
8-3-5: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS KEPT:
No person shall permit more than two dogs to be or remain in or about any
single-family residence, building or lot, nor more than one dog in any single-
family unit in any multiple housing building within the village under his
control at any one time. This section applies only to dogs required to be
licensed under this chapter. (1981 Code)
8-3-6: DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE; LEASH REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a dog, except when on a leash and controlled
by the owner or his agent, to use or be upon any public street, sidewalk,
parkway, public area or unenclosed premises within the village.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any dog, even though on leash, to be or enter
upon any public hall, restaurant, confectionery shop, office, store, grocery or
any other store for the sale of food, except any store for the sale of animal
pets, anywhere within the village during the time that any of said places are
open for use by the public.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any dog, even though on a leash, to go or be
upon any school premises or public playground within the village, or upon a
path or sidewalk extending through or within any school premises or public
playground within the village.
   D.   No leash shall be longer than eight feet in length.
   E.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs leading blind
persons. (1981 Code)
8-3-7: IMPOUNDING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Unlicensed Dogs: All unlicensed dogs within the limits of the village
in violation of this chapter shall be impounded.
   B.   Capture And Impounding: Any dog found running at large in the village
shall be deemed and considered to be a public nuisance. It shall be the duty of
the police department to impound any such dog. The police department shall,
immediately upon impounding of any dog, make a complete registry, entering the
breed, color and sex of such dog, and whether licensed, if known; and, if
licensed, he shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of
the license tag, if known, and if bearing an inoculation tag, the number of
such tag shall be recorded. When any licensed dog shall be impounded, the
police department shall forthwith give notice in person or by mail or telephone
to the owner of such licensed dog, informing such owner of the impounding of
said dog.
   C.   Cost Of Impounding Dogs: The cost of keeping impounded dogs and the
customary charge for same shall be fair and reasonable. (1981 Code)
8-3-8: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS:
   A.   Licensed Dogs: If any dog for which the license fee for the current
year has been paid is impounded or taken up for being at large without a collar
or harness and license tag, the owner, in order to redeem such dog, shall be
required by satisfactory proof to affirm that such dog was so licensed and that
the collar or harness with tag attached had been placed and kept about the body
of such dog, but that such collar or harness and tag was lost or taken from
such dog; and the owner shall be required to pay a fee of thirty dollars for
the taking up or impounding of such dog and the payment of the cost of keeping
such dog while impounded. If, after five days from the time of impounding, all
normal attempts to contact the owner of such dog have failed, such dog may be
disposed of by a licensed veterinarian engaged by the police department.
   B.   Unlicensed Dogs: Any unlicensed dog which shall have been impounded may
be redeemed by the owner of such dog on payment of the sum of thirty dollars as
a fee for taking up or impounding such dog, plus the annual license fee
provided herein, and the cost of keeping such dog while impounded. If any such
dog be not redeemed within three days after being impounded, such dog may be
disposed of by a licensed veterinarian engaged by the police department. (Ord.
3226, 4-14-2008)
8-3-9: DOGS DAMAGING PROPERTY:
No person shall, without the consent of the owner of the property concerned,
permit any dog in his custody or control to enter upon the premises of another
within the village, or permit any dog in his custody to injure or carry away
any vegetable, plant, fruit, shrub, tree, flower or other thing which may be on
said premises or which may be planted or seeded therein. (1981 Code)
8-3-10: FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT:
The owner of any female dog in heat shall keep the same confined or on leash at
all times. (1981 Code)
8-3-11: DANGEROUS DOGS:
A dangerous dog is hereby defined to be a dog which shall cause annoyance or
reasonable fear of bodily injury to any person by attacking or threatening to
attack such person. Any such dog is hereby declared a nuisance, and the owner
of any dangerous dog shall keep the same confined in a secure enclosure or on
leash controlled by the owner at all times. (1981 Code)
8-3-12: BITING DOGS:
A biting dog is hereby defined to be a dog which has bitten, scratched or
otherwise injured any person so as to cause abrasion to the skin of such
person. Whenever complaint shall be made, under oath, and filed with the police
department setting forth that a dog has bitten, scratched or otherwise injured
a person within the village, so as to cause an abrasion of the skin, and that
the person so injured was not at the time unlawfully trespassing upon the
person or property of the owner of such dog, process shall issue and be served
upon the owner of such dog.
If the defendant is found guilty, he shall be fined for said offenses as
provided for under section
1-4-1 of this code, or the court may stay execution or issuance of a mittimus
and continue the cause for a further day and order the defendant to have the
dog disposed of within the time for which the case is continued. Upon
satisfactory showing to the court that said dog has been disposed of, the court
may, in its discretion, dismiss the action. (1981 Code)
8-3-13: RABIES:
The provisions of state statute, chapter 8, paragraphs 351 et seq., (animal
control act) and Cook County animal and rabies control ordinance, January 3,
1977, are adopted by reference. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 4
CAT CONTROL
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definition
8-4-2: License Required
8-4-3: License Fees And Tags
8-4-4: Inoculation Certificate Required
8-4-5: Limitation On Number Of Cats Kept
8-4-6: Female Cats In Heat
8-4-7: Capture And Impounding
8-4-8: Redemption Or Disposal Of Cats
8-4-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, "owner" means a person having a right of
property in a cat, or who keeps or harbors a cat, or who has a cat in his care,
or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about
any premises occupied by him. (1981 Code)
8-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be the owner of a cat within the village
unless he shall procure a license therefor. Said license shall be obtained on
or before May 1 in each year, except for a cat less than four months old, in
which case a license shall be procured when the cat attains such age. If a cat
is acquired after May 1, a license shall be obtained within five days after
acquisition or when the cat is four months old, whichever event is the later.
(1981 Code)
8-4-3: LICENSE FEES AND TAGS:
Every owner of a cat within the village shall pay an annual license fee of ten
dollars for each cat and shall receive from the village clerk a metal tag
bearing the words "River Forest Cat Tag", as well as the license number and the
year issued, stamped thereon. Any owner of a licensed cat whose license tag has
been lost may obtain a replacement tag by payment of a fee of one dollar to the
village clerk. (Ord. 3228, 4-14-2008)
Every owner of a cat within the village shall keep such license tag securely
attached to a collar or harness fastened around the neck or body of such cat at
all times when said cat is off the premises of the licensed owner. It shall be
unlawful for any person, other than the owner, his agent or a member of the
police department, to remove a license tag from a cat. (1981 Code)
8-4-4: INOCULATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
A certification of inoculation against rabies for each cat issued by the county
rabies inspector or by his deputy, or by a licensed veterinarian, shall be
submitted to the village clerk for inspection at the time of application for
license. No license shall be issued for any cat unless such inoculation
certificate is valid. (1981 Code)
8-4-5: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF CATS KEPT:
No person shall permit more than two cats to be or remain in or about any
single-family residence, building or lot, nor more than one cat in any single-
family unit in any multiple housing building within the village under his
control at any one time. This section applies only to cats required to be
licensed under this chapter. (1981 Code)
8-4-6: FEMALE CATS IN HEAT:
The owner or keeper of any female cat who permits such cat, while in heat, to
be upon any sidewalk, street, parkway, alley or other public place, or upon any
private premises other than the premises of the owner or keeper or, if
outdoors, upon any unfenced part of the premises of the owner or keeper which
is closer to a sidewalk, street, parkway, alley or other public place than ten
feet shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The court may, upon conviction, order
such cat committed to a kennel at the owner's expense until such period of heat
shall terminate. (1981 Code)
8-4-7: CAPTURE AND IMPOUNDING:
Any cat which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood, or is found
running at large, or is found abandoned in the village shall be deemed and
considered to be a public nuisance. The police department shall, immediately
upon impounding any such cat, register the color and sex of such cat, and if
bearing an inoculation tag, the number of such tag shall be recorded. When any
such cat shall be impounded, the police department shall take reasonable steps
to give notice by mail or by telephone to the owner of such cat, informing such
owner of the impounding of his cat. (1981 Code)
8-4-8: REDEMPTION OR DISPOSAL OF CATS:
If any impounded cat is redeemed by the owner or keeper thereof, an impounding
fee of thirty dollars, plus the cost of keeping such cat while impounded, shall
be paid. If any licensed impounded cat be not redeemed within five days, the
cat may be disposed of by a licensed veterinarian engaged by the police
department. If any such unlicensed cat be not redeemed within three days after
being impounded, such cat may be disposed of by a licensed veterinarian engaged
by the police department. Anything in this section to the contrary
notwithstanding, no cat suspected of having rabies shall be released within
less than ten days following its impounding. (Ord. 3227, 4-14-2008)
CHAPTER 5
RIVER FOREST LIQUOR CONTROL ORDINANCE
SECTION:
8-5-1: Title
8-5-2: Purpose
8-5-3: Definitions
8-5-4: Local Liquor Commissioner
8-5-5: Village Administrator As Chief Administrative Officer
8-5-6: Applicability Of Other Provisions
8-5-7: Local Liquor License Required
8-5-8: Application
8-5-9: Persons, Corporations, Partnerships, And/Or Limited Liability Companies
Ineligible For Local Liquor License
8-5-10: Processing Of Applications
8-5-11: Classification Of Local Liquor Licenses
8-5-12: Term; Fees
8-5-13: Limitation On Number Of Local Liquor Licenses
8-5-14: Renewal; Effect Of Failure To Renew
8-5-15: Change In Personnel
8-5-16: Change Of Location
8-5-17: Insurance Required
8-5-18: Cessation Of Business
8-5-19: Local Liquor License A Personal Privilege; Not To Be Subject To
Attachment, Transfer, Devolution
8-5-20: Records
8-5-21: Display Of Local Liquor License
8-5-22: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
8-5-23: Notification And Application Of New Managers
8-5-24: Hours Of Business And Outdoor Consumption
8-5-25: Prohibited Activities On Licensed Premises
8-5-26: Fine, Suspension, Revocation, And Nonrenewal Of Local Liquor License
Generally; Appeal
8-5-27: After Revocation Of Local Liquor License
8-5-28: Violation Of Retailers' Occupation Tax Act
8-5-29: Signs
8-5-30: Sale To Certain Persons Prohibited
8-5-31: Evidence Of Age Of Person Attempting To Purchase Or Receive Alcoholic
Liquor
8-5-32: Required Warning Sign
8-5-33: Employment Of Underaged Persons
8-5-34: Unlawful Possession And Consumption By Persons Under Age
8-5-35: Parental Responsibility
8-5-36: Responsibility Of The Owner Or Occupant Of Premises
8-5-37: General
8-5-38: Method Of Notice
8-5-1: TITLE:
The provisions of this chapter may be cited and referred to as the RIVER FOREST
LIQUOR CONTROL ORDINANCE. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Purpose: It is the policy of the village to regulate the sale of
alcoholic liquor as set forth in this chapter. Further, it is the policy of the
village to limit the purchase, consumption, or possession of alcoholic liquor
to persons of the age of twenty one years or older in order to prevent
intoxication, disorderly conduct, trespasses, unruly disturbances at public or
private assemblies, traffic accidents, and similar conduct which often result
from the purchase, consumption, or possession of alcoholic liquor by persons
under the lawful age.
   B.   Construction Of Chapter: This chapter shall be liberally construed so
that the public health, safety, and welfare shall be protected and temperance
in the consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be fostered and promoted by sound
and careful control and regulation of the sale, consumption, and distribution
of alcoholic liquors. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
   ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. Alcohol does not include denatured alcohol or wood
alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
   APPLICANT: An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, or not for profit organization which seeks to be licensed under the
provisions of this chapter. In the case of a "not for profit organization"
defined herein, applicant shall mean the officers, directors and person
operating as manager, and in the case of a corporation, it shall mean the
officers, directors, all persons owning directly or beneficially more than five
percent of the stock of such corporation and the person operating as manager of
the premises. In the case of a partnership, applicant shall mean all of the
partners and the person operating as manager.
   HOTEL: Any building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers
and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five
or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and
having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests,
such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same
building or buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings,
structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity.
   LICENSEE: An individual, partnership, corporation, or not for profit
organization which obtains a local liquor license pursuant to this chapter.
   NOT FOR PROFIT ORGANIZATION: An entity organized or operating under the laws
of this state as a not for profit institution which shall have been operated
solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors.
   ORIGINAL CONTAINER: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, barrel, keg, or other
receptacle or container whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled
by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and convey any alcoholic
liquor.
   RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually
and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
   SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and includes and
means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent,
servant or employee. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012; amd. Ord. 3578, 11-23-2015)
8-5-4: LOCAL LIQUOR COMMISSIONER:
   A.   The President of the Village shall serve as the Local Liquor
Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the River Forest
Liquor Control Ordinance and of such other ordinances relating to alcoholic
liquor as may be, from time to time, enacted by the Village Board.
   B.   The Local Liquor Commissioner, or his/her designee(s), shall have the
following powers and duties with respect to liquor licenses issued by the
Village:
      1.   To grant or to suspend for not more than thirty days or to revoke
for cause, all local liquor licenses issued to persons or entities for sale of
alcoholic liquor on premises within the Village.
      2.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer or other Village
employee designated by the Village Administrator to enter, at any time, upon
the premises of a licensee to determine whether any of the provisions of the
State law or Village ordinance or any rules or regulations adopted by the
Village or by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission have been, or are being,
violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in
connection therewith.
      3.   To receive complaints from any citizen that any provision of the
State law or of this chapter has been, or is being, violated and to act upon
any such complaints in the manner provided by law.
      4.   To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the
Village Treasurer.
      5.   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath:
         a.   Any applicant for a local liquor license or for a renewal
thereof; or
         b.   Any licensee upon whom notice of possible revocation, suspension
or fine has been served; or
         c.   Any licensee against whom a citation proceeding has been
instituted by the State Liquor Control Commission.
      6.   To examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any
applicant or licensee as may be necessary to properly discharge the
Commissioner's duties.
      7.   To issue subpoenas to obtain information necessary to perform the
Commissioner's duties.
      8.   To report to the Village Board from time to time actions which have
been taken to grant or deny local liquor licenses or to penalize licensees.
(Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-5: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR AS CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of this chapter and the direction of the
Local Liquor Commissioner, the Village Administrator shall monitor the Village
staff in its enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The Village Administrator shall monitor the Village staff in performing
their responsibilities related to the administration of the Liquor Control
Ordinance, including, but not limited to, the response to questions concerning
local liquor licenses and the handling of local liquor license applications.
   C.   At the end of each fiscal year, the Village Administrator shall prepare
and submit to the Village Board an annual written report concerning the
activities of the Village staff in administering and enforcing this chapter.
(Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-6: APPLICABILITY OF OTHER PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the licensee, owner,
proprietor, or person in charge of any place in the Village where alcoholic
liquor is sold from the restrictions and requirements of any other provision of
this Code, other ordinances of the Village or of the Statutes of the State of
Illinois. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-7: LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED:
Within the Village, it shall be unlawful to make any sale, or offer for sale,
of any alcoholic liquor without having a local liquor license, and it shall
also be unlawful to make any sale, or offer for sale, of any alcoholic liquor
in violation of the terms of such license. Peddling of alcoholic liquor is
absolutely prohibited. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-8: APPLICATION:
   A.   A person wishing to file an application for a local liquor license
(other than a not for profit organization applying for a Class 5 license) may
obtain an application form from the Village as prepared by the Village
Administrator for the purpose of providing reasonable information about the
applicant. Such application shall be filed with the Local Liquor Commissioner,
together with a document outlining the applicant's program for training its
employees to properly handle the sale of alcoholic liquor, and with an initial
nonrefundable application fee of five hundred dollars, except for Class 5
license applications filed by an applicant other than a not for profit
organization, which shall have a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred
dollars, and there shall be no application fee for a Class 5 license filed by a
not for profit organization. The application shall be signed by: 1) the
applicant, if the applicant is an individual, 2) the president and secretary,
if the applicant is a corporation, 3) a general partner, if the applicant is a
partnership, or 4) two duly authorized officers, if the applicant is a not for
profit organization. (Ord. 3744, 4-22-2019)
   B.   Applications (other than for Class 5 licenses) shall be signed by the
applicant, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following
statements and information:
      1.   The applicant's name, birth date, mailing and residence addresses,
driver's license number, social security number and telephone number.
      2.   If applicable, the name and address of the applicant's business.
      3.   If applicable, the "assumed name" of the business and the date of
the filing of the assumed name with the County Clerk in question.
      4.   In the case of a corporation, if an Illinois corporation, the date
of its incorporation, or if a foreign corporation, the state where it was
incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois Business
Corporation Act to transact business in the State, and in either case, a
statement of the objects for which the corporation was organized, the full
name, age, address, and telephone number of all officers, directors, and
shareholders with an aggregate of more than five percent of the shares of
ownership of the corporation or of any persons receiving a direct or indirect
benefit from the profits of the sale of alcoholic liquor in the Village.
      5.   The name, age, address, and telephone number of the persons who will
manage the business of the applicant in the Village.
      6.   The citizenship of all persons required herein to be identified in
the application, their date and place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen,
the time and place of their naturalization.
      7.   A description of the character of the business of the applicant.
      8.   The length of time that applicant has been in business of that
character.
      9.   The location or description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such local liquor license, and the following
information: a) if a leased premises, a complete and unredacted copy of the
lease shall be provided, which lease shall be for a term of sufficient length
to encompass the term of the local liquor license sought, and the name and
address of the owner or owners of the premises and the names and addresses of
all the owners of the beneficial interest of any trust if said premises are
held in trust; b) if the premises is owned, a copy of a duly issued title
policy in the name of the applicant.
      10.   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
local liquor license on premises in River Forest other than described in this
application, and the disposition of such application.
      11.   A statement signed by or on behalf of the applicant and by all
individuals, if any, named in response to subsection B4 of this section, that:
a) none of them has ever been convicted of a felony or a Class A misdemeanor;
and b) none is disqualified to receive a local liquor license by reason of any
matter contained in the laws of the State or the provisions of this chapter.
      12.   A statement whether a previous local liquor license by any state or
subdivision thereof, or by the Federal government, has been issued and if so,
where and when; if any such license has been revoked or suspended, or if the
licensee has been fined in connection with any such license, the statement
shall recite the reasons therefor.
      13.   A statement that the applicant and all individuals required to be
identified in the application have not in the past and will not in the future
violate any of the laws of the State or of the United States, or any ordinance
of the Village controlling the sale of alcoholic liquor in the conduct of his
place of business.
      14.   The applicant's Retailers' Occupation Tax registration number and a
statement regarding whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of the
Retailers' Occupation Tax, also known as Sales Tax, and if so, the reasons
therefor.
      15.   A statement whether applicant is delinquent under the Thirty Day
Credit Law, and if so the reasons therefor.
      16.   A statement whether applicant has any delinquencies or disputes
with any government, Federal, State, Municipality, or political subdivision
thereof, concerning the payment of any tax.
      17.   A statement whether the applicant, any individual identified in the
application, or any other person, directly or indirectly interested in the
place of business, possesses a current Federal wagering and gaming device
stamp, and if so the reasons therefor.
      18.   A statement whether the applicant, any individual identified in the
application, or any other person, directly or indirectly interested in the
place of business, is a public official, and if so the particulars thereof.
      19.   A statement whether applicant is in violation of section 6-6 of the
Liquor Control Act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-6, as amended, and if so
the reasons therefor.
      20.   A statement whether the applicant is delinquent under the Cash Beer
Law, and if so, the reasons therefor.
      21.   A statement whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
gambling offense or felony, and if so, the particulars thereof.
      22.   A statement that applicant and all individuals required to be
identified in the application have not sold, delivered, or given away alcoholic
liquor in violation of any State law, or Village ordinance, to a person under
the minimum age required to purchase or possess alcoholic liquor.
      23.   A scaled floor plan, diagram, or drawing, in detail satisfactory to
the Local Liquor Commissioner illustrating the premises in which alcoholic
liquor is to be sold.
      24.   A copy of a certificate of liquor liability insurance with a
coverage amount sufficient to cover the maximum amount of liability under the
Illinois Liquor Control Act and provided by a company satisfactory to the
Village.
      25.   Such additional information or identification as the Local Liquor
Commissioner determines desirable in order to establish the character and
business plans of the applicant. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
   C.   Each application for a Class 5 license, which application must be filed
with the Local Liquor Commissioner no less than fourteen days prior to the
special event for which such license is sought and verified by oath or
affidavit, need contain only the following information:
      1.   The name of the applicant and its address and phone number.
      2.   The premises for which the license is applicable, a description of
the approximate area of the premises, and whether or not it is indoors or both
indoors and outside.
      3.   The date of the special event, hours of operation of the event, the
name of the property owner and a written statement of consent from the property
owner (if other than the applicant).
      4.   The names, phone numbers and addresses of those persons who are
responsible for conducting the event, which persons shall remain on the event's
premises during the actual event.
      5.   Signature of the applicant.
      6.   A copy of a certificate of liquor liability insurance, naming the
Village as certificate holder for the period which liquor will be sold. This
coverage shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the maximum amount of
liability under the Illinois Liquor Control Act and provided by a company
satisfactory to the Village.
      7.   If applicable, proof of a State-issued liquor license for the
special event.
      8.   The information required in subsections B1 through B3, B5, B11
through B15, and B18 through B25 of this section, except if the applicant is a
not for profit organization.
   D.   No license shall be issued until the applicant(s) shall have been
investigated by the Local Liquor Commissioner and a report filed in the records
of said Commissioner approving the new applicant(s). New applicant(s) (other
than for a not for profit organization applying for a Class 5 license) shall
not be licensed until said new applicant(s) and managers, if any, have been
fingerprinted and photographed by the Village Police Department and record
searches made of the files of the Sheriff of Cook County, the Illinois State
Police, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and any other agency that the
Local Liquor Commissioner, the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall deem
necessary. A copy of the fingerprints and photographs shall be retained in the
files of the Chief of Police and a sworn affidavit from the Chief of Police
clearing the applicant(s) shall be filed with the Local Liquor Commissioner.
(Ord. 3744, 4-22-2019)
   E.   A licensee may seek renewal of its local liquor license by filing an
application for renewal no later than sixty days before its expiration. The
application shall state: the name of the licensee; name and address of the
business conducting sales; class of the local liquor license; period for which
renewal is sought; changes, if any, made since the original application and/or
previous renewal; name and address of the current manager of the business
conducting sales; and, an affidavit stating the application for the renewal is
true and complete and that no changes to the original application for a local
liquor license, other than those noted in the renewal application, exist. (Ord.
3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-9: PERSONS, CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS, AND/OR LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANIES
INELIGIBLE FOR LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE:
As set forth in this chapter, a person, corporation, partnership, or limited
liability company may be eligible for a local liquor license. No local liquor
license shall be issued to, or maintained by:
   A.   A person who is not a resident of the Village.
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   C.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this
State or any other state of the United States of America, if the Illinois
Liquor Control Commission has determined, that such person has not been
sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering
matters set forth in such person's application and the commission's
investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the
applicant.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of prostitution or
keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, promoting prostitution that involves
keeping a place of prostitution, or promoting juvenile prostitution that
involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution.
   F.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   G.   A person whose license issued under this Act has been revoked for
cause.
   H.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any local liquor
license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   I.   A partnership, or copartnership, if any general partner thereof, or any
limited partner thereof, owning more than five percent of the aggregate limited
partner interest in such partnership would not be eligible to receive a local
liquor license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence
within the Village.
   J.   A corporation or limited liability company, if any member, officer,
manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be
eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship
and residence within the Village.
   K.   A corporation or limited liability company, unless it is incorporated
in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the
"Illinois Business Corporation Act of 1983" or the Limited Liability Company
Act to transact business in Illinois.
   L.   A person whose place of business is operated by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possess the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   M.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or has
forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
   N.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a local
liquor license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period
for which the local liquor license is to be issued.
   O.   Any law enforcing public official, Village Administrator, Village
Attorney, Village Clerk, President of the Village Board, any member of the
Village Board; and no such person shall be interested directly in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor. With the following
exceptions:
      1.   A license may be granted to such official in relation to premises
that are not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that
official if the issuance of such license is approved by the State Liquor
Control Commission.
      2.   In relation to premises that are located within the Village, if: a)
the sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is incidental to the
selling of food, b) the issuance of the license is approved by the State Liquor
Control Commission, c) the issuance of the license is in accordance with all
applicable Village ordinances, and d) the official granted a license does not
vote on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the board or council to which
the license holder is elected.
   P.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   Q.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of section 28-1 of, or as proscribed
by section 28-3 of, the "Criminal Code of 1961", approved July 28, 1961, as
heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any
of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
   R.   A person or entity, including, without limitation, a partnership,
corporation, or limited liability company, to whom a Federal wagering stamp has
been issued by the Federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible
to be issued a license under the Raffles Act or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar
Games Act.
   S.   A person whose proposed alcoholic liquor dispensing business is located
on property within one hundred feet of any church or school, other than an
institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or
for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station,
provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant
service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other
places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried
on. In the case of a church, the distance of one hundred feet shall be measured
to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational
programs and not to property boundaries. Otherwise the distance is measured
from property lines rather than buildings. This subsection shall not prohibit
the issuance of a Class 5 license to a church or private school allowing sale
of alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are
assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other
than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors. Nor shall this subsection
apply to any not for profit organization, provided the sale of alcoholic liquor
occurs after six o'clock P.M. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-10: PROCESSING OF APPLICATIONS:
   A.   As directed by the Local Liquor Commissioner and upon receipt of an
application for any local liquor license authorized to be issued pursuant to
this chapter, other than Class 5 licenses requested by not for profit
organizations, the Village Administrator shall determine whether all
requirements for the application have been met. The Village Administrator shall
bring deficiencies in the application to the attention of the applicant. Once a
completed application is on file, copies shall be provided to the Chief of
Police and the Local Liquor Commissioner. The Village Administrator, or his/her
designee(s), shall then complete a review of the application and provide
findings, in writing, including a sworn affidavit from the Chief of Police
concerning the investigation of the applicants, to the Local Liquor
Commissioner. Following the review of the application, materials and written
reports prepared by staff, the Local Liquor Commissioner shall render in
writing a decision denying or granting such license. (Ord. 3744, 4-22-2019)
   B.   Any decision of the Local Liquor Commissioner to grant or deny a local
liquor license authorized to be issued under this chapter shall be conclusive.
(Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-11: CLASSIFICATION OF LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSES:
Such local liquor licenses shall be, and are hereby, divided into the following
classes:
   A.   Class 1 - Restaurant Alcoholic Liquor For Consumption On Premises: A
Class 1 local liquor license shall authorize the sale in restaurants of
alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the restaurant premises.
   B.   Class 1A - Breakfast, Brunch, and Lunch Restaurant Alcoholic Liquor For
Consumption On Premises: A class 1A local liquor license shall authorize the
sale in restaurants that specialize only in the service of breakfast, brunch,
and lunch or alcoholic liquor for consumption on the restaurant premises. A
class 1A license shall authorize only table service of a limited variety of
alcoholic liquor beverage menu offerings, such as a bloody mary, mimosa, or
other similar beverage, as an adjunct to the service of breakfast, brunch, and
lunch, and shall not provide a full liquor bar or the service of alcoholic
liquor beyond the limited variety of alcoholic liquor beverage menu offerings.
C.   Class 2 - Restaurant Beer And Wine For Consumption On Premises: A Class 2
local liquor license shall authorize the sale in restaurants only of beer and
wine for consumption on the restaurant premises.
D.   Class 3 - Hotel Alcoholic Liquor For Consumption On Premises: A Class 3
local liquor license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption only on the hotel premises. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
E.   Class 4 - Package Alcoholic Liquor: A Class 4 local liquor license shall
authorize the sale, on the premises specified in the license, of alcoholic
liquor for consumption not on the premises ("package sales"). Package sales
shall be limited to premises primarily devoted to the sale at retail of grocery
food, commonly known as supermarkets, and pharmaceuticals and sundries,
commonly known as pharmacies, if the pharmacy is operated in conjunction, and
shares a common entrance with, a supermarket, both totally consisting of not
less than fourteen thousand gross above grade square feet, subject to the
following conditions and restrictions:
   1.   That portion or portions of the premises devoted to the sale of
alcoholic liquor shall be no larger than ten percent of the gross above grade
square feet of the entire premises which is the subject of the application and
license.
   2.   Although the sale of alcoholic liquor may take place at all cash
registers within the premises subject to the license, no sale shall be made or
accepted by a cashier or other employee under the age of twenty one years of
age, and appropriate signage shall be posted by the licensee at all cash
registers reminding customers that alcoholic liquor cannot be purchased by
anyone under the age of twenty one years of age.
   3.   Alcoholic liquor and beer shall only be sold in original containers.
Original containers of alcoholic liquor and beer shall not be opened and/or
poured prior to sale, except as permitted for tasting purposes in subsection D4
of this section. Original containers of beer may be sold individually, even if
the original containers of beer are distributed in packages of four original
containers, six original containers, or other similar packaging.
   4.   Sampling and/or tasting of the products being sold may be allowed under
the following restrictions:
      a.   The administration of such sampling and/or tasting and the actual
serving shall be done only by a department manager of the licensee or his/her
superiors.
      b.   The sampling and/or tasting may not be offered more than two times a
week and shall not exceed six hours for each day of such sampling and/or
tasting.
      c.   Sampling and/or tasting must occur in a single designated location;
multiple locations are prohibited.
 
   November 2020
8-5-11   RIVER FOREST - POLICE REGULATIONS   8-5-11
      d.   Up to three samples, consisting of no more than: 1) one-fourth ounce
of distilled spirits, 2) one ounce of wine, or 3) two ounces of beer may be
served to a consumer in one day.
   5.   A Class 4 license may not be issued to both the supermarket and
drugstore within the premises; rather, the license may be issued to either the
supermarket or drugstore, but not both.
   6.   That portion of the premises devoted to the sale of alcoholic liquor
shall not have ingress and egress separate from the ingress and egress of the
nonalcoholic portions of the premises. (Ord. 3789, 12-9-2019)
F.   Class 4A - Package Beer And Wine: A Class 4A local liquor license shall
authorize the sale, on the premises specified on the license, of only beer and
wine for consumption not on the premises ("special package sales"). Such
special package sales shall be limited to premises primarily devoted to the
sale at retail of grocery food, commonly known as supermarkets, consisting of
not less than fourteen thousand gross above grade square feet. Such sale of
beer and wine shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
   1.   Beer and wine shall only be sold in original containers. Original
containers of beer and wine shall not be opened and/or poured prior to sale,
except as permitted for tasting purposes in subsection E2 of this section.
Original containers of beer may be sold individually, even if the original
containers of beer are distributed in packages of four original containers, six
original containers, or other similar packaging.
   2.   Sampling and/or tasting of the products being sold may be allowed under
the following restrictions:
      a.   The administration of such sampling and/or tasting and the actual
serving shall be done only by a department manager of the licensee or his or
her superiors.
      b.   The sampling and/or tasting may not be offered more than two times a
week and shall not exceed six hours for each day of such sampling and/or
tasting.
      c.   Sampling and/or tasting must occur in a single designated location;
multiple locations are prohibited.
      d.   Up to three samples, consisting of no more than: 1) one-fourth ounce
of distilled spirits, 2) one ounce of wine, or 3) two ounces of beer may be
served to a consumer in one day.
   3.   Although the portion of the premises devoted to the sale of the beer
and wine need not be confined to an area which is separated from the other
retail portions of the premises, the portion of the premises devoted to the
sale of such beer and wine shall be no larger than ten percent of the gross
above grade square feet of the entire premises which is the subject of the
application and license.
   4.   Although the sale of beer and wine may take place at all cash registers
within the premises subject to the license, no sale shall be made or accepted
by a cashier or other employee under the age of twenty one years of age, and
appropriate signage shall be posted by the licensee at all
 
November 2020
 
cash registers reminding customers that beer and wine cannot be purchased by
anyone under the age of twenty one years of age. (Ord. 3578, 11-23-2015)
G.   Class 4B - Restaurant Package Alcoholic Liquor: A Class 4B local liquor
license shall authorize the sale, on the premises specified on the license, of
alcoholic liquor for consumption not on the premises ("restaurant package
sales"). Such sale of alcoholic liquor shall be subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
   1.   Alcoholic liquor may only be sold in conjunction with the sale of
prepared fresh food.
   2.   There shall be no breakdown of any retail packaging from the original
manufacturer or wholesaler into smaller packaging or individual containers.
   3.   Beer and/or wine may be sold only in containers between twelve ounces
and fifty ounces in size.
   4.   Alcohol liquor, other than beer or wine, may only be sold in containers
between twelve ounces and twenty six ounces in size.
   5.   The sale of unmixed alcohol liquor, other than beer or wine, is
prohibited.
   6.   Sampling and/or tasting of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited. (Ord.
3428, 5-14-2012)
H.   Class 5 - Temporary Special Event Alcoholic Liquor: A Class 5 local liquor
license ("temporary license") shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor at a
special event sponsored by an applicant. A temporary license shall be limited
to: 1) no more than fifteen special events within any one calendar year by an
applicant that is a not for profit organization, and 2) no more than fifteen
special events within any one calendar year by any applicant other than a not
for profit organization. A separate temporary license shall be required for
each day of each special event, as each day of an event shall be considered a
separate special event. The license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic
liquor only between the hours of eleven o'clock A.M. and one thirty o'clock
A.M., and the extension beyond twelve o'clock midnight to one thirty o'clock
A.M. shall not constitute a new day. Such sales shall take place only in
enclosed structures (including tents), but consumption may take place in the
open air on property owned or leased by the applicant holding the temporary
license. (Ord. 3744, 4-22-2019)
I.   Class 6 - Restaurant BYOB Beer And Wine: A Class 6 local liquor license
shall authorize the restaurants that do not sell alcoholic beverages to permit
consumption of beer or wine only brought onto the premises of a restaurant by
an adult patron for personal consumption, including consumption by their adult
dining guest(s), while the patron and dining guest(s) are being served a
complete meal in the restaurant, subject to all of the following conditions and
restrictions:
   1.   Consumption of beer and wine is restricted to the licensed premises.
   2.   The restaurant may charge a corkage fee to the patron.
   3.   The sale of beer, wine, spirits and all other types of alcoholic liquor
beverages to patrons of the licensed premises shall be prohibited.
   4.   No package sales shall be permitted. The sale of beer, wine, spirits or
other alcoholic beverages (e.g., wine coolers, spirits, prepared mixed drinks,
etc.) in single cans or bottles, kegs or pitchers or any other form is
prohibited.
      5.   Patrons are prohibited from taking any opened alcoholic beverage
outside of the premises, except for a recorked wine bottle that has been sealed
in a carryout bag in accordance with State law 1 . (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012; amd.
Ord. 3963, 7-14-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/6-33.
8-5-12: TERM; FEES:
   A.   The term of each local liquor license issued hereunder shall be from
January 1 to December 31. (Ord. 3456, 10-8-2012)
   B.   The fee for the various classes of local liquor licenses shall be as
follows:
License Fee
License                                   Fee
Class 1                                   $2,000.00 annually
Class 2                                   1,000.00 annually
Class 3                                   4,000.00 annually
Class 4                                   4,000.00 annually
Class 4A                                  4,000.00 annually
Class 4B                                  4,000.00 annually
Class 4B, if issued in combination with a 500.00 annually
Class 1 or 2
                                          $100.00 per event (not for profit)
Class 5                                   $100.00 per event (other than not for
                                          profit)
Class 6                                   $1,000.00 annually
 
(Ord. 3744, 4-22-2019)
   C.   For the initial term of a local liquor license, the fee shall be
reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the
calendar year in which such license is issued.
   D.   Any licensee whose liquor license is forfeited, suspended or revoked
shall not be eligible for a refund of the liquor license fee. In any other
circumstance that a licensee ceases selling alcoholic liquor and requests a
refund of the annual liquor license fee, a refund shall be made based on the
prorated remaining number of full months in the calendar year after the
licensee ceases liquor sales.
   E.   The annual fee shall be due and payable by January 1 in each year. No
licensee shall continue to engage in the business of selling alcoholic liquor
unless such fee has been paid.
   F.   All required fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of the local
license after approval by the Local Liquor Commissioner pursuant to section
8-5-10 of this chapter. All such fees shall be forthwith deposited with the
Village Finance Director. (Ord. 3456, 10-8-2012)
8-5-13: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSES:
   A.   Number Of Licenses: The number of authorized licenses shall be limited
to the following:
Class Number Of Licenses
Class Number Of Licenses
1     1
1A    1
2     0
3     0
4     5
4A    0
4B    1
5     Open
6     0
 
(Ord. 3663, 11-13-2017)
   B.   Changing Number Of Licenses: The number of licenses authorized in this
section shall remain at the number set forth in this section unless amended by
the Corporate Authorities of the Village when it is determined to be in the
best interests of the Village to increase or decrease the number of licenses;
provided, however and notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, that
if any license is revoked, the number of authorized licenses in the class of
the license revoked shall, without further action by the Corporate Authorities
of the Village, be reduced by the total number of revoked licenses in the
particular class at the time the license is revoked. (Ord. 3634, 12-12-2016;
amd. Ord. 3963, 7-14-2025)
8-5-14: RENEWAL; EFFECT OF FAILURE TO RENEW:
Any licensee may renew his local liquor license at the expiration thereof,
provided the licensee is then entitled to receive a local liquor license and
the premises for which such renewal license is sought is still suitable for
such purpose. Application for renewal shall be made on forms as provided in
section
8-5-8 of this chapter. Any local liquor license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall terminate by operation of law if not renewed within ten days after the
date of its expiration. Thereafter, the licensee may apply for a new local
liquor license, consideration of which application shall be made pursuant to
the procedures established by this chapter. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-15: CHANGE IN PERSONNEL:
   A.   The occurrence of any of the following events are examples of what
shall be deemed to constitute a change in the identity of the holder of a local
liquor license issued under this chapter, for which a new local liquor license
shall be required:
      1.   With respect to any licensee that is a corporation or limited
liability company, the replacement or addition of any officer, director, or
manager of said corporation or any shareholder owning directly or indirectly
(including ownership by members of the same household) five percent or more of
the outstanding shares of any class of the capital stock of said corporation;
      2.   With respect to any licensee that is a general partnership, the
replacement or addition of any general partner;
      3.   With respect to any licensee that is a limited partnership, the
replacement or addition of any general partner or of any limited partner
holding directly or indirectly (including ownership by members of the same
household) more than a five percent interest in the earnings of said limited
partnership.
   B.   Upon the occurrence of any of the events described in subsection A of
this section, the licensee shall, as promptly as practicable, and in any event
within five regular business days after the occurrence of such event, give the
village administrator written notice describing such event in reasonable
detail; the village administrator shall then promptly deliver such notice to
the local liquor commissioner. Failure to give the notice required by the
provisions of this subsection shall constitute a violation of this chapter
subjecting the licensee to revocation or suspension of the local liquor
license. No additional license fee shall be payable for a new local liquor
license required by virtue of the occurrence of any of the events described in
subsection A of this section, and so long as an application therefor is pending
and not yet acted on by the local liquor commissioner, the applicant may
continue to conduct its business and operations under the local liquor license
in effect immediately prior to such occurrence.
   C.   Within ten days of any change of manager or agent conducting business
for the licensee, the licensee shall report such change to the village
administrator and shall provide information concerning such manager or agent as
required in section
 8-5-23 of this chapter. The village administrator shall then promptly deliver
such notice to the local liquor commissioner. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-16: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A local liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the
premises described in the application for such license. Such location may be
changed only upon written permission to make such changes issued by the local
liquor commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the
proposed new location is a proper one for the sale of alcoholic liquor under
the laws of the state, and under ordinances of the village. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-
2012)
8-5-17: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No local liquor license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant
furnishes evidence satisfactory to the local liquor commissioner that such
applicant is covered by a policy of liquor liability insurance in an amount
sufficient to cover the maximum amount of liability under the Illinois liquor
control act and provided by a company satisfactory to the village and, in the
event the applicant is not the owner of the premises described in said
application, that the applicant has a lawful right to possession of the same
until the expiration of the term of the local liquor license for which
application is made.
Each licensee shall furnish the local liquor commissioner with a certificate of
such insurance and in the event of cancellation, the local liquor commissioner
shall be notified no less than thirty days prior to such cancellation. (Ord.
3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-18: CESSATION OF BUSINESS:
Any licensee who has ceased to do business at the premises for which he has
obtained a local liquor license hereunder, or closes his place of business for
a period of thirty successive days or longer without written permission from
the local liquor commissioner, shall be subject to having its local liquor
license declared forfeited and lapsed by order of the commissioner. (Ord. 3428,
5-14-2012)
8-5-19: LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE A PERSONAL PRIVILEGE; NOT TO BE SUBJECT TO
ATTACHMENT, TRANSFER, DEVOLUTION:
A local liquor license shall be purely a personal privilege, effective for a
maximum of one year after issuance, unless sooner revoked as in this chapter
provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, nor subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such local liquor license shall cease upon the death of a
licensee who is an individual person, and shall not descend to any heirs of the
licensee; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of a business involved in the sale of alcoholic
liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order
of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or
insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or such
insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such local liquor license, but
not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such
licensee. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-20: RECORDS:
The village administrator shall cause to be kept a complete record of all local
liquor licenses issued. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-21: DISPLAY OF LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE:
Any local liquor license issued under this chapter shall be displayed by the
licensee at all times in a conspicuous place where it is readily visible to an
inspecting officer and to the customers of the licensee. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-22: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager or other
agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of
such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in
the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by the
employer or licensee personally. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-23: NOTIFICATION AND APPLICATION OF NEW MANAGERS:
A licensee whose business is conducted by a manager or agent, and who acquires,
hires, transfers in, promotes, or appoints a new manager, not listed as a
manager in the original application for a local liquor license, shall within
five days, including Sundays and holidays, of the date the new manager
commences his/her duties, submit a completed "new manager's application" to the
local liquor commissioner, which application shall contain no less than the
following statements and information:
   A.   The new manager's full name, birth date, address, telephone number,
driver's license number, and social security number.
   B.   An affirmation by attachment of the new manager's signature and the
licensee's signature that the new manager has not in the past and will not in
the future violate any laws of the state or of the United States, or any
ordinance of the village, controlling the sale of alcoholic liquor and the
conduct of his business.
   C.   The new manager shall further affirm by his signature that he/she has
never sold, delivered, or given away any alcoholic liquor in violation of any
state law, or village ordinance, to a person under the minimum age required to
purchase or possess alcoholic liquor.
   D.   The new manager shall further affirm by his signature that he/she has
never been convicted of a felony or class A misdemeanor and is not disqualified
to receive a local liquor license by reason of any manner or thing contained in
the laws of the state or provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Arrange for fingerprinting with the village police department of the
new manager and provide a money order or cashier's check in the amount of fifty
dollars made payable to the village at the time of fingerprinting.
   F.   Provide the village police department with the new manager's current
home address and his addresses for the ten year period prior to his new
manager's application, with clear indication of the specific number of years a
manager resided at each address.
   G.   Inform the village police department whether the new manager has ever
been known at any time by any other name or names. If the new manager has been
known by another name or names, a list of such names shall be submitted to the
village police department.
Within fifteen days of his receipt of the new manager's application, the
village administrator shall rule whether the new manager is qualified to manage
the licensee's operation with respect to the sale of alcoholic liquor. Upon
disapproval of any new manager for failure to comply with any of the
requirements of this provision, the licensee shall, immediately upon written
notification by the village administrator, terminate the new manager's duties
with respect to the sale of alcoholic liquors. If the licensee immediately
relieves the new manager of his/her duties pursuant to the order of the village
administrator and is able to provide for continued management of the licensed
premises by any person previously qualified to manage the licensed premises by
reason of a prior application, the licensee may continue to sell alcoholic
liquor.
If, however, the licensee is unable to provide another person previously
qualified to manage the licensed premises pursuant to a prior application, the
licensee shall terminate the sale of alcoholic liquor until such times as the
village administrator approves a subsequent application for a new manager
complying with all the requirements of this section. This section shall in no
way be interpreted to preclude the local liquor commissioner from proceeding to
hearing for violations of any sections of this chapter, including this section,
and the licensee shall further be subject to any and all other penalties that
may be imposed pursuant to section
8-5-26 of this chapter as a result of the licensee's failure to comply with
this section. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-24: HOURS OF BUSINESS AND OUTDOOR CONSUMPTION:
   A.   Hours Of Business: Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the sale
of alcoholic liquor by licensees of a class 1, 2, or 3 local liquor license,
and consumption of beer and/or wine on a class 6 licensee's premises, shall be
permitted during the hours of eleven o'clock A.M. and twelve o'clock midnight
Monday through Saturday and twelve o'clock noon and eleven o'clock P.M. on
Sunday. All patrons and customers of classes 1 and 2 local liquor licenses
shall leave the premises not later than twenty minutes following the closing
hours recited herein.
   The sale of alcoholic liquor by a licensee of a class 1A local liquor
license shall be permitted during the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and
three o’clock (3:00) P.M. Monday through Sunday.
   The sale of alcoholic liquor by a licensee of a class 4, 4A, or 4B local
liquor license shall be permitted beginning at the time the licensee opens for
business through ten o'clock P.M.
   No licensee under this chapter shall sell or permit to be sold or given away
any alcoholic liquor during a time period other than as recited in this
chapter.
   B.   Outdoor Consumption: It shall be unlawful for a licensee, other than a
licensee holding a class 1, 1A, 2, 3, 5, or 6 local liquor license, to serve,
sell or otherwise dispense alcoholic liquor at an outdoor location on the
licensee's premises. Licensees, other than class 1A, permitted to serve, sell
or otherwise dispense alcoholic liquor by this subsection may only serve, sell
or otherwise dispense alcoholic liquor in an outdoor location on the licensee's
premises during the hours of eleven o'clock A.M. (twelve o'clock noon on
Sundays) through ten o'clock P.M. Sunday through Thursday and during the hours
of eleven o'clock A.M. through eleven o'clock P.M. Friday through Saturday.
Class 1A licensees permitted to serve, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic
liquor by this subsection may only serve, sell or otherwise dispense alcoholic
liquor in an outdoor location on the licensee’s premises during the hours of
seven o’clock A.M. and three o’clock P.M. Monday through Sunday. (Ord. 3428, 5-
14-2012; amd. Ord. 3963, 7-14-2025)
8-5-25: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES ON LICENSED PREMISES:
   A.   Gambling: It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises
licensed to sell alcoholic liquor.
   B.   Discount, Promotion, Gift: It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any licensee, officer, employee, agent or representative of any licensee to
knowingly offer any discount, promotion, gift, service or other product to any
employee or elected official of the village. This section shall not include any
promotion, discount, gift, service or product provided without discrimination
to the general public.
   C.   Alcohol Without Liquid Machines: It shall be unlawful to bring into the
village for use or sale any alcohol without liquid machine. For the purposes of
this subsection, "alcohol without liquid machine" means a device designed or
marketed for the purposes of mixing alcohol with oxygen or another gas to
produce a mist for inhalation for recreational purposes.
   D.   Alcopops: It shall be unlawful to sell for consumption an alcohol malt
beverage containing caffeine, guarana, taurine, or ginseng, where the beverage
constitutes 0.5 percent or more of alcohol by volume, unless individual
containers of the beverage have imprinted on each individual container the
following: the words "contains alcohol" and the alcohol content of the
beverage.
   E.   Happy Hours Prohibited: No licensee or employee or agent of such
licensee shall:
      1.   Serve two or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one
person for consumption by that one person, except conducting product sampling
pursuant to subsection
8-5-11D or E of this chapter, or selling or delivering wine by the bottle or
carafe; or
      2.   Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public; or
      3.   Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any
person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other
purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to
encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in this
subsection E; or
      4.   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the
size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day; or
      5.   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
      6.   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under this subsection E.
      7.   Nothing in this subsection E shall be construed to prohibit a
licensee from:
         a.   Offering free food or entertainment at any time; or
         b.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
or
         c.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
or
         d.   Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract
between a hotel or multiuse establishment and another group for the holding of
any function, meeting, convention or trade show; or
         e.   Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel; or
         f.   Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited
to, buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily
sold in such manner, or selling bottles of spirits, and delivered to two or
more persons at one time; or
         g.   Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in
whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment
not regularly scheduled.
   F.   Sale Of Unmixed Spirits For On Premises Consumption: No unmixed spirits
shall be sold or offered for sale at retail for consumption on the premises,
except in a container having a minimum capacity of no less than one fluid ounce
and which contains at the time of sale no less than one fluid ounce of the
beverage being sold.
   G.   Equal Enjoyment: No licensee shall deny or permit its agents or
employees to deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any premises in which
alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold subject only to the conditions and
limitations established by law and applicable alike to all citizens.
   H.   Sealing And Removal Of Open Wine Bottles From A Restaurant:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a restaurant with a local
liquor license may permit a patron to remove one unsealed and partially
consumed bottle of wine for off premises consumption provided that the patron
has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with the meal
on the restaurant premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be
removed from the premises pursuant to this chapter shall be securely sealed by
the licensee or an agent of the licensee prior to removal from the premises and
placed in a transparent onetime use tamperproof bag. The licensee or agent of
the licensee shall provide a dated receipt for the bottle of wine to the
patron. Wine that is resealed in accordance with the provisions of this section
and not tampered with and transported in accordance with the restrictions of
subsections (a) and (b) of section 11-502 of the Illinois vehicle code shall
not be deemed to violate section 11-502 of the Illinois vehicle code, as set
forth in section 6-33 of the state liquor control act.
   I.   No Sale Or Consumption Of Cannabis: No licensee shall sell cannabis at
a licensed premises. The consumption of cannabis at a licensed premises is
prohibited. No licensee shall permit the consumption of cannabis at a licensed
premises. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012; amd. Ord. 3789, 12-9-2019)
8-5-26: FINE, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, AND NONRENEWAL OF LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE
GENERALLY; APPEAL:
   A.   Revocation, Suspension, And/Or Denial: The local liquor commissioner
may, in accordance with the state liquor control act, revoke, suspend, or deny
the renewal of any local liquor license issued under the provisions of this
chapter and/or levy a fine on the licensee if it is determined that the
licensee has violated any of the provisions of the state liquor control act,
this chapter, or any other ordinance or resolution enacted by the village, or
any applicable rules or regulations established by the local liquor
commissioner or the Illinois liquor control commission, or any state or federal
statute. However, no such license shall be revoked, suspended, or denied
renewal, nor may a fine be levied except after a public hearing by the local
liquor commissioner upon a three day written notice to the licensee affording
the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend the charges contained in such
notice. The three day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery
of notice to the licensee if delivered in person, or two days after such notice
was deposited in the U.S. mail, it being conclusively presumed that such
licensee shall have received such notice within two days after deposit in the
U.S. mail.
   B.   Emergency Authority: If the local liquor commissioner has reason to
believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will
immediately threaten the welfare of the community, the local liquor
commissioner may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for
such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises
closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be
heard during that period. If the licensee is also engaged in another business
on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other
businesses.
The local liquor commissioner shall, within five days after such hearing, if it
is determined after such hearing that the local liquor license should be
revoked, suspended, or denied renewal, or that the licensee should be fined,
state the reason for such determination in a written order, including in such
order the amount of the fine, period of suspension, or that the license has
been revoked or denied renewal, and shall serve a copy of such order within the
five days upon the licensee by depositing the copy of such order in the U.S.
mail.
   C.   Appeal: Appeal of any decision of the local liquor commissioner shall
be permitted to the extent, and shall be conducted in the manner, provided for
in section 7-9 of the state liquor control act. Appeal of any decision of the
local liquor commissioner regarding the nonrenewal of a license shall only be
allowed if required by law, otherwise such decision of the local liquor
commissioner shall be final and nonreviewable. Any licensee determined by the
local liquor commissioner to have violated any of the provisions of the state
liquor control act, or any ordinance or resolution of the village, or any rule
or regulation established by the local liquor commissioner, or the Illinois
liquor control commission, shall pay to the village the costs of the hearing
before the local liquor commissioner on such violation. The local liquor
commissioner shall determine the cost incurred by the village for the hearings,
including, but not limited to: court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or
records, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders, and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village.
The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty days of
notification of the costs by the local liquor commissioner. In the event of an
appeal to the Illinois liquor control commission, and in cases where appeal is
taken pursuant to the administrative review act, payment is due ten days after
the entry of an order finally affirming the determination of the local liquor
commissioner. Failure to pay said costs within ten days of notification is a
violation of this section and may be cause for local liquor license suspension
or revocation. In the event a local liquor license is revoked, the licensee
shall forfeit all sums therefor paid to the village in connection with such
local liquor license. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-27: AFTER REVOCATION OF LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE:
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be
granted to the individual, partnership, corporation, or limited liability
company that held the license or was included on the application or manager's
list for the revoked license, for the period of one year thereafter unless the
revocation order has been vacated or unless the revocation order was entered as
to the licensee only. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-28: VIOLATION OF RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX ACT:
In addition to other grounds specified in this chapter, the local liquor
commissioner may refuse the issuance or renewal of a local liquor license, or
suspend or revoke such license, for violations of section 3 of the retailers'
occupation tax act, as amended, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/3. Violations
of this section shall be subject to the procedures of section
8-5-26 of this chapter. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-29: SIGNS:
   A.   No sign which is visible from outside of the premises where alcoholic
liquor is sold, which promotes or advertises the sale of alcoholic liquor, or
identifies the licensee's premises as a place where alcoholic liquor is served,
shall be placed or erected inside or outside of the licensed premises.
   B.   Every licensee shall cause a sign with the message "Government Warning:
According To The Surgeon General, Women Should Not Drink Alcoholic Beverages
During Pregnancy Because Of The Risk Of Birth Defects. If You Need Assistance
For Substance Abuse, Please Call The Office Of Alcoholism And Substance Abuse
(OASA) At 1-800-843-6154." to be framed and hung in plain view. The sign shall
be no larger than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches.
   C.   Every licensee shall cause his/her license or licenses to be framed and
hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 3428,
5-14-2012)
8-5-30: SALE TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No licensee shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor, including
beer and wine, to any person under the age of twenty one years, or to any
intoxicated person, or to any person known by licensee, or any of licensee's
employees or agents to be under legal disability or in need of mental
treatment.
   B.   If a person under the age of twenty one years is in possession of
alcoholic liquor on premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption
on such premises, it shall be presumed that the licensee sold, gave, or
delivered such alcoholic liquor to the minor in possession thereof.
   C.   For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any
licensee, or licensee's agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve
alcoholic liquor to any person who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of twenty
one years. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-31: EVIDENCE OF AGE OF PERSON ATTEMPTING TO PURCHASE OR RECEIVE ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR:
   A.   If a licensee, or its agent or employee, believes, has reason to
believe, or should have reason to believe, that a sale or delivery of alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient is under the age of
twenty one years, then, before making such sale or delivery, the licensee shall
demand presentation of no less than two positive forms of identification issued
by a public officer in the performance of official duties, and containing proof
of age and one shall contain a picture of the holder thereof. A traffic
citation shall not be accepted as identification or evidence of age.
   B.   No person shall transfer, alter, or deface an identification card
issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government or subdivision or
agency thereof, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or
forged identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false
identification.
   C.   No person shall purchase, accept delivery, or have possession of
alcoholic liquor by the use of an altered, forged, or defaced identification
card or by the use of an identification card of another person.
   D.   No person shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the village where
alcoholic liquor is offered for sale. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-32: REQUIRED WARNING SIGN:
In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be
displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall read
substantially as follows:
WARNING: If you are under twenty one years of age, you are subject to a fine up
to one thousand dollars under the River Forest Village Code if you purchase
alcoholic liquor or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or
obtaining alcoholic liquor. Official photo identification will be required to
prove age before purchase.
(Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-33: EMPLOYMENT OF UNDERAGED PERSONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent, or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ,
or permit any person under the age of twenty one years to draw, pour, mix, or
deliver any alcoholic liquor in any licensed premises.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any agent or employee of any
licensee holding a local liquor license authorizing the sale of alcoholic
liquor not for consumption on the premises to permit any employee under the age
of twenty one years or any customer of any age to register, by mechanical or
electronic means, the sale of any alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-34: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION BY PERSONS UNDER AGE:
   A.   Underage Consumption: No person under the age of twenty one years shall
possess, consume, purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor within the
village; provided the possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person
under the age of twenty one years of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony, the consumption by a person under the age of
twenty one years under the direct supervision and approval of the parent or
guardian of such underage person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's
home, or the possession and delivery of alcoholic liquor in pursuance of a
person's lawful employment is not prohibited and shall not be construed as a
violation of this section.
   B.   Underage Delivery: No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining
alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another
person under the age of twenty one years, except as allowed under subsection A
of this section.
   C.   Solicitation: No person under the age of twenty one years shall solicit
a person to buy alcoholic liquor for him/her. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-35: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly suffer or permit any child
under the age of twenty one of whom he or she is the parent or guardian to
violate any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-36: RESPONSIBILITY OF THE OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located within
the village to knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty one years and
not his child to remain on such premises while such child possesses alcoholic
liquor. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-37: GENERAL:
   A.   Nonlicensee Fines: Any person, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, that is not a licensee, violating any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars, nor more than one
thousand dollars per offense. Each day on or during which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   B.   Licensee Fines: If a licensee violates any provision of this chapter,
the licensee shall be fined an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars for a
first violation within a twelve month period, one thousand five hundred dollars
for a second violation within a twelve month period, and two thousand five
hundred dollars for a third or subsequent violation within a twelve month
period. Not more than fifteen thousand dollars in fines under this chapter may
be imposed against any licensee during any one licensing period. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on or during each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
   C.   Other Penalties: If the local liquor commissioner determines that a
licensee has violated any provision of this chapter, the licensee may be
subject to having its local liquor license revoked, suspended, or not renewed,
in addition to all other remedies set forth in this chapter.
   D.   False Statements: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee
of any licensee to make a false statement of fact to a police officer
investigating an alleged violation of the state liquor control act or of this
chapter.
   E.   BASSET Program: All class 1, 2, 3, 4, 4A, and 4B licensees shall be
required to have each manager who may, as part of his/her job, serve, sell,
deliver, or distribute alcoholic liquor to a customer on the licensed premises,
take and successfully complete the BASSET program for alcoholic liquor servers,
and thereafter maintain a current certification from said program. Each
licensee shall supply the village with copies of the course completion
certificate(s) for each manager who has successfully completed the BASSET
program. A copy of the BASSET program completion certificate(s) shall also be
made available at all times at the licensed premises for inspection by the
village police department. Any licensee who, due to the loss of a manager who
successfully completed the BASSET program is put in a position of noncompliance
with this subsection, shall have four months to come into compliance. Any
licensee, person, firm, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company
violating the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to the penalties
set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 3428, 5-14-2012)
8-5-38: METHOD OF NOTICE:
All notices therein required shall be in writing. Unless an alternate method of
service is set forth in this chapter, notice shall be effective upon service by
delivery of the notice personally to any agent of the licensee on the licensed
premises, as well as by mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner, if the licensee is an individual; to a partner, if the
licensee is a partnership; to the registered agent of the licensee, if the
licensee is a corporation or limited liability company; or to the signatories
of the application, if the licensee is a not for profit organization. (Ord.
3428, 5-14-2012)
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC OFFENSES
SECTION:
8-6-1: Assault And Battery
8-6-2: Disorderly Conduct
8-6-3: Alcoholic Liquor, Prohibitions
8-6-4: Controlled Substances Or Cannabis, Prohibitions
8-6-5: Cruelty To Children
8-6-6: Gambling
8-6-7: Houses Of Ill Fame; Disorderly Houses
8-6-8: Obscenity
8-6-9: Barbed Wire Fences, Guards, Railings
8-6-10: Dangerous Sports
8-6-11: Injuring Village Property
8-6-12: Petit Larceny
8-6-13: Trains, Playing Upon
8-6-14: Littering
8-6-15: Impersonate, Interfere With Village Officers
8-6-16: Escape From Custody
8-6-17: Weapons
8-6-18: Theft Of Recyclables
8-6-19: Disposal Of Yard Wastes
8-6-20: Graffiti Prohibited
8-6-21: Coin Operated Amusement Devices And Video Gaming Prohibited
8-6-22: Underage Possession Of Tobacco Or Tobacco Products Prohibited; Sale of
Flavored Liquid Nicotine Products Prohibited
8-6-23: False Statements To Governmental Agencies
8-6-24: Prohibition Of Fireworks And Explosives
8-6-1: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
The provisions of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-2 et seq., are adopted by
reference. (1981 Code)
8-6-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   Definitions:
   GANG ACTIVITY:
      1.   The commission, attempted commission, conspiracy to commit, or
solicitation with the intent to commit or have committed, any misdemeanor or
criminal act by any member of a gang; or
      2.   Wearing, possessing, using, distributing, displaying or selling any
clothing, jewelry, emblem, badge, symbol, sign or other item which evidences
membership or affiliation in any gang; or
      3.   Committing any act or using any communication, either verbal or
nonverbal, such as gestures or handshakes, showing membership or affiliation in
a gang; or
      4.   Drawing of gang related graffiti or distributing gang related
literature; or
      5.   Conduct in furtherance of the gang which violates State, local and/
or school laws, ordinances, rules or policies; or
      6.   Soliciting others for membership in a gang; or
      7.   Requesting any person to pay protection or otherwise intimidating or
threatening any person in furtherance of the gang; or
      8.   Inciting another to act with physical violence upon any other person
in furtherance of the gang.
   GANG OR STREET GANG: Any ongoing organization, association or group of three
or more persons, whether formal or informal, which engages in gang activity,
and at least two of these members individually or collectively engage in or
have engaged in a pattern of criminal activity.
   GANG SIGN: A signal with the hands or other parts of the body, the purpose
of which is to indicate gang affiliation or gang messages to other persons,
and/or the wearing, possessing, using, distributing, or displaying any
clothing, jewelry, emblem, badge, symbol, sign or other item which evidence
membership or affiliation in any gang.
   B.   Unlawful To Disturb Peace And Quiet: It shall be unlawful for any
person to disturb the peace and quiet of the Village, or any portion thereof by
disorderly conduct.
   C.   Disorderly Conduct Committed When: Disorderly conduct shall be
committed by any person when he either:
      1.   Knowingly does any act in such an unreasonable manner as to provoke,
make or aid in the making of a breach of the peace; or
      2.   Resists or obstructs the performance by one, who may reasonably be
believed to be a police officer, of any authorized act within such officer's
capacity; or
      3.   Assembles with three or more persons for the purpose of using force
or firearms to disturb the public peace; or
      4.   Fails to observe a lawful order of dispersal by any person who may
reasonably be believed to be a police officer where three or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are
likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm;
or
      5.   Knowingly enters upon any school property, public or private within
the Village at any time when other persons are present on such school property,
for the purpose or with the intention of making or doing any unreasonable or
offensive act, utterance, gesture or display; or
      6.   Knowingly enters upon any school property, public or private within
the Village at any time when others are present on such school property, and
while thereon makes or does any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance,
gesture or display, which disrupts or interferes with or tends to disrupt or
interfere with administrative functions, educational classes or social and
athletic activities then and there in progress; or
      7.   Resists any officer of the Police Department in the discharge of his
duties or in any way interferes with or hinders or prevents such officer from
discharging his duty as such officer or offers or endeavors to do so, or
assists any person in the custody of any member of the police forces to escape
or attempt to escape from such custody, or attempts to rescue any person in
such custody; or
      8.   Creates a disturbance of public order by an act of violence or by an
act likely to produce violence; or
      9.   Engages in fighting, threatening or tumultuous behavior; or
      10.   Hinders, annoys or molests persons passing along any street,
sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way; or
      11.   Loiters, sits or stands around the entrance of a church, theater,
public building or other place of public assemblage, in any manner so as to
unreasonably obstruct such entrance; or
      12.   Places or erects upon any public way an obstruction of any type
except a temporary barrier or warning signs placed thereon for the purpose of
safeguarding the public against any hazard; or
      13.   Disturbs threatens or intentionally damages any occupied house or
vehicle; or
      14.   Intentionally inhales vapors or fumes or any substance which
induces euphoria, hallucinations or intoxication, except as otherwise provide
by law; or
Visits or resorts to any place wherein the inhaling of vapors or fumes or any
substance which induces euphoria, hallucinations or intoxication, is being
conducted practiced or carried on illegally therein; or
      15.   Makes continuous or causes to be made by use of any shouting or any
outcry, or by use of any horn, bell, radio, loudspeaker, amplifying systems or
by operation of any other instrument or device, any unreasonably loud,
disturbing or unnecessary noise or noises as prohibited by Section 6-14-1 of
this Code, upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of
this Village, or upon private premises in said Village which noise or noises
are of such character, volume intensity and duration, as to plainly be heard
upon the street, alleys, parks or other public places so as to disturb the
peace and quite of the Village or any portion thereof; or
      16.   Is in possession of an alcoholic beverage in a public street or
other public place unless the alcoholic beverage is in its original container
with the seal unbroken or unless the possession is on the premises of an
establishment holding a valid Village liquor license. For the purpose of this
subsection, a public place shall include, but not be limited to all Village
streets, Village parks, Cummings Square (the Forest Preserve property at Harlem
and Lake Street), all Village of River Forest Park District property, Village-
owned parking facilities, all parking lots and common areas serving multi-
family residential structures containing four or more dwelling units, provided
that this prohibition shall apply to such multi-family common areas only if the
owner, manager, or owner association has stated in writing that it is the
intention of such owner of the common area that the prohibition be applied. The
written statement may reserve the right of management to give one day permits
for residents or tenants to hold social gatherings in a common area; or
      17.   Is involved in any gang activity, or makes a gang sign; or
      18.   Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any city, town,
village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time
of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such
fire exist; or
      19.   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that
a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is
concealed in such place; or
      20.   Transmits is any manner to any peace officer, public officer or
public employee a report to the effect that no offense had been committed,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground
believing that such an offense has been committed; or
      21.   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any windows
or other opening in it; or
      22.   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the Illinois
"Collection Agency Act" or as an employee or such collection agency, and while
attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged
debtor which is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; or
      23.   Transmits a false report to the Department of Children and Family
Services under section 4 of the Illinois "Abused and Neglected Child Reporting
Act"; or
      24.   Transmits a false report to the Department of Public Health under
the Illinois "Nursing Home Care Act"; or
      25.   Transmits in any manner to the police department or fire department
of any municipality or fire protection district, or any privately owned and
operated ambulance service, a false request for an ambulance, emergency medical
technician-ambulance or emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the
time there is no reasonable ground in believing that such assistance is
required; or
      26.   Transmits a false report under Article II of "Elder Abuse
Demonstration Project Act", approved September 16, 1984, as amended 1 .
      27.   Violates any provision of subsections D and E below.
   D.   Gangs Signs Prohibited: It shall be a violation of this Section for any
person to display, make, demonstrate or "throw" a gang sign that may be seen or
received by another person who is in or on any public place within the Village.
   E.   Loitering For The Purpose Of Causing Street Gang Activity Or
Recruitment Is Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf,
wander, stand or to remain idle, whether alone or in consort with others, in a
public place for the purpose of recruiting others for membership in a street
gang or for participation in a gang activity or any criminal activities.
   F.   Temporary Questioning Prior To Arrest:
      1.   A peace officer, after having identified himself or herself as a
peace officer, may stop any person in a public place for a reasonable period of
time, when the person is wearing known gang colors, emblems or other gang
insignia, and the officer reasonably suspects from the circumstances that the
person is committing, is about to commit or has committed an offense, including
those set forth in this section. Once stopped, the officer may demand the name
and address of the person and an explanation of the person's action. Such
detention and temporary questioning will be conducted in the vicinity of where
the person is stopped.
      2.   When a peace officer has stopped a person for temporary questioning
pursuant to subsection F1 of this section and the officer reasonably suspects
that the officer or another person is in danger of attack, the officer may
search the person for weapons. If an officer discovers a weapon, the officer
may take it until the questioning is completed, at which time the officer shall
return any lawfully possessed weapon. (Ord. 2659, 11-13-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 320 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.
8-6-3: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or
have any alcoholic liquor in, upon or about any motor vehicle except in the
original package and with the seal unbroken.
   B.   It is unlawful for any pedestrian who is under the influence of
intoxicating liquors, as to provoke a breach of peace, to be upon any street or
roadway of the village.
   C.   No person under twenty one years of age shall purchase or accept a gift
of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his possession.
No person under age twenty one shall accept delivery of or consume alcoholic
liquor.
The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under age twenty one under the
direct supervision and approval of the parents, or parent, of such minor in the
privacy of a home is not prohibited by this section.
   D.   Whenever a police officer of the village observes a violation of this
section, he may issue a violation notice to the person committing the
violation. The violation notice shall be signed by the police officer and shall
include the following:
      1.   The name of the person violating this section and his or her
address, if known.
      2.   The nature of the offense. (1981 Code)
      3.   Every person found guilty of violating this section shall be guilty
of a petty offense and be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars. In lieu of, or in addition to, a finding of guilt and/or a fine,
a judicial officer may order a person to complete up to forty hours of
community service, under an order of supervision if appropriate. (Ord. 3412, 3-
12-2012)
8-6-4: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES OR CANNABIS, PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Definitions:
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any drug or controlled substance as defined in 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/102.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Articles or equipment commonly used in the consumption
or ingestion of controlled substances or cannabis shall include, but are not
limited to, the following enumerated articles: cocaine spoons, pot pipes, water
pipes, hypodermic needles, syringes, roach clips and literature devoted wholly
or substantially to describing or illustrating explicitly the consumption or
ingestion of a controlled substance or cannabis which tends to promote the use
of a controlled substance or cannabis.
   Words and phrases not defined in this section shall have the meaning given
to them in the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
550/1 et seq., as amended, the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., as amended, the Illinois Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 705/1-1 et seq., as amended, and
the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 130/1 et seq., as amended.
   B.   Possession Of Cannabis: It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of twenty one years to possess any quantity of cannabis.
      1.   Except if otherwise authorized by law, for a person who is twenty
one years of age or older and a resident of the State of Illinois, it shall be
unlawful for any person to possess cannabis in excess of the following limits:
         a.   Thirty grams of cannabis flower;
         b.   No more than five hundred milligrams of THC contained in
cannabis-infused product;
         c.   Five grams of cannabis concentrate; and
         d.   For registered qualifying patients, any cannabis produced by
cannabis plants grown under 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 705/10-5(b),
provided any amount of cannabis produced in excess of thirty grams of raw
cannabis or its equivalent must remain secured within the residence or
residential property in which it was grown.
      2.   For a person who is twenty one years of age or older and who is not
a resident of the State of Illinois, the possession limit is:
         a.   Fifteen grams of cannabis flower;
         b.   Two and one half grams of cannabis concentrate; and
         c.   Two hundred fifty milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis-
infused product.
The possession limits found in subsections B.1. and B.2. of this section are to
be considered cumulative.
   C.   Displays And Exhibits: It is unlawful for any person publicly to
exhibit or display for sale any drug paraphernalia, articles or equipment
commonly used in the consumption or ingestion of controlled substances, except
where such articles are prescribed for strictly medical purposes and are used
as such.
   D.   Sale To Minors: It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell
any paraphernalia, articles or equipment commonly used in the consumption or
ingestion of controlled substances to any person under the age of eighteen
years, except where such articles or equipment are prescribed for strictly
medical purposes and are used as such. It is unlawful for any person to sell or
offer to sell any paraphernalia, articles or equipment commonly used in the
consumption or ingestion of cannabis to any other person under the age of
twenty one years, except where such articles or equipment are prescribed for
strictly medical purposes and are used as such.
   E.   Violation: Whenever a police officer of the village observes a
violation of this section, he may issue a violation notice to the person
committing the violation. The violation notice shall be signed by the police
officer and shall include the following:
      1.   The name of the person violating this section and his or her
address, if known.
      2.   The nature of the offense.
      3.   Every person found guilty of violating this section shall be guilty
of a petty offense and be punished as follows:
         a.   The first violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine
of no less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars. Up to forty hours of community service may be substituted for all or
part of this fine. A sentence of community service will be accompanied by a
minimum fine of fifty dollars.
         b.   A second violation of this section by the same person within a
twelve month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than five hundred
dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars.
         c.   A third or subsequent violation of this section by the same
person within a twelve month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less
than seven hundred fifty dollars. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3412, 3-12-2012; Ord.
3789, 12-9-2019)
8-6-5: CRUELTY TO CHILDREN:
The provisions of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 675/2 are adopted by
reference. (1981 Code)
8-6-6: GAMBLING:
The provisions of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1 et seq., are adopted by
reference. (1981 Code)
8-6-7: HOUSES OF ILL FAME; DISORDERLY HOUSES:
No person shall keep or maintain a house of ill fame or assignation, or place
for the practice of prostitution or lewdness. No person shall patronize or be
an inmate of the same nor let, own or be interested in any house, room or other
premises for any such purpose or shall keep a common, ill governed, disorderly
house to the encouragement of idleness, gaming, drinking, fornication or other
misbehavior. (1981 Code)
8-6-8: OBSCENITY:
The provisions of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-19, 5/11-20 and 5/11-21
are adopted by reference. (1981 Code)
8-6-9: BARBED WIRE FENCES, GUARDS, RAILINGS:
No person, being the owner, lessee or agent of any real estate in the village,
shall erect, maintain or permit to be erected or maintained on or about the
exterior building line of such real estate or upon any portion of the sidewalk
adjacent to such real estate, any railing, fence, guard or protection of any
kind of barbed wire, or upon which railing, fence, guard or other protection
there shall be affixed or placed or in any manner attached, any spike, nail or
any pointed instrument of any kind or description. (1981 Code)
8-6-10: DANGEROUS SPORTS:
No person shall, at any place in the village, fly kites, throw stones, arrows
or other hard substances, play ball or engage in any sport or exercise likely
to impede the passage of vehicles and otherwise injure persons or property or
obstruct the business of other persons. (1981 Code)
8-6-11: INJURING VILLAGE PROPERTY:
No person shall injure, destroy or deface any public building, sewer, water
pipe, hydrant, lamppost or other village property or any tree, grass, shrub or
walk in any public way. Any person who damages such property shall pay to the
village the full amount of the cost of repair or restoration of the property so
damaged, plus a minimum charge of ten percent of the amount for administrative
and legal processing. (1981 Code)
8-6-12: PETIT LARCENY:
The provisions of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-1 are adopted by
reference. (1981 Code)
8-6-13: TRAINS, PLAYING UPON:
No person shall play upon or about any locomotive, engine, fender, car, or any
platform or step thereof, while the same or any or either of them are in
motion. (1981 Code)
8-6-14: LITTERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or place in any manner
whatsoever, in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, park or public place in the
village, refuse of any kind whatsoever; provided, that this section shall not
apply to the deposit of material under a permit authorized by any provisions of
this code or other ordinances of the village; nor to goods, wares or
merchandise deposited upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place
temporarily, in the necessary course of trade, and removal therefrom within two
hours after being so deposited, nor to articles or things deposited in, or
conducted into the village sewerage system through lawful drains in accordance
with the provisions of this code or other lawful ordinances of the village
relating thereto. (1981 Code)
8-6-15: IMPERSONATE, INTERFERE WITH VILLAGE OFFICERS:
No person shall falsely represent himself to be an officer of the village nor
shall, without being duly authorized, exercise or attempt to exercise any of
the duties, functions or powers of a village officer, nor shall hinder,
obstruct, resist or otherwise interfere with any village officer in the
discharge of his official duties. (1981 Code)
8-6-16: ESCAPE FROM CUSTODY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to break open or out of any jail in the
village or in any manner, directly or indirectly, to aid or assist in or
counsel or advise the breaking open or out of any jail in the village. (1981
Code)
8-6-17: WEAPONS:
   A.   Carry When Concealed: It shall be unlawful for any person within the
corporate limits of the village to carry or wear, under his clothes or
concealed about his person, any pistol, revolver or slungshot, metal knuckles,
switch blade knife or dagger, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon. This
prohibition shall not apply to members of the police department of the village
when on duty nor to any officer of any court whose duty it may be to serve
warrants or make arrests. The prohibition on the possession of a concealed
firearm herein shall not apply to any person licensed to carry a concealed
firearm pursuant to the Illinois firearm concealed carry act, 430 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 66/1 et seq., as amended. "Concealed firearm" as used in this
section shall mean a loaded or unloaded handgun carried on or about a person
completely or mostly concealed from view of the public or on or about a person
within a vehicle as defined in 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 66/5, as amended.
(Ord. 3558, 5-11-2015)
Any such weapon duly adjudged by any judge to have been worn or carried by any
person in violation of these provisions shall be forfeited or confiscated to
the village.
   B.   Discharge Of Firearms: It shall be unlawful for any person, except a
member of the police department when on duty, or any officer of the court whose
duty it may be to serve warrants to make arrests, to fire or discharge any gun,
pistol, fowling piece or other firearm, within the corporate limits of the
village.
   C.   Air Guns, Spring Guns: No person shall be permitted to fire or
discharge in the village any air gun or air pistol, spring gun or spring
pistol, or other device which is calculated or intended to project a bullet,
pellet, arrow or similar projectile. In addition to any other penalty that may
be imposed for violation of this provision, weapons used in violation shall be
forfeited to and confiscated by the village.
   D.   Illegal Sales To Minors: No person shall, within the corporate limits
of the village, sell, loan or furnish to any person under the age of twenty one
any gun, pistol, fowling piece, air gun or air pistol, spring gun or spring
pistol, or other firearm or device which is calculated or intended to propel or
project a bullet, pellet, arrow or similar projectile. (1981 Code)
8-6-18: THEFT OF RECYCLABLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, obtain, possess or pick up any
recyclable item placed for collection from a residence or from a drop off
recycling center unless said person is an authorized agent of the individual
group or organization conducting the recycling program. (Ord. 2385, 4-23-1990)
8-6-19: DISPOSAL OF YARD WASTES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit yard wastes on any parkway,
sidewalk, street, alley, park or public place in the village, and it shall also
be unlawful for any person to deposit yard waste on private property unless
said yard wastes are deposited by the property owners for the sole purpose of
composting or mulching those yard waste materials developed on site. (Ord.
2385, 4-23-1990)
8-6-20: GRAFFITI PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to inscribe, draw or otherwise
place upon the surface of any structure or wall that is publicly or privately
owned any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch,
picture or letter without the permission of the owner of the property. The
above list is not to be a limitation, but is merely illustrative of items known
as graffiti.
   B.   It shall be an affirmative defense to the alleged violation of the
foregoing provision if such activity was undertaken with the prior written
consent of the owner of the property, demonstrating that the owner was aware of
the content and method of the inscription to be placed on the structure or
wall; however no owner of property shall place or give permission to place on
any property, real or personal which is in public view any sign, symbol,
marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture or letter which
incites violence by reference to gang or criminal activity, depicts or
expresses obscenity by referring to sexual activity or contains defamatory
material about a public or private person.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess while in any public
building or in any public facility or while on private property spray paint
containers, paint, ink, marking pens which contain a nonsoluble fluid, brushes,
applicator or other etching with the intent to use such material(s) to violate
subsection A of this section.
   D.   The village hereby declares graffiti, as defined in this section, to be
a nuisance and as a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided herein.
   E.   Upon notification by the village, the owner of property upon which
graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the graffiti within five
working days from the date of the notice. Such property owners or other owners
of property upon the exterior of which graffiti has been placed may obtain
chemicals for the removal of graffiti from the village public works department
upon signing a release holding the village harmless from any claims or suits
brought for damages pursuant to any adverse or injurious effects of such
chemicals. Chemicals will be supplied in original containers with
manufacturer's instructions for use and warnings intact.
   F.   The village, upon notification of graffiti placed upon any village
property, shall remove the graffiti within three working days from the date of
the notification. The village also shall remove graffiti from the exterior of
private property if owners inform the village of the presence of such graffiti
and of their inability to remove it. Owners must sign a statement authorizing
removal by the village and must sign a release holding the village harmless
from any claims or suits brought for damages pursuant to any adverse or
injurious effects of such chemicals or from the actions taken by the village or
its employees to remove the graffiti. If property owners do not request such
removal or do not remove the graffiti within the time specified they shall be
subject to the penalties listed in subsection H of this section.
   G.   An extension of time in which graffiti must be removed may be granted
by the village upon application of the property owner to the police department
and a showing of cause. Cause shall include, but not be limited to: weather,
temperature, availability of chemicals or physical limitations.
   H.   Every person found guilty of violating subsection A, B or C of this
section, shall be guilty of a petty offense or a misdemeanor and be punished by
a fine of not less than one hundred dollars and not more than five hundred
dollars for each offense. Additionally, the court may require the party guilty
of violating subsection A, B or C of this section to make full and complete
restitution to the village and/or the owner of the property for expenses
incurred in the removal of graffiti and/or restoration of the structure or wall
to its previous condition. The court may also order as a further penalty,
community service in the form of time to be spent in cleaning property that has
been defaced by graffiti in any location in the village 1 .
   I.   Every person found guilty of violating subsection E of this section,
shall be guilty of a petty offense or a misdemeanor and be punished by a fine
of not less than twenty five dollars and not more than five hundred dollars for
each offense. (Ord. 2539, 3-22-1993)
 
Notes
  1. The Illinois parental responsibility act, 740 ILCS 115/1 et seq., shall be
1 applicable to personal injury and/or property damage resulting from a
  violation of the prohibition against graffiti.
8-6-21: COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND VIDEO GAMING PROHIBITED:
   A.   Amusement Devices Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or use for gain or public use within the village any amusement device,
electronic or otherwise, the operation of which is governed or controlled by
the deposit of a coin or token.
   B.   Video Gaming Prohibited:
      1.   Definitions:
   VIDEO GAMING: The ownership, placement, maintenance, operation or use of a
"video gaming terminal" (as defined herein) in a licensed establishment,
licensed fraternal establishment or licensed veterans' establishment, as said
terms are defined within the Video Gaming Act 1  (hereinafter the
"establishment(s)"), within the Village.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including, but not limited to, video poker, line up and blackjack, as
authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board, utilizing a video display and
microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that can
be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly
dispenses coins, cash or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
      2.   Prohibition:
         a.   Video gaming is prohibited within the Village of River Forest.
         b.   A video gaming license issued by the State of Illinois is not
effective within the Village of River Forest.
         c.   A prohibited video gaming terminal shall be immediately removed
by the owner or operator from the establishment(s).
         d.   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to permit
or allow any video gaming terminal to be played or remain within any
establishment(s) within the Village of River Forest.
      3.   Fines And Penalties: Any person who violates or assists in the
violations of any provision of this section shall be deemed to have committed a
petty offense and shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars for
each such violation. Each day on which, or during which, a violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 3431, 5-21-2012)
 
Notes
1 2. 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
8-6-22: UNDERAGE POSSESSION OF TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS PROHIBITED; SALE OF
FLAVORED LIQUID NICOTINE PRODUCTS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Definitions:
      ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE: means any electronically actuated device which in
operation causes the user to exhale any smoke, vapor, or other substance other
than those produced by unenhanced human exhalation. "Electronic cigarette"
includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold
as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an
electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or under any other product name or
descriptor. The term "electronic cigarette" does not include any asthma inhaler
or other device that has been specifically approved by the United States Food
and Drug Administration.
      FLAVORED LIQUID NICOTINE PRODUCT: means any liquid nicotine product that
contains a constituent that imparts a characterizing flavor. As used in this
definition, the term "characterizing flavor" means a distinguishable taste or
aroma, other than the taste or aroma of tobacco, imparted either prior to or
during consumption of a liquid nicotine product including but not limited to
tastes or aromas of menthol, mint, wintergreen, chocolate, vanilla, honey,
cocoa, any candy, any dessert, any alcoholic beverage, any fruit, any herb or
any spice.
      LIQUID NICOTINE PRODUCT: means (1) any electronic cigarette (i)
containing liquid, gel, salt-based nicotine liquid, or other solution that
contains nicotine, or (ii) packaged with a liquid, gel, salt-based nicotine
liquid, or other solution that contains nicotine; and (2) any other container
of liquid, gel, salt, salt-based nicotine liquid, or other solution where the
liquid, gel, salt-based nicotine liquid, or other solution contains nicotine
and is intended to be utilized in an electronic cigarette. The term "liquid
nicotine product" does not include any product regulated by the United States
Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act, 21 U.S.C. § 301, et seq.
      TOBACCO: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping
tobacco, any liquid nicotine product and any product or device not consisting
of or containing tobacco leaf that provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling,
snorting, sniffing, or any other means including, but not by way of limitation,
what is commonly referred to as electronic cigarettes or vaping.
   B.   Prohibited. The following are prohibited in the Village, and are
declared a nuisance and detrimental to the public’s health, safety and welfare:
      1.   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall knowingly
possess or use tobacco, in any of its forms provided, that the possession by a
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years under the direct supervision of
the parent or legal guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent’s or
guardian’s home shall not be prohibited.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to purchase tobacco, or to misrepresent his identity or age, or to use
any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give
away or deliver tobacco to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give
away or deliver flavored liquid nicotine products.
      5.   Signs informing the public of the restrictions provided for in this
section shall be posted by every seller of tobacco at or near every display of
tobacco and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco for sale.
Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS
OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW AND THE SALE OF FLAVORED LIQUID NICOTINE PRODUCTS
TO ANYONE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW
   C.   Violation: Whenever a police officer or police employee of the Village
observes a violation of this section, he or she may confiscate the product for
disposal and issue a violation notice to the person committing the violation.
The violation notice shall be signed by the police officer or police employee
and shall include the following:
      1.   The name of the person violating this section and his or her
address, if known.
      2.   The nature of the offense.
      3.   Every person found guilty of violating this section shall be guilty
of a petty offense and be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars. In lieu of, or in addition to, a finding of guilt and/or a fine,
a judicial officer or administrative hearing officer may order a person to
complete up to forty hours of community service, under an order of supervision
if appropriate. (Ord. 2817, 3-22-1999; amd. Ord. 3412, 3-12-2012; Ord. 3763, 6-
24-2019; Ord. 3782, 9-23-2019)
8-6-23: FALSE STATEMENTS TO GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES:
   A.   False Statements Prohibited: Any person who knowingly makes a false
statement of material fact to the Village in violation of any statute,
ordinance or regulation, or who knowingly makes a false statement of material
fact to the Village or to a unit of local government located within the Village
in connection with any application, report, affidavit, oath, certification or
attestation, including a statement of material fact made in connection with a
bid, proposal, contract or economic disclosure statement, is liable to the
Village for a petty offense punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars. Each day that such false
statement of material fact remains in effect shall constitute a separate
offense. The penalties imposed by this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty provided for in this Code.
   B.   Reasonable Investigation Required: Any person who signs, certifies,
attests, submits or otherwise provides assurances to the Village or unit of
local government within the Village, or causes any other person to sign,
certify, attest, submit or otherwise provide assurances to the Village or unit
of local government within the Village, that a statement of material fact made
in connection with any application, report, affidavit, oath, attestation or
other document submitted to the Village or such unit of local government is
accurate, true or complete, shall make a reasonable investigation to determine
the accuracy, truthfulness or completeness of such statement of material fact.
   C.   Presumption: When any person signs, certifies, attests, submits or
otherwise provides assurances to the Village or unit of local government within
the Village, or causes any other person to sign, certify, attest, submit or
otherwise provide assurances to the Village or unit of local government within
the Village, that a statement of material fact made in connection with any
application, report, affidavit, oath, attestation or other document submitted
to the Village or the unit of local government is accurate, true or complete,
and that statement of material fact is not accurate, true or complete, a
rebuttable presumption shall be created that such person has not made a
reasonable investigation to determine the accuracy, truthfulness or
completeness of such statement of material fact.
   D.   State Of Mind: For the purposes of this Code, a person knowingly makes
a false statement of material fact when that person: 1) makes a statement of
material fact with actual knowledge that the statement was false, or 2) makes a
statement of material fact with knowledge of facts or information that would
cause a reasonable person to be aware that the statement was false when it was
made, or 3) signs, certifies, attests, submits or otherwise provides
assurances, or causes any other person to sign, certify, attest, submit or
otherwise provide assurances, that a statement of material fact is true or
accurate in deliberate ignorance or reckless disregard of the truth or falsity
of the statement. For purposes of this section, a person who fails to make a
reasonable investigation to determine the accuracy, truthfulness or
completeness of any material fact acts in deliberate ignorance or reckless
disregard of the truth or falsity of the material fact. (Ord. 3675, 1-8-2018)
8-6-24: PROHIBITION OF FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
      Consumer Fireworks Display: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of
consumer fireworks to produce a visual or audible effect.
      Fireworks: Any explosive composition or any substance or combination of
substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion,
deflagration or detonation. This includes, but is not limited to blank
cartridges, toy cannons in which explosives are used, the type of balloons
which required fire underneath to propel the same, fireworks, torpedoes, sky
rockets, roman candles, bombs or other explosives of like construction and any
device containing any explosive compound for exhibitional purposes, or any
tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or containing
combustible substances producing visual effects.
      Pyrotechnic Display: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of display
fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees.
   B.   Prohibitions And Permits:
      1.   Storage Prohibited: No gunpowder, gun cotton, giant powder,
dynamite, nitroglycerin, fulminate of mercury or other high explosives of
similar nature shall be permitted to remain upon any landing, street, public
way, railroad track, station platform, freight house, warehouse or upon or in
any car or at any other place within the village, in any quantity whether in
bulk or made up or kept in package or cartridges. This provision shall not
apply to paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths (0.25) grain
or less of explosive compound or explosive mixture for use in toy pistols or
other such devices.
      2.   Fireworks Prohibited:
         a.   No person, firm, partnership, copartnership, or corporation may
knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use,
ignite, explode, or otherwise discharge any fireworks within village limits;
         b.   However, upon application and village approval, the village may
grant permits for pyrotechnic and consumer fireworks displays. Permits for
pyrotechnic and consumer fireworks displays may be issued unless the
requirements of section 2.1 or 2.2 of the fireworks use act, 425 Illinois
compiled statutes 35/0.01 et. seq., as applicable, have been met, or
      3.   Prohibited Consumer Fireworks: Prohibited consumer fireworks
include, but are not limited to, the following: Handheld fireworks, bottle
rockets, skyrockets, roman candles, chasers, buzz bombs, ground items other
than those identified as approved consumer fireworks, helicopters, missiles,
pin wheels or any other twirling device whether on the ground or mounted above
the ground, planes, sky lanterns, the type of balloon which requires fire
underneath to propel same, and firecrackers (all types).
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   The term “fireworks” shall not include snake or glowworm pellets;
smoke devices; or sparklers.
      2.   The term “fireworks” also does not include trick noisemakers known
as party poppers, booby traps, snappers, trick matches, cigarette loads, and
auto burglar alarms.
      3.   Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or
plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths (0.25) grain or less of
explosive compound are used are not considered fireworks, provided they are so
constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for
the explosion.
      4.   Toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than twenty-five
hundredths (0.25) grain of explosive mixture are also permitted. The sale and
use of these permitted items shall be allowed at all times.
      5.   Cones including showers of sparks, fountains, and repeaters (also
known as cakes). Single tube fountains must not contain more than seventy-five
(75) grams of pyrotechnic composition. Cone fountains must not contain more
than fifty (50) grams total of pyrotechnic composition. Multiple-tube fountains
must not contain more than five hundred (500) grams total of pyrotechnic
composition.
      6.   Mines, comets, tubes, sells, fancy florals, and parachutes. These
items are fireworks devices designed to produce low-level aerial effects, which
are propelled into the air by a lift charge. Shells will burst at the peak of
flight to create a display of stars, reports or other effects or leave a trail
of sparks until exhausted. These items contain a maximum of forty (40) grams of
chemical composition and no more than twenty (20) grams of lift charge.
      7.   As defined by the pyrotechnic use act, 425 ILCS 35/1, all consumer
fireworks must comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling
regulations of the U.S. consumer products safety commission, as set forth in 16
C.F.R. parts 1500 and 1507 and classified as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the
United States department of transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101.
      8.   The consumer fireworks must be labeled “1.4G Consumer” or must be
1.4S fireworks classified as UN0337 intended for outdoor consumer use.
      9.   The American fireworks standards laboratory (AFSL) must have
inspected the consumer fireworks. It is the consumer distributor’s and consumer
retailer’s responsibility to ensure that the consumer fireworks he or she
distributes, sells, offers for sale, exchanges for consideration, transfers, or
provides have been tested and meet AFSL standards. The consumer distributor/
retailer shall maintain records verifying AFSL testing and compliance for the
consumer fireworks he or she distributes, sells, offers for sale, exchanges for
consideration, transfers, or provides.
      10.   The consumer fireworks must be ground mounted. No handheld consumer
fireworks shall be approved.
   D.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person, firm, partnership, copartnership, or corporation
violating this provision shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
      2.   Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be cited
accordingly. (Ord. 3966, 8-25-2025)
CHAPTER 7
CURFEW
SECTION:
8-7-1: Curfew For Minors
8-7-2: Curfew For Civil Emergencies
8-7-1: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
   A.   Offenses:
      1.   It is unlawful for a person less than eighteen years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at
the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian or other responsible companion at least twenty one years of age
approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or
occupation which the laws of the state authorize a person less than eighteen
years of age to perform:
         a.   Between one minute past twelve o'clock A.M. and six o'clock A.M.
Saturday;
         b.   Between one minute past twelve o'clock A.M. and six o'clock A.M.
Sunday; and
         c.   Between eleven o'clock P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and
six o'clock A.M. on the following day.
      2.   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate this
section.
      3.   The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises or the
establishment during curfew hours.
   B.   Defenses:
      1.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection A of this section
that the minor was:
         a.   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or another similar entity
that takes responsibility for the minor;
         b.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right to assembly.
   C.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
subsection B of this section is present.
   D.   Fines; Penalties:
      1.   Every person found guilty of violating subsection A of this section
shall be guilty of a petty offense and be punished by a fine of not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars.
      2.   Up to forty hours of community service may be substituted for all or
part of this fine. (Ord. 3380, 7-18-2011)
8-7-2: CURFEW FOR CIVIL EMERGENCIES:
   A.   Definitions:
   CIVIL EMERGENCY: A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate
power to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of
law; or
Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood, conflagration,
cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate limits of the
village, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of
property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect
the public health, safety and welfare.
   CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or person walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the village,
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated
to duty with reference to said civil emergency.
   B.   Declaration Of Emergency: Whenever an emergency, as defined in
subsection A of this section exists, the president shall declare the existence
by means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the
emergency. After proclamation of a civil emergency by the president, he may
order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village or
to the village as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable during such
hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public
safety and welfare.
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the president may also, in the
interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following orders:
      1.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
      2.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever;
      3.   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the
protection of life and property.
   C.   Time Period: The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for
a period of forty eight hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the
president indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The president
shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the
end of each forty eight hour period during the time the said civil emergency
exists.
   D.   Notification: Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the
chief of police shall notify the news media situated within the village and
shall cause three copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the
emergency to be posted to the following places within the village: the village
hall, the police station, and the post office.
   E.   Impairment Of Powers: Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to impair the powers contained in this code giving powers to the
police and fire departments, but shall be construed together with existing
ordinances now in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the
village. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 8
GARAGE SALES
SECTION:
8-8-1: Definitions
8-8-2: Property Permitted to be Sold
8-8-3: Hours and Length of Operation
8-8-4: Display of Sale Property
8-8-5: Display of Signs
8-8-6: Maintenance of Order
8-8-7: Parking
8-8-8: Penalty
8-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
   GARAGE SALE: Shall mean and include all general sales, open to the public,
conducted from a residential premises for the purpose of disposing of personal
property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage", "lawn",
"yard", "attic", "porch", "room", "backyard", "patio", "flea market" or
"rummage" sale. This definition shall not include a situation where no more
than five specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such
sale specifically names those items to be sold. (Ord. 2078, 7-27-81)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an
individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course
of living or in maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which
was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. It also does not include
firearms of any kind. (Ord. 2078, 7-27-81; amd. Ord. 2441, 7-8-91)
8-8-2: PROPERTY PERMITTED TO BE SOLD:
It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell or offer for sale, under
authority granted by this Chapter, property other than personal property.
8-8-3: HOURS AND LENGTH OF OPERATION:
Such garage sale shall be limited to the hours of nine o'clock A.M. to five
o'clock P.M. The sale shall be limited to any two consecutive days.
8-8-4: DISPLAY OF SALE PROPERTY:
Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in a
garage, carport and/or in a rear yard, but only in such areas. No personal
property offered for sale at a garage sale shall be displayed in the front yard
of any such premises or in any public right of way.
8-8-5: DISPLAY OF SIGNS:
A sign advertising a garage sale may be displayed only on the property of the
residence where the garage sale is being conducted during the time the sale is
in progress, and may not exceed four square feet in surface area.
8-8-6: MAINTENANCE OF ORDER:
The individual conducting the sale and the owner or tenant of the premises on
which such sale or activity is conducted shall be responsible for the
maintenance of good order on the premises during such sale. In the event good
order is not maintained or the sale shall violate any of the provisions of this
Chapter, the person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject
to the penalties provided by this Code.
8-8-7: PARKING:
The Police Department may enforce temporary traffic and parking controls to
alleviate any hazards or congestion created by any garage sale. (Ord. 2078, 7-
27-81)
8-8-8: PENALTY:
Every person found guilty of violating the sections herein shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be punished by a fine of not less than fifteen dollars and not
more than five hundred dollars for each offense. (Ord. 2078, 7-27-81; amd. Ord.
2441, 7-8-91)
CHAPTER 9
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
8-9-1: Definitions
8-9-2: Exceptions From Solicitation Activities
8-9-3: Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited
8-9-4: Time Limit On Solicitation And Certain Excepted Activities
8-9-5: Street Intersections Wherein Charitable Solicitation Is Permitted
8-9-6: Organizations Qualifying For Street Intersection Solicitation Activities
8-9-7: Registration Required
8-9-8: Waiver Of Registration Requirements
8-9-9: Permit Required
8-9-10: Permit Fees
8-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
   SOLICITATION: For the purpose of this chapter the term "solicitation" shall
be defined and shall include any one or more of the following activities:
   A.   Seeking to obtain orders either for immediate or future delivery, for
the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind,
character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind or character; or
   C.   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
   D.   Going upon any premises and ringing the doorbell upon or near any door,
or creating any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of engaging in any of the
activities described in this section; or
   E.   Seeking to obtain contributions on behalf of any charitable, religious,
civic, local fire or police auxiliary, school or scouting organization or any
other not for profit organization in good standing in the state of Illinois.
Such charitable or not for profit organization shall be:
      1.   Registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization in
the manner provided by law;
      2.   Engaged in statewide fundraising activities. (Ord. 2473, 2-10-1992;
amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
8-9-2: EXCEPTIONS FROM SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES:
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "solicitation" shall not include the
following activities:
   A.   Seeking to conduct any of the activities enumerated in section
8-9-1 of this chapter when undertaken by any person pursuant to a previous
appointment or invitation of the party being contacted.
   B.   Seeking to obtain signatures to petitions on political or public policy
questions or matters. (Ord. 2473, 2-10-1992; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
8-9-3: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
No person shall engage in solicitation upon any premises or in any dwelling
house, apartment or other residence located thereon within the village after
having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises or
residence, nor shall any person engage in solicitation upon any premises or in
any dwelling house, apartment or other residence located thereon if such
premises or dwelling building is posted against solicitation by means of a
notice prominently displayed, upon which is printed the legend:
"NO SOLICITOR" or "NO SOLICITORS INVITED" or "NO TRESPASSING"
which notice is posted or exhibited at or near the main entrance to the
premises or on or near the main door to any dwelling or residence thereon or
any point of approach of entry thereto. (Ord. 2473, 2-10-1992; amd. Ord. 2668,
2-12-1996)
8-9-4: TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITATION AND CERTAIN EXCEPTED ACTIVITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the solicitation
activities defined in section
8-9-1 of this chapter or in any of the excepted activities listed in subsection
8-9-2A of this chapter at any time prior to nine o'clock A.M. or after eight
o'clock P.M. local time Monday through Friday or Saturday, prior to nine
o'clock A.M. or after five o'clock P.M. at any time on a Sunday or on a state
or national holiday. (Ord. 3414, 4-9-2012)
8-9-5: STREET INTERSECTIONS WHEREIN CHARITABLE SOLICITATION IS PERMITTED:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section
8-9-2 of this chapter, solicitation of contributions for charitable or other
not for profit purposes, shall be allowed only at the following street
intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop:
Chicago Avenue and Thatcher Avenue
Harlem Avenue and Lake Street
Harlem Avenue and North Avenue
Thatcher and Lake Street
(Ord. 2473, 2-10-1992; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
8-9-6: ORGANIZATIONS QUALIFYING FOR STREET INTERSECTION SOLICITATION
ACTIVITIES:
No charitable or not for profit organization or other person shall conduct
solicitation activities on or within this village, unless such organization
shall be:
   A.   Registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization in
the manner provided by law.
   B.   Engaged in statewide fundraising activities.
   C.   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during such
solicitation activity which is causally related to an act of ordinary
negligence of the soliciting agent.
   D.   Liable for any increase in the cost of liability insurance taken by the
village with respect to said street intersection solicitation activity.
   E.   Restricted in its solicitation activities to representatives or agents
who shall be sixteen years of age or more and who shall be wearing a high
visibility vest, with no more than four such persons being allowed to actually
solicit on or within an intersection at any one time.
   F.   Able to first furnish a valid certificate of liability insurance with
an insurer approved by the village naming the village as an additional insured
with respect to such solicitation activities.
   G.   Able to first execute a hold harmless and indemnification agreement to
the village with respect to such solicitation activities. (Ord. 2473, 2-10-
1992; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
8-9-7: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Every solicitor, except as indicated in section
 8-9-2 of this chapter, shall prior to engaging in such activity, register with
the department of police and furnish in writing on a form prescribed by the
police department the following:
      1.   The name and current address and telephone number of the solicitor.
      2.   The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization
by whom he is employed or with whom he is associated.
      3.   The nature of the commodities, articles or services registrant is
selling or offering for sale, or the charitable purpose for which funds are to
be solicited.
      4.   An estimate of the time period in which solicitation activities will
be pursued.
      5.   The names of other municipalities or cities where the applicant has
solicited in the past five years.
      6.   A description of the methods of solicitation that will be employed.
      7.   A listing of criminal convictions of the applicant. (Ord. 2473, 2-
10-1992; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
      8.   Submit to a name check only criminal background check (waiver
required). (Ord. 3414, 4-9-2012)
   B.   Registration forms may be completed in person at the police department
or will be accepted by U.S. mail.
   C.   The number of solicitors representing one organization at the same time
is limited to eight.
   D.   The police department shall deny the application of any applicant who
answers a question untruthfully.
The police department shall approve or deny the application no later than three
working days after receiving a properly completed application. A solicitor must
carry the approved application on his or her person at all times when
soliciting in the village, as proof of registration and shall present it upon
request. (Ord. 2473, 2-10-1992; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
8-9-8: WAIVER OF REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
The registration requirements outlined in section
8-9-7 of this chapter are hereby waived for groups that are community based
youth groups or school sponsored student groups provided the leader or sponsor
of such group maintains a roster of the names of its members. (Ord. 2473, 2-10-
1992; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
8-9-9: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any organization eligible to conduct solicitation activities within those
street intersections herein above designated shall obtain a permit for such
solicitation from the village administrator and it shall be the duty of the
village administrator to see that the applicant complies with eligibility
requirements contained in section
8-9-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2473, 2-10-1992; amd. Ord. 2668, 2-12-1996)
8-9-10: PERMIT FEES:
Any organization eligible to conduct solicitation activities within the
corporate limits of River Forest shall pay a permit fee of one hundred dollars
per twelve month period, which will include the fee for the requestor's
background check. Each subsequent solicitor of an organization (maximum of
eight) will be charged a background check fee of twenty five dollars per
solicitor. (Ord. 3414, 4-9-2012)
CHAPTER 10
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF MUNICIPAL CODE VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
8-10-1: Adoption
8-10-2: Purpose
8-10-3: Definitions
8-10-4: Hearing Officer Qualifications
8-10-5: Establishment Of Code Hearing Department
8-10-6: Function And Jurisdiction
8-10-7: Hearing Procedures Not Exclusive
8-10-8: Code Enforcement Procedures
8-10-9: Retaliation Against Occupants Prohibited
8-10-10: Subpoenas
8-10-11: Representation At Code Hearings
8-10-12: Continuances
8-10-13: Hearing
8-10-14: Evidence
8-10-15: Defenses To Building Code Violations
8-10-16: Default
8-10-17: Findings, Decision And Order
8-10-18: Order And Sanction Attached To Property
8-10-19: Administrative Review
8-10-20: Judgment And Enforcement
8-10-1: ADOPTION:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to division 2.2 of article 1 of the Illinois
municipal code 1  and division 31.1 of article 11 of the Illinois municipal
code 2  in their current forms and as they may be amended from time to time for
adjudication of municipal ordinance violations, including building code
violations, to the extent permitted by the Illinois constitution. (Ord. 3363,
4-11-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.
8-10-2: PURPOSE:
It has been determined to be in the best interest of the village of River
Forest to provide a method for fairly and efficiently enforcing the village's
municipal ordinances, including the building code, as may be allowed by law
through the administrative adjudication of such violations, and establishing
fines and penalties and authority for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
(Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, words or terms shall have the following meanings
unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another meaning is intended:
   BUILDING CODE: Any village ordinance, law, housing, building code, or zoning
ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire
prevention, sanitation, or other health and safety standards that are
applicable to structures in the village or any village ordinance that requires,
after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the
removal of inoperable vehicles or the abatement of nuisance from private
property.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR: Any full time state, county or municipal employee, whose
duties include the inspection or examination of structures or property in a
municipality to determine if zoning or other code violations exist.
   CODE: Unless the context requires otherwise, any village code or ordinance,
including any "building code" violation, as defined in this section, except for
any offense under the Illinois vehicle code or similar offense that is a
traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for a
reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , and
also excepting any village code or ordinance adjudicated under title 9, chapter
6 of this code pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3(a).
   HEARING OFFICER: A village employee or an officer or agent of the village,
other than a building inspector or law enforcement officer, whose duty is to:
   A.   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not
a code violation exists;
   B.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from the building inspector, law
enforcement officer, code enforcement officer or other individual specifically
authorized to issue a code violation notice, to the structure/property owner
and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code violation;
   C.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
   D.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a
code violation exists.
   PROPERTY OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a structure. (Ord. 3363, 4-
11-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/6-204.
8-10-4: HEARING OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS:
Prior to conducting proceedings under this chapter, hearing officers shall
successfully complete a formal training program that includes the following:
   A.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will
conduct;
   B.   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will
administer;
   C.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
   D.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and
issuing final orders.
   E.   Every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the state of Illinois for at least three years. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-5: ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby established the ordinance enforcement department, an executive
department of village government, which shall function as a code hearing
department pursuant to the system of administrative adjudication described in
this chapter. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-6: FUNCTION AND JURISDICTION:
   A.   The function of the ordinance enforcement department is to expedite the
prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner set forth herein.
   B.   The ordinance enforcement department may adjudicate any code violation
as defined herein. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-7: HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
This chapter does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce
the provisions of this code, including its building code. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-
2011)
8-10-8: CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   When a building inspector finds a building code violation to exist, or
a police officer, code enforcement officer or other individual specifically
authorized by any village official or village department to issue a code
violation notice, finds a code violation, building code violation, to exist, he
or she shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report
form that shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   The name and address of the party violating the ordinance, if known,
or the property owner for a building code violation;
      2.   The type and nature of the violation;
      3.   The date and time the violation was observed;
      4.   The names of the witnesses of the violation; and
      5.   In the case of the building code violation, the address of the
property where the violation is observed.
   B.   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the ordinance
enforcement department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of
the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for
that purpose on the form.
   C.   The hearing date shall not be less than thirty nor more than forty days
after the violation is reported.
   D.   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files
of the ordinance enforcement department and shall be part of the record of
hearing.
   E.   One copy of the report form shall be returned to the building inspector
issuing the report form or the individual representing the village in the case
to prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on
the date indicated.
   F.   One copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail to the
defendant (the property owner for building code violations) along with a
summons commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing.
   G.   In the case of a building code violation only, if the village ordinance
requires property owners to register, service may be on the owner by mailing
the report and summons to the property owner's address registered with the
village.
   H.   In the case of a building code violation only, if the name of the
property owner cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made
by mail, service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the
violation report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is
found, not less than twenty days before the hearing is scheduled. (Ord. 3363,
4-11-2011)
8-10-9: RETALIATION AGAINST OCCUPANTS PROHIBITED:
In the case of a building code violation only, no action for eviction,
abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar
proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling
solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a building code
violation hearing. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-10: SUBPOENAS:
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the
case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give
testimony at the hearing. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-11: REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS:
The case for the village may be presented by an attorney designated by the
village or by any other village employee, but shall not be presented by an
employee of the ordinance enforcement department. The case for the defendant
may be presented by the defendant, his or her attorney, or any other agent or
representative of the defendant. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-12: CONTINUANCES:
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under
this chapter except when absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the
defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any
continuance authorized by the hearing officer under this section shall not
exceed twenty five days. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-13: HEARING:
At the hearing, the hearing officer shall preside, hear testimony and accept
any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code violation.
(Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-14: EVIDENCE:
With regard to testimony heard and evidence presented, the strict rules of
evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings
authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-15: DEFENSES TO BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS:
In the case of a building code violation only, it shall be a defense if the
owner, his or her attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the
hearing officer's satisfaction that:
   A.   The building code violation alleged does not in fact exist, or at the
time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed.
   B.   The building code violation has been caused by the current property
occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the property owner to
maintain the dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue
to cause the building code violation.
   C.   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry by the owner
or his or her agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of
correcting the building code violation. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-16: DEFAULT:
   A.   If the defendant or his or her attorney or designee fails to appear on
the dates set for the hearing, the hearing officer may find the defendant in
default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of a code violation.
   B.   Upon finding the defendant in default, the ordinance enforcement
department shall send or cause to be sent notices by first class mail, postage
prepaid to the defendant who was sent notice of the ordinance violation.
Service or notices sent in accordance herewith shall be complete as of the date
of deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-17: FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER:
   A.   At the conclusion of the hearing the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a code violation exists.
   B.   The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as
findings, decision and order.
   C.   The findings, decision and order shall include:
      1.   The hearing officer's finding of fact;
      2.   A decision as to whether or not a code violation exists based upon
the findings of fact;
      3.   An order that states the sanction, which may include an order to
correct the violation, or dismisses the case if a violation is not proved;
      4.   In the case of a code violation other than a building code
violation, if a violation is proved, a monetary sanction shall not exceed the
amount provided for in section a of the Illinois municipal code 1 , currently
seven hundred fifty dollars; and
      5.   In the case of a building code violation, if a violation is proved,
the order may impose the sanctions that are provided in the building code for
the violation proved.
   D.   A copy of any findings, decisions, or orders shall be served on the
defendant within five days after it is issued.
   E.   Service shall be via first class mail.
   F.   Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of any fine or money
shall be in the manner as set forth in this code. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1.
8-10-18: ORDER AND SANCTION ATTACHED TO PROPERTY:
In the case of a building code violation only, the order to correct a building
code violation and the sanctions imposed by the village as the result of a
finding of a building code violation under this chapter shall attach to the
property as well as to the property owner so that a finding of a building code
violation against an owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the
property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes
subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this
chapter. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
8-10-19: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of Cook County. The provisions of the
administrative review law 1  and the rules adopted pursuant thereto shall apply
to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decisions,
and order of a hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord. 3363, 4-11-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
8-10-20: JUDGMENT AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Debt Due: Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any
fine, other sanction, or costs imposed under this chapter, remaining unpaid
after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures
under the Illinois administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the
village and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
   B.   Findings: Upon expiration of the period in which judicial review under
the Illinois administrative review law may be sought for a final determination
of a village code violation unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the findings, decision and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the
same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   Court Costs, Attorney Fees And Costs Of Collection: In any case in
which a person has failed to comply with a hearing officer's judgment ordering
the correction of a village code violation or imposing any fine or other
sanction as a result of a village code violation, any expenses incurred by the
village to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney fees,
court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after
they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or by the hearing officer,
shall be a debt due and owing the village and may be collected in accordance
with applicable law.
Prior to any expenses being fixed by the hearing officer pursuant to this
subsection, the village shall provide notice to the person that states that the
person shall appear at a hearing before the hearing officer to determine
whether the person has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set
the date for such hearing, which shall not be less than seven days from the
date that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven day period
shall begin on the date the notice was deposited in the mail.
   D.   Lien Imposed: Upon being recorded in the manner required by article 12
of the code of civil procedure, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-101 et
seq., or by the uniform commercial code, a lien shall be imposed on the real
estate or personal estate, or both, of the person in the amount of any debt due
and owing the village under this section. The lien may be enforced in the same
manner as a judgment lien would be enforced in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   E.   Remedies: Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the village
from pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money
judgments. (Ord. 3638, 2-13-2017)
CHAPTER 11
SOCIAL HOSTING
SECTION:
8-11-1: Purpose
8-11-2: Definitions
8-11-3: Certain Events And Gatherings Prohibited
8-11-4: Other Responsible Persons
8-11-5: Exceptions
8-11-6: Fines; Penalties
8-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is:
   A.   To protect public health, safety and general welfare;
   B.   To enforce laws prohibiting the serving to and consumption of alcoholic
beverages by underage persons; and
   C.   To reduce the costs of providing police, fire and other emergency
response services to loud or unruly gatherings, by imposing a civil fee against
social hosts and landowners (including landlords) for the recovery of costs
associated with providing law enforcement, fire and other emergency response
services to loud or unruly gatherings, including those where alcoholic
beverages are served to or consumed by underage persons. (Ord. 3368, 4-26-2011)
8-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
   ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid
or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and which contains one-half
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
   CONVEYANCE: Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for the
transportation of persons or property.
   EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three or more persons who have assembled or
gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
   HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or
permit an event or gathering.
   ILLICIT DRUGS: Any drug, substance, or compound prohibited by law, including
drugs prescribed by a physician that are in the possession of or used by
someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
   PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
      A.   As a natural, adoptive parent, or stepparent;
      B.   As a legal guardian; or
      C.   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust
or any other legal entity.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking lots.
   REASONABLE STEPS: Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the event or
gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the event
or gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the event or gathering by
inspecting driver's licenses or other government issued identification cards to
ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs while at
the event or gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the event
or gathering, calling for police assistance in the event people under twenty
one are in possession of alcohol or illicit drugs at the event or gathering or
advising law enforcement in advance of departing one's residence that the owner
will be away and no underage person is authorized to be present and consume
alcohol or illicit drugs at the owner's residence.
   RELIGIOUS CEREMONY: The possession, consumption and dispensation of alcohol
or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or
religious ceremony.
   RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied
on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased,
rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
   UNDERAGE PERSON: Any person less than twenty one years of age. (Ord. 3368,
4-26-2011)
8-11-3: CERTAIN EVENTS AND GATHERINGS PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to host, permit, allow, or fail to take
reasonable steps to prevent an event or gathering at any residence or premises,
or on any other property whether private or public, or in any conveyance, over
which that person has control or a reasonable opportunity for control where
illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages are present when that person knows or
reasonably should know that an underage person will or does consume or possess
any illicit drugs or alcoholic beverage.
   B.   It also is unlawful for any person to fail to take reasonable steps to
prevent possession or consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages by an
underage person at any such event or gathering. A person who hosts an event or
gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be in
violation of this subsection. (Ord. 3368, 4-26-2011)
8-11-4: OTHER RESPONSIBLE PERSONS:
   A.   A person is responsible for violating section
8-11-3 of this chapter if that person intentionally aids, advises, hires,
counsels, conspires with, or solicits another person to commit a violation of
this chapter.
   B.   A person is responsible for violating section
8-11-3 of this chapter if that person knows or should have known about the
committing of a prohibited act and failed to take reasonable steps to prevent
the prohibited act. (Ord. 3368, 4-26-2011)
8-11-5: EXCEPTIONS:
A person who hosts an event or gathering shall not be in violation of this
chapter if he or she undertakes one of the following steps before any other
person makes a complaint about the event or gathering:
   A.   Seeks assistance from the River Forest police department or other law
enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to abide by the host's
performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, or
   B.   Terminates the event or gathering because the host has been unable to
prevent underage persons from consuming illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages
despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so.
   C.   This section does not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic
beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or that is exclusively between an
underage person and his or her parent, as permitted by law. (Ord. 3368, 4-26-
2011)
8-11-6: FINES; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or assists in the violations of any provision of this
chapter shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense and shall be fined
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars for each such violation. Each day on
which, or during which, a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   A.   The first violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of no
less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars.
Up to forty hours of community service may be substituted for all or part of
this fine. A sentence of community service will be accompanied by a minimum
fine of fifty dollars.
   B.   A second violation of this section by the same person within a twelve
month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than five hundred dollars
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars.
   C.   A third or subsequent violation of this section by the same person
within a twelve month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than
seven hundred fifty dollars. (Ord. 3368, 4-26-2011)
CHAPTER 12
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
8-12-1: Purpose
8-12-2: Definitions
8-12-3: Special Event Permit Required
8-12-4: Permit Application
8-12-5: Rules Or Regulations
8-12-6: Consideration For Issuance; Denial
8-12-7: Restrictions And Conditions
8-12-8: Prohibited Conduct
8-12-9: Fines And Penalties
8-12-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes licensing procedures and regulations for special
events held within the village in order to properly provide for the public
health, safety and welfare; and to provide penalties for violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 3472, 1-14-2013)
8-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
SPECIAL EVENT: Any temporary occurrence conducted by a person, organization,
entity or association, where fifty or more individuals are gathered, involving
a display, demonstration, performance, exhibition, entertainment or amusement
which includes, but is not limited to, festivals, concerts, carnivals, arts and
craft shows, fundraisers, sporting events, parades, runs, walks, rallies, and
the like, where village resources or property are affected, or village
resources or property are reasonably expected to be affected, excluding
regularly scheduled events conducted on property where such events are normally
held for such purpose. (Ord. 3472, 1-14-2013)
8-12-3: SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED:
No special event shall be held within the corporate limits of the village of
River Forest unless a permit is first obtained for special event. (Ord. 3472,
1-14-2013)
8-12-4: PERMIT APPLICATION:
An application to conduct a special event shall be made to the village, in
writing, on a form supplied by the village, by the person, organization, entity
or association, in charge or responsible therefor. All applications for special
event permits shall be made no less than ten days prior to the date on which
the special event is sought to be held, unless the village administrator waives
the time requirements for good cause shown. Applicants shall include a two
hundred dollar refundable deposit to be used by the village for damage or
cleanup of village property resulting from the special event.
Applicants shall agree in writing, prior to the issuance of a special event
permit, to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the village, its
representatives, officer, trustees, agents, attorneys, and employees from and
against any and all claims, actions, suits, damages, costs, expenses and
liabilities, including reasonable fees and expenses of their attorneys, expert
witnesses and consultants, court costs and fines, asserted against them or
sought to be imposed upon them, individually or jointly or severally, and which
arise directly or indirectly out of or in connection in any way with the
special event applied for.
Prior to final approval of the application and issuance of a permit, the
village may include as an addendum to any special event permit, reasonable
requirements not specifically outlined in the original permit application.
(Ord. 3472, 1-14-2013)
8-12-5: RULES OR REGULATIONS:
The village administrator is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and/or
regulations, not in conflict with this chapter, to supplement and specify in
more detail requirements relating to special events, provided that such rules
or regulations are approved by the village board. Failure to observe any rule
or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter shall constitute an ordinance
violation.
   A.   The following requirement shall apply to special events in all zoning
districts:
      1.   All temporary uses, buildings and structures used in the course of a
special event shall observe all yard setback requirements for the districts in
which the special events are held.
   B.   The following requirements shall apply to special events in residential
districts:
      1.   All lots in a residential district with a nonresidential use (e.g.,
churches, schools, etc.) shall comply with the restrictions set forth for
special events in nonresidential districts.
      2.   No special event shall begin before nine o'clock A.M. nor continue
after ten o'clock P.M. In cases where the desired hours of the special event
are outside the limits as described herein, upon application, the village
administrator shall have the authority to vary the permitted hours to
accommodate the activities of such special event, taking into consideration the
impact of such special event on the village's resources and property.
   C.   The following requirements shall apply to special events in
nonresidential districts:
      1.   All special events shall provide adequate on site parking for
attendee vehicles as determined by the village administrator or his/her
designee.
      2.   No special event shall begin before nine o'clock A.M. nor continue
after ten o'clock P.M. In cases where the desired hours of the special event
are outside the limits as described herein, upon application, the village
administrator shall have the authority to vary the permitted hours to
accommodate the activities of such special event, taking into consideration the
impact of such special event on the village's resources and property. (Ord.
3472, 1-14-2013)
8-12-6: CONSIDERATION FOR ISSUANCE; DENIAL:
In determining whether to approve a special event permit, the village
administrator shall consider the following factors relevant to the proposed
special event and necessary to secure the public welfare:
   A.   Whether village resources or property will be affected, or are
reasonably expected to be affected;
   B.   Whether the special event appears to be held for any unlawful purpose;
   C.   Whether it appears the special event may be conducted in a manner so as
to cause a breach of peace;
   D.   Whether the special event will unnecessarily interfere with the public
use of the streets, sidewalks, open and/or public areas;
   E.   Whether the special event may have some special right or priority under
the law; and
   F.   Whether the special event would, in any way, be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare.
If the village administrator denies an application for a proposed special
event, the applicant may appeal that decision to the village president and
board of trustees by filing a written appeal of the village administrator's
decision with the village clerk within thirty days of the village
administrator's denial thereof. A majority of the village president and board
of trustees may overturn the village administrator's decision to deny an
application for a special event. (Ord. 3472, 1-14-2013)
8-12-7: RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
The permit evidencing approval of a special event may include reasonable time,
place and manner restrictions as a condition to granting any permit if such
restrictions are reasonable and necessary for the protection of the public's
health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 3472, 1-14-2013)
8-12-8: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   No person shall knowingly participate in a special event for which a
permit application has been falsified or has not been obtained.
   B.   No person shall continue to organize, or participate in the further
planning or organizing, of a special event that is conducted without a permit
after a permit has been denied.
   C.   No person in a position of influence or control over a special event
shall allow the conduct of a special event without a permit.
   D.   No person shall violate any condition of a special event permit.
   E.   No person shall violate any ordinance, rule or regulation of the
village during the planning, operation or conclusion of a special event. (Ord.
3472, 1-14-2013)
8-12-9: FINES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   In addition to any and all additional remedies available by law, any
person violating any provision of this chapter may be directed to:
      1.   Cease and desist such violation; and
      2.   Upon a finding of liable of this chapter, pay a civil penalty not
less than one hundred dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars for
each violation.
   B.   Every day a violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. (Ord. 3472, 1-14-2013)
CHAPTER 13
PARK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-13-1: Territorial Jurisdiction
8-13-2: Enforcement
8-13-3: Park Hours
8-13-4: Permits
8-13-5: Protection Of Property
8-13-6: Protection Of Natural Resources
8-13-7: Domestic Dogs And Cats
8-13-8: Vehicles
8-13-9: Bicycles, Skateboards, Rollerblades
8-13-10: Sports And Games
8-13-11: Winter Sports
8-13-12: Personal Conduct
8-13-13: Hindering Or Bribing Employees
8-13-14: Advertising And Vending
8-13-15: Fires
8-13-16: Additional Or Temporary Rules And Regulations
8-13-17: Fines
8-13-1: TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply and be effective in and for all
grounds, buildings and territory, from time to time owned, occupied, or used by
the River Forest park district, Cook County, Illinois, all and every part of
which is hereinafter referred to as the "park district". (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The qualified persons who may enforce the park district's rules and regulations
prescribed by this chapter include state and local law enforcement officers and
officers and employees of the park district, including the park board of
commissioners, the executive director of the park district ("director") and
park district employees acting under the director's authority. Arrest powers
are reserved to law enforcement authorities, including members of the River
Forest police department, members of the Cook County sheriff's department, and
the Illinois state police. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-3: PARK HOURS:
Subject to restrictions on certain activities hereinafter set out, the park
system shall be open for public use between the hours of six o'clock A.M.,
prevailing local time, and dusk each day of the year, and no person shall enter
upon, or in any manner, use any part of the park system between dusk and six
o'clock A.M., prevailing local time, except that those portions of the park
system lighted for recreational use by the public may be used during such time
as they are lighted. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-4: PERMITS:
No person shall conduct, operate, present, manage, or take part in the
following activities in a park, unless a permit is obtained from the director
prior to the activity:
   A.   Any athletic field used for more than eight persons. The River Forest
park district athletic field use policy is expressly incorporated by reference
into this chapter as if fully stated herein.
   B.   Any picnic, outing, or gathering sponsored by any persons or
organization, or composed of twenty or more persons.
   C.   Any fundraising activity, organized sporting event, fair, children's
program or camp, ceremony, dramatic or musical performance, motion picture,
radio or television broadcast, or public meeting, assembly or parade,
including, but not limited to, rallies, picketing, marches, or political
meetings.
   D.   Sell or offer for sale any goods or services.
   E.   The use of any park or facility by a certain person or group to the
exclusion of others.
Permits are not transferable without written consent of the director, and fees
paid are nonrefundable.
Permits must be applied for at least four weeks in advance of the event, but no
permit shall be issued in excess of twelve weeks prior to the date of the
event.
No person in a park or on park premises shall refuse or fail to produce and
exhibit any written permit if he claims to have upon request of any law
enforcement officer, authorized park district representative, or employee who
wishes to inspect the permit for the purpose of determining that the provisions
of this chapter have been complied with. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-5: PROTECTION OF PROPERTY:
No person shall, in connection with any property of the park district:
   A.   Destroy, deface, paint, or remove any monument, sign, plaque, stake or
post designating any boundary line, survey line or reference point.
   B.   Cut, break, mark upon, or otherwise damage, destroy, or remove any
building, shelter, lamppost, post, flagpole, storage box, picnic table, bench,
garbage can, paving or paving materials, utility outlet, or other park property
without written permission of the director.
   C.   Deface, destroy, cover, damage, or remove any sign, or place card, or
parts thereof, whether permanent or temporary, posted or exhibited by the park
district to announce the rules, regulations, and warning, or any other
information to the public necessary or desirable for proper use of park or park
property.
   D.   Construct or erect any building or structure of any kind, whether
permanently or temporarily, or run or string any public utility into, upon, or
across a park, without the written permission of the director.
   E.   Enter into or upon any park area or structure closed or posted against
trespass, without written permission of the director. These structures or areas
may be, but are not limited to, construction areas, workshops or stations,
equipment and storage structures or area, or areas hazardous to public safety
or health.
   F.   Tamper with in any way, enter or climb upon, weaken, destroy, damage,
or remove anything from any park vehicle, machine, or implement.
   G.   Misuse any refuse container or receptacle by depositing into it any hot
coals or other hot or burning substances, or by depositing into any garbage,
trash, refuse, pet waste, or other unwanted material that was not gathered on
the site in the course of normal, lawful use of park facilities.
   H.   Bring into, leave behind, or dump any material of any kind, whether
waste or otherwise, in the park, except refuse, ashes, garbage, and other
material arising from the normal use within the park system, provided such
material is properly deposited in receptacles provided for such purposes. (Ord.
3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-6: PROTECTION OF NATURAL RESOURCES:
No person shall, in connection with any property of the park district:
   A.   Cut, remove, uproot, pick, saw, chop, carve, injure or wantonly destroy
any tree, bush, shrub, flower or plant, whether alive or dead, or chip, blaze,
box, girdle, trim, or otherwise deface or injure any tree, shrub or bush, or
break or remove any branch or foliage thereof, or pick or gather any seed of
any tree or other plant, unless necessitated by the performance of restorative
maintenance construction work pursuant to contract with the park district.
   B.   Drive any nail, staple, or attach or fasten any wire, rope, or device
to any tree or plant, or tie or hitch any animal to any tree, plant or bush.
   C.   Climb any tree, or walk, stand or sit upon any monument, vase,
fountain, railing, fence or any other park property not designated or normally
used for such purposes.
   D.   Remove or cause to be removed any sod, earth, downed timber, rock, sand
or gravel, or remove or cause to be removed any other natural material from
park district property, unless necessitated by the performance of restorative
maintenance, or construction work, pursuant to contract with the district.
   E.   Hunt, trap, molest, wound, poison or kill, or attempt to hunt, trap,
molest, wound, poison, or kill any animal, bird or reptile, or disturb any
nest, lair, den or burrow of any animal, bird or reptile, without written
permission of the director.
   F.   Release or cause to be released any wild, or domestic animal, bird or
reptile, or distribute the seeds or spores of any flowering or nonflowering
plants into or upon park lands, without written permission of the director.
   G.   Ride, lead or allow to be loose upon park premises, any horse, pony or
other riding animal.
   H.   Use or cause to be used any chemical or biological pesticide or any
other substance, measured or process designated to alter the anatomy or
physiology of any organism for the purpose of directly manipulating their
populations, without written permission of the director and then only in
compliance with all applicable laws of the state of Illinois and the United
States Of America. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-7: DOMESTIC DOGS AND CATS:
   A.   No person shall bring any bird or animal into the park system other
than domestic dogs and cats.
   B.   Persons owning or having right to immediate custody or control of any
dog or cat shall not permit any or all such dog or cat to enter into or remain
in the park system, unless at all times that it is within the park system, such
dog or cat is, by means of a leash or other physical equipment, entirely and
continuously under and subject to the direction and control of a person.
   C.   Any person who brings such dogs or cats into the park system shall pick
up and remove from the park system any and all solid waste of such dog or cat.
Disposal of any solid waste is prohibited in any park district waste
receptacle.
   D.   Seeing eye dogs or service animals for the visually impaired are
expressly excluded from this section and are authorized to be within the park
system. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-8: VEHICLES:
   A.   No person shall drive or operate any motorized vehicle in the park
system, except upon designated parking areas. Persons not subject to this
provision are park district employees, police officers, and park district hired
contractors when acting under the authority of the director.
   B.   Operate a vehicle in disregard of any sign, signal, marking, or devise
erected, constructed or created by the village or any public body, or official
having jurisdiction for the purposes of regulating, warning, or guiding
traffic, or contrary to the order or direction of any police officer or other
person duly authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
   C.   Vehicle parking in any park system parking lot is permitted only during
park hours, as described in section
 8-13-3 of this chapter.
   D.   Park system parking lots are limited for participants of the park
system. Use of the park system parking lot for any other use except use of the
park system without written permission from the director is prohibited.
   E.   No person may operate a motorized vehicle in such a manner so as to
cause or produce unnecessary loud, raucous noise. Excessive or unusual noise,
including, but not limited to, the racing of the motor, the continuous sounding
of a horn or other signal device, audio music heard beyond twenty five feet of
the vehicle, the creation of tire friction by sudden, unnecessary motor
acceleration or rapid turning or weaving, or the failure to have a properly
operating muffler.
   F.   No person in charge of a motorized vehicle within the park system shall
permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine.
   G.   Operate any motor vehicle at a rate of speed or in any manner that is
unreasonable or imprudent, not having regard to the traffic and use of the way,
condition or the weather, visibility, condition or the roadway and other
surrounding conditions, so as to endanger the life, limb, or injure the
property of any persons. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-9: BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERBLADES:
No person shall, in connection with any property of the park district:
   A.   Ride a bicycle on any path, roadway, or other areas designated and
posted prohibiting bicycles, skateboards or rollerblades.
   B.   Operate a bicycle, skateboard, or rollerblade in a reckless manner so
as to endanger pedestrians or the rider or riders thereof.
   C.   Leave unattended any bicycle, except in those designated for such
purpose, and then only in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard
to the public. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-10: SPORTS AND GAMES:
No person shall, in connection with any property of the park district:
   A.   Golf In The Parks: Swing or make use of any golf club nor play golf,
nor hit or putt golf balls within or into the park system.
   B.   Engine Powered Models And Toys: Start, fly, or use any fuel powered or
rocket or jet type or electric powered model aircraft, boat, or rocketlike
powered toy or model.
   C.   Aviation: Bring, land, or cause to descend or alight within the park
system any airplane, flying machine, balloon, parachute, or other apparatus for
aviation, except with the written permission of the director.
   D.   Games: Take part in the playing of any games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model
airplanes. The use of lawn darts on any park property is specifically
prohibited.
   E.   Gambling: Manage, operate or engage in gambling of any form without
written permission of the director, and then only in compliance with all local,
state and federal law. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-11: WINTER SPORTS:
No person shall, in connection with any property of the park district:
   A.   Inadequate Snow: Sled, toboggan, ski or slide on any area posted as
being "unsafe" or "hazardous" or as being "closed" due to inadequate snow
cover, or other environmental conditions, or upon being duly notified of such
by the director or authorized park district personnel.
   B.   Inadequate Ice: Ice skate on any area posted as being "unsafe" or
"hazardous" or as being closed due to inadequate ice or other environmental
conditions, or upon being duly notified of such by the director or authorized
park district personnel.
   C.   Tennis Courts: Access or use the platform tennis courts without
required membership, guest pass, as a registered participant to a platform
tennis program, or as a participant to a platform tennis lesson with approval
from the director.
   D.   Snowmobiles: Operate a snowmobile upon any park property. (Ord. 3510,
3-10-2014)
8-13-12: PERSONAL CONDUCT:
No person shall, in connection with any property of the park district:
   A.   Public Assemblies, Meetings: Hold any public meetings, exhibits,
contests, tournaments, concerts or public entertainment of any kind within the
park system without written approval from the director.
   B.   Obstruction Of Use: Exercise exclusive control or dominion over park
district property within the park system without written approval from the
director.
   C.   Weapons: Have in their possession or on or about their person or use
any firearm, pistol, revolver, shotgun, ammunition, bow and arrow, crossbow,
slingshot, blackjack, billy club, or device capable of discharging a projectile
by air, spirit, gas or explosive, any explosive substance or harmful solid,
liquid or gaseous substance, any tear gas or any disabling chemical agent or
any other dangerous weapon.
   D.   Fireworks: Have in their possession or on or about their person or use
any sparklers, fireworks, pyrotechnic devices or explosive devices at any time
within the park system without written approval from the director.
   E.   Alcohol And Controlled Substances: Be under the influence of alcohol,
illegal drugs or, other controlled substances shall enter, be or remain in the
park system, nor shall any person bring within, possess, sell, give away,
inhale, ingest or otherwise use or consume any alcohol, illegal drugs or
controlled substances in the park system. The smoking of cigarettes, cigars, or
pipe tobacco is prohibited inside or within twenty five feet of any building,
facility or structure, or within one hundred feet of any organized activity
within the park system.
   F.   Disorderly Conduct: Make countenance or assist in making any improper
noise, riot, disturbance, breach of the peace, or diversion tending to a breach
of peace, in the park system, or be guilty of any disorderly conduct therein,
or collect with other persons, in bodies or crowds for unlawful purposes, or
for any purpose to the annoyance or obstruction or disturbance of other
persons.
   G.   Improper Speech And Conduct: Use or engage in any abusive, threatening,
insulting, indecent, profane, or obscene language, signs, symbols, postures, or
acts or employ any such language or acts in such a way as to be conducive to a
breach of peace in the park system, as reasonably determined by any person
authorized to enforce this chapter. No person shall behave in any manner that
is unsportsmanlike, insulting, provoking, abusive, potentially harmful or
physically harmful toward any person while within the park system, as
reasonably determined by any person authorized to enforce this chapter.
   H.   Public Indecency: Engage in conduct that is publicly indecent, and a
person shall be deemed to have committed an act of public indecency when any
person performs any of the following acts:
      1.   An act of sexual intercourse.
      2.   An act of deviate sexual conduct.
      3.   A lewd exposure of the body, done with intent to arouse or satisfy
the sexual desire of the person.
      4.   A lewd fondling or caressing of the body on another person of either
sex.
   I.   Unlawful Use Of Photographic Or Video Equipment: The use of any device
with photographic or video capabilities is not permitted within restrooms
within the park system, or locker rooms, shower rooms, restrooms, or changing
rooms in other facilities where and when park district programs are being
conducted. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-13: HINDERING OR BRIBING EMPLOYEES:
No person shall, in connection with any property of the park district:
   A.   Interfere with, unreasonably disrupt, delay, or in any manner hinder
performance of their duties.
   B.   Give or offer to give an employee any money, gift, privilege, or
article of value on or off park district property in order to violate the
provisions of this chapter or any other park district ordinance, contract,
permit, or statutes of the state of Illinois and the United States, or in order
to gain or receive special consideration in applying for any use or privilege,
or to gain special consideration and treatment in the use of any park district
property or facility. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-14: ADVERTISING AND VENDING:
No person shall, in connection with any property of the park district:
   A.   Advertise: Post, affix, or otherwise display any place card, bill,
notice or advertisement of any kind in the park system, nor shall any person
distribute, cast, throw or place any handbill, pamphlet, circular,
advertisement or notice of any kind in the park system, nor shall any person
post, stencil or otherwise affix any notice, bill, advertisement or other
papers upon any structure or thing in or about the park system without written
approval from the director.
   B.   Concession Contract Agreement: Expose or offer for sale or hire any
articles or things, or conduct or solicit any business, trade or occupation or
profession without a concession contract agreement approved by the board of
commissioners, and then only in accordance with the terms and conditions
thereof, it being the intention of the park district to control commercial
enterprises or sales on park district lands.
   C.   Payment: Enter, without invitation or without having paid. (Ord. 3510,
3-10-2014)
8-13-15: FIRES:
No person shall, in connection with any property of the park district:
   A.   Set fire or cause to be set on fire, any tree, garden, grassland,
refuge container or structure.
   B.   Build a fire anywhere for any purpose, except in a park district fire
pit with written permission from the park district and the River Forest fire
department is required. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
8-13-16: ADDITIONAL OR TEMPORARY RULES AND REGULATIONS:
No person shall violate any rule of the park district relating to the use and
administration of the park system. The board of commissioners or the director
or authorized representatives may issue such additional or temporary rules and
regulations as are necessary to incur public health and safety in the use and
enjoyment of any and all park facilities, including, but not limited to, its
park lands, other recreational activities, and any special events. No person
shall use any park district facility, which in the opinion of the director, is
not in condition for use, and all persons shall refrain from using the same
when requested by a written notice or personally requested by the board of
commissioners, the director, or authorized park district personnel. (Ord. 3510,
3-10-2014)
8-13-17: FINES:
   A.   Fine: Any person violating a clause or provision of any section of this
chapter shall be fined, upon conviction thereof, not less than fifty dollars
nor more than one thousand dollars for each convicted offense.
   B.   Eviction, Expulsion: Any person violating any clause or provision of
any section of this chapter may be evicted or expelled from the park district
by any person empowered to enforce this chapter as prescribed in section
8-13-2 of this chapter.
   C.   Damage; Restitution: Any person violating any clause or provision of
any section of this chapter and having caused damage to the building, property
or equipment of the park district, shall make restitution in addition to any
other fine or penalty imposed. Restitution shall include all expenses required
to make the park district whole, including, but not limited to, contractor's
fee, attorney fees and court costs. (Ord. 3510, 3-10-2014)
CHAPTER 14
BEES AND BEEKEEPING CONTROL
SECTION:
8-14-1: Definitions
8-14-2: Beekeeping Permit
8-14-3: Intent To Apply For Beekeeping Permit Notification
8-14-4: Colony Densities
8-14-5: Maintenance
8-14-6: Hive Location
8-14-7: Release And Indemnification
8-14-8: Violation And Penalty
8-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter the following terms, unless the context otherwise
requires, are defined as follows:
   APIARY: The assembly of one or more hives or colonies of honeybees at a
single location.
   APIARY INSPECTION: Inspection of an apiary and the surrounding area for
compliance with this chapter.
   BEEKEEPER: A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of
honeybees.
   BEEKEEPING: The act of owning or caring for one or more apiaries.
   BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT: Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such as
hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.
   COLONY: The entire honeybee family or social unit living together.
   FAMILY MEMBER: One or more persons occupying and residing in a dwelling on a
lot and living as a single housekeeping unit.
   HIVE: A frame or structure used or employed as a domicile for bees.
   HONEYBEE: The common domestic honeybee, limited to the Apis mellifera
species, specifically excluding the African honeybee, Apis mellifera scutellata
or "Africanized honeybees".
   LOT: A contiguous parcel of land under common ownership.
   NUCLEUS OR NUC COLONIES: Small honeybee colonies created from larger
colonies. The term refers both to the smaller size box and the colony of
honeybees within it.
   PERSON: Any natural person or education institution. (Ord. 3666, 11-27-2017)
8-14-2: BEEKEEPING PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: Beekeeping is prohibited unless a permit has first
been obtained from the Village in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
Unpermitted beekeeping is declared a nuisance. Persons desiring to establish
and maintain a honeybee apiary in the Village shall first obtain a permit from
the Village.
Beekeepers who owned or operated a honeybee apiary within the Village prior to
November 27, 2017, and who wish to continue to do so after November 27, 2017,
shall apply for a Village beekeeping permit.
At the time of application for a Village beekeeping permit, the applicant shall
provide the Village with:
      1.   Proof of compliance with the requirements of this chapter, including
the property bee notification requirement in section
8-14-3 of this chapter, including a copy of the notice and mailing list;
      2.   Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
      3.   A description of the number of colonies requested to be kept on the
lot;
      4.   A depiction of the lot on which the colony, or colonies, are
proposed to be located and a depiction of the location on the lot on which the
colony, or colonies, are proposed to be located;
      5.   A twenty five dollar nonrefundable permit application fee; and
      6.   Such other information or documents as the Village may request.
When complete, the Village shall review the permit application and determine
whether the permit should be issued. If the Village determines the permit
should be issued, the Village shall issue the permit to the applicant. The
Village may attach conditions of approval on a permit issued under this
chapter. The Village may deny, suspend or revoke any permit issued under this
chapter in accordance with the procedures set forth in section
3-1-11 of this Code, substituting "license" for "permit" and "business" for
"beekeeping" therein, and any person aggrieved by such denial, suspension or
revocation may appeal it in accordance with the procedures set forth in section
3-1-12 of this Code, substituting "license" for "permit" and "business" for
"beekeeping" therein. A permit may be suspended or revoked for the reasons set
forth in subsection
3-1-11C of this Code, or if the Village determines that beekeeping cannot be
conducted on the lot in a safe manner.
   B.   Permit Expiration And Renewal: Permits shall expire on November 30 of
each calendar year. Permit holders must apply to renew their permit annually by
completing a renewal application, by paying a twenty five dollar nonrefundable
permit renewal fee, and by giving the notice required in section
8-14-3 of this chapter to new adjacent property owners, if any, since the date
the last permit was issued. The notice requirements herein shall not apply to
Dominican University.
   C.   Apiary Inspection Right Of Entry: By applying for a permit, the
applicant authorizes the Village and its employees and agents to enter onto the
lot that contains the apiary for the purpose of inspecting the lot and the
apiary for compliance with this chapter, both prior to the issuance of a
permit, and, if a permit is issued, for the duration of the permit or so long
as an apiary is present on the lot.
   D.   Nontransferability: No permit shall be assigned or transferred to any
other person or entity. No refund shall be granted for any unexpired period of
a permit if the permit is turned in, surrendered, suspended or revoked. If a
permittee moves to a new lot within the Village, a permit may be transferred to
the new lot, so long as all requirements of this chapter are satisfied and
confirmed by the Village prior to establishment of the colony or colonies on
the new lot, and so long as the notification requirements of section
8-14-3 of this chapter are satisfied and confirmed by the Village prior to
establishment of the colony or colonies on the new lot.
   E.   State Registration: All permittees shall register the apiary on the lot
with the State of Illinois Department of Agriculture and maintain their
apiaries in accordance with the Illinois Bees and Apiaries Act, 510 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 20/1, et seq., and other applicable State, Federal and
Village laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and directives. (Ord. 3666, 11-27-
2017)
8-14-3: INTENT TO APPLY FOR BEEKEEPING PERMIT NOTIFICATION:
Prior to applying for an initial permit, the applicant must provide written
proof that the applicant served written notice, by first class U.S. mail, no
more than thirty calendar days and no less than fifteen calendar days prior to
the submission of the permit application, to all properties adjacent to the
applicant's lot, of the applicant's intent to apply for a permit. The written
notice shall inform the recipients of the proposed application for a permit,
and the ability of the recipients to object to the application on the grounds
set forth below. The form of the written notice shall be available from the
Village. The notice requirements herein shall not apply to Dominican
University.
Within seven calendar days of receiving notice from the applicant, a recipient
may file a written objection with the Village to the applicant's permit
application if any recipient, a recipient's family member or a recipient's
employee (if the recipient is a business) suffers from anaphylaxis or a related
life-threatening condition. If the objector provides documentation from a
licensed physician or medical professional that confirms an anaphylaxis
reaction or a life-threatening condition related to bee stings, the application
shall be denied. (Ord. 3666, 11-27-2017)
8-14-4: COLONY DENSITIES:
   A.   Colony Limits: No more than two colonies shall be located on a lot,
with the exception of Dominican University, as set forth in subsection B of
this section.
   B.   Dominican University Exception: Notwithstanding the limitations to bee
colony densities herein, Dominican University may continue to keep up to four
colonies on its lot, so long as the colonies continue to be an integral part of
Dominican University's educational program, so long as Dominican University
adheres to all other requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Limits On Permits: A maximum of twenty two permits may be issued by the
Village at a time, with renewal applications taking priority over new
applications. All new applications shall be considered on a first come first
served basis. In the event of an excess of twenty two permits being requested,
the remaining applications will be placed on a first come first served waiting
list. (Ord. 3666, 11-27-2017)
8-14-5: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Apiary Maintenance: All beekeeping equipment shall be kept in good
condition and unused equipment must be secured from weather, potential theft or
vandalism. No bee comb, wax or other materials shall be left upon the grounds
of the apiary, which might encourage disturbance or robbing by wildlife or
domestic animals. Beekeepers shall promptly store or dispose of any bee comb,
wax or other materials which have been removed from the hive in a sealed
container or within a building or other bee proof enclosure.
   B.   Type Of Hives: All colonies must be kept in "inspect accessible" type
hives with removable frames or comb, which must be kept in sound and usable
condition.
   C.   Water: A convenient and adequate source of water must be available on
the lot at all times as long as the colonies remain active outside the hive.
The purpose of this requirement is to prevent bees from congregating at
swimming pools, faucets, pet water bowls, birdbaths or other water sources
where they may cause human, bird, or domestic pet contact. The water shall be
maintained so as not to become stagnant.
   D.   Record Keeping: Beekeepers shall maintain records of colony maintenance
and monitoring of hive health. These records are to be made available to the
Village upon request.
   E.   Limits On Nucleus Or Nuc Colonies: Beekeepers may create and maintain
up to two nucleus or nuc colonies for purposes of managing their beehive
population and queen bee health. (Ord. 3666, 11-27-2017)
8-14-6: HIVE LOCATION:
   A.   Distance From Property Lines: Hives shall be kept a minimum of five
feet from all of the lot's property lines, and oriented so that flight patterns
face away from the closest lot fence line on the lot.
   B.   Flyways: A hive shall be placed on a lot so that the general flight
pattern of the bees is in a direction and distance that will deter bee contact
with humans and domesticated animals. If this cannot be achieved due to lot
constraints, the beekeeper shall install a fly-wall at least two feet higher
than the hive entrance, and no more than five feet from said entrance. The fly-
wall shall be made of vegetation or fencing material.
   C.   Fencing: If the lot where a hive is located is not completely fenced
in, the beekeeper shall erect a fence and/or barrier around the hives
themselves that will be at least four feet high and no closer than five feet
from the hive. The requirements of this subsection C shall not apply to a hive
on a rooftop.
   D.   Signage: A weatherproof sign at least ten inches by ten inches shall be
installed at either the entrance(s) of the yard or the entrance to the fence
erected around a hive in a non-fenced in yard. The sign shall read "State
Registered Beehive(s) on Property" or similar language that makes it clear that
bees are on the premises. The Village-issued permit number must be included and
displayed clearly. (Ord. 3666, 11-27-2017)
8-14-7: RELEASE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
By accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee shall have agreed to:
   A.   Waive and relinquish any and all claims, demands or causes of action of
any kind, including but not limited to personal injuries, illness or death,
damages, or economic and non-economic damages or losses, that the permittee or
its officers (if any), officials (if any), employees (if any), contractors,
subcontractors, volunteers, agents (if any), invitees, guests and members of
the public ("permittee affiliates") may have against the Village and its
officers, appointed and elected officials, President and Trustees, employees,
agents, attorneys and volunteers ("Village affiliates") arising out of,
connected with or in any way associated with beekeeping and the activities
allowed under the permit.
   B.   Protect, indemnify, save and hold forever harmless and defend the
Village affiliates from and against any and all liabilities, obligations,
claims, injuries, illness, death, damages or losses of any kind, penalties,
causes of action, costs and expenses brought by any person, including any
permittee affiliates, arising out of, connected with or in any way associated
with beekeeping and the activities allowed under the permit.
The obligations in this section shall be, and are, incorporated into each
permit granted under this chapter, and are an integral part thereof. (Ord.
3666, 11-27-2017)
8-14-8: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
No bees may be kept in the Village except as permitted in this chapter. Anyone
violating any provision of this chapter may be fined up to five hundred
dollars, with each day the violation exists constituting a separate violation.
(Ord. 3666, 11-27-2017)
CHAPTER 15
LEAF BLOWER USE
SECTION:
8-15-1: Leaf Blower Use
8-15-1: LEAF BLOWER USE:
   A.   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "gas-powered leaf
blower" shall mean: A leaf blower that is powered by gasoline or propane,
including an electric leaf blower powered by stand-alone fossil fuel powered
generators or generators powered by vehicle engines.
   B.   In calendar years 2026 and 2027, no gas-powered leaf blower shall be
permitted to be operated in the village between the dates of May 15 and
September 15, except as provided below.
   C.   In calendar years 2028 and 2029, gas-powered leaf blowers shall only be
permitted to be operated in the village during the months of April, October,
and November, except as provided below. The village administrator may, at their
sole discretion, extend the aforementioned allowable periods, up to thirty (30)
additional days.
   D.   Beginning in 2030 and in each subsequent year thereafter, no gas-
powered leaf blowers shall be permitted to be operated in the village except as
provided below.
   E.   The use of portable fossil-fuel powered generators to power electric
leaf blowers or to recharge batteries used in leaf blowers is prohibited in the
village beginning May 15, 2026.
   F.   Exceptions: Gas-powered leaf blowers shall be permitted to be operated,
at the direction of the village administrator, for the purpose of cleanup
activities necessary as a result of extreme weather or other emergency
conditions.
   G.   Conflict With State Law: If any provision of this section conflicts or
is otherwise inconsistent with a provision of state law, the more stringent or
restrictive provision shall prevail and shall be enforced by the village.
   H.   Penalty: Anyone violating any provision of this chapter may be fined in
accordance with the penalties set forth in section 6-7-5 of the noise pollution
chapter of the village code. If a business required to be licensed under title
3 of the village code, including any contractor requiring a license under
chapter 3-3, is found in violation of this provision, the business or licensee,
rather than the individual operating the leaf blower, shall be fined. (Ord.
3962, 7-14-2025)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
VEHICLE LICENSES
SECTION:
9-1-1: License Required
9-1-2: Application For License
9-1-3: Fees
9-1-4: License Emblems
9-1-5: Penalty
9-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
The owner of any motor vehicle registered to a village address or any resident
who applies for a village parking permit pursuant to section
9-2-20 or
9-2-24 of this title shall be required to obtain and display a village license.
This licensing requirement shall apply to the owner of any motor vehicles
temporarily not in operating condition or intermittently garaged outside of the
village. (Ord. 3398, 11-14-2011)
9-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person requiring a license for any such motor vehicle shall prepare an
application upon a form provided by the village, setting forth the name and
address of the applicant, a description of the motor vehicle, its state license
number, if any, and such other information as may be prescribed. Upon payment
by the applicant of the license fee provided in section
9-1-3 of this chapter, the village shall issue the license. (Ord. 2844, 9-21-
1999)
9-1-3: FEES:
The license fees to be paid annually to the village shall be as follows:
Passenger automobiles and school buses                                $45.00
Motorcycles, scooters and mopeds                                      25.00
Vehicles with state of Illinois issued antique license plates         25.00
Recreational vehicles (RVs)                                           50.00
Truck with maximum load not to exceed 5 tons                          50.00
Truck with maximum load in excess of 5 tons                           70.00
Senior citizen rate (residents 65 years or older with proof of age) 1 25.00
automobile per family or household only
Duplicate tags (with return of a portion of old sticker)              2.00
Active duty military or veteran designation                           25.00
 
The above license fees shall be due and payable before July 15 in each year and
all licenses shall expire on July 14 of the following year. The owner of any
vehicle required to have a license who fails to pay the prescribed fee before
July 15 shall be required to pay the additional sum of ten dollars if the
license fee is paid before August 14. If the owner pays the prescribed fee on
or after August 15 but before October 15, he shall be required to pay the
additional sum of fifteen dollars. If the owner pays the prescribed fee on or
after October 15, he shall be required to pay the additional sum of twenty
dollars. The owner or operator of any vehicle coming into possession thereof
after July 15 shall not be subject to any penalty if the license fee is paid
within thirty days of obtaining possession of said vehicle or of moving into
the village. If such possession is not acquired until after January 15, only
one-half the annual fee shall be required for the balance of the license year.
(Ord. 3457, 10-8-2012; amd. Ord. 3912, 11-13-2023)
9-1-4: LICENSE EMBLEMS:
Upon issuance of the license, the village clerk shall deliver to the applicant
a sticker bearing a number identical with the number of such license, together
with the words "River Forest" and the year for which said license is issued. It
shall be the duty of the licensee to affix the same in the lower right hand
corner of the glass part of the windshield of such vehicle. Motorcycles,
scooters and mopeds will be issued a plate of plastic or other material bearing
a number identical with the number of such license, together with the words
"River Forest" and the year for which said license is issued, which shall be
attached to the state license plate of the vehicle. (Ord. 2844, 9-21-1999)
9-1-5: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars for each offense. Each day in which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense. A person charged with violating
a provision of this chapter may be issued a violation notice in lieu of the
village filing a complaint in court against that person. The violation notice
shall be administratively adjudicated pursuant to chapter 6 of this title.
(Ord. 3398, 11-14-2011)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: State Motor Vehicle Laws Adopted
9-2-2: U-Turns
9-2-3: Through Streets
9-2-4: Stop Intersections
9-2-5: One-Way Streets And Alleys
9-2-6: Truck And Bus Routes
9-2-7: Limited Load Streets
9-2-8: Parking Vehicles For Sale
9-2-9: All Night Parking
9-2-10: Parking In Loading Zones
9-2-11: Parking In Bus Stops
9-2-12: Time Limit Parking
9-2-13: Signs Posted
9-2-14: Stopping, Standing Or Parking To Obstruct Traffic
9-2-15: Parking During Snowfall
9-2-16: Traffic Offenses
9-2-17: Accessible Parking
9-2-18: Exemptions
9-2-19: Penalty
9-2-20: Village Parking Lots
9-2-21: Alley Parking
9-2-22: Parking In Student Loading Zones
9-2-23: Resident Parking Zones
9-2-24: Permit Parking Zones
9-2-25: Daily Parking Zones
9-2-26: Immobilization Of Motor Vehicles (Rep. by Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
9-2-27: Resident Parking Permit Zones
9-2-28: Business Parking Permit Zones
9-2-29: Parking Reserve Funds
9-2-30: Overweight Vehicles
9-2-1: STATE MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations for
pedestrians and the operation of vehicles on the village streets, that certain
code known as the Illinois vehicle code, being in particular 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes, three copies of which code have been and now are filed in
the office of the village clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and represented
as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the village. (1981 Code)
9-2-2: U-TURNS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make U-turns on the
streets designated in schedule 10, section
 9-3-10 of this title. (1981 Code)
9-2-3: THROUGH STREETS:
The streets and parts of streets designated in schedule 1, section
9-3-1 of this title are hereby declared to constitute through streets. It shall
be unlawful to drive any vehicle into a through street without first bringing
such vehicle to a full stop within ten feet of the street line, except where
traffic is regulated by traffic lights. (1981 Code)
9-2-4: STOP INTERSECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle into the intersections of the streets
set out in schedule 2, section
9-3-2 of this title, without first bringing such vehicle to a full stop at said
intersections. (1981 Code)
9-2-5: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any of the streets or alleys
designated as one-way in schedule 3, section
9-3-3 of this title, in any direction other than that so indicated. (1981 Code)
9-2-6: TRUCK AND BUS ROUTES:
It shall be unlawful to drive any truck or bus on any streets named in schedule
6, section
9-3-6 of this title or in any alley. Vehicles may, however, use said streets
for the sole purpose of crossing said streets at intersections and of making
deliveries and pick ups on said streets. Vehicles may also use said alleys for
the sole purpose of making deliveries and pick ups on said alleys, provided
that the loading facility is not accessible via a street. Operators of
emergency vehicles and of government owned vehicles are exempt from the
provisions of this section. (Ord. 2397, 7-23-1990)
9-2-7: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which, with its load, exceeds ten
thousand pounds in weight on any of the streets designated in schedule 6,
section of this title, and on any streets so designated by ordinance of the
president and board. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3934, 8-12-2024)
9-2-8: PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from
which vehicle merchandise is peddled. (1981 Code)
9-2-9: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than
thirty minutes between the hours of two o'clock A.M. and six o'clock A.M. of
any day, except physicians on emergency calls. (Ord. 3099, 2-14-2005)
9-2-10: PARKING IN LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle
for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading and unloading of
passengers, or to exceed three minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight
carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload
and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty minutes, in any place designated by
the village board as a loading zone and marked as such, or at any place not to
exceed seventy five feet along the curb before the entrance to a public
building. For designated loading zones, see schedule 15, section
 9-3-15 of this title. (Ord. 2407, 11-26-1990)
9-2-11: PARKING IN BUS STOPS:
Subject to the concurrence of the traffic and safety commission 1  and to the
approval by ordinance of the president and board, the chief of police is hereby
authorized and required to establish bus stops on such public streets in such
places and in such number and of such length as he shall determine to be of the
greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop shall
be designated by appropriate signs. For specific bus stop designations, see
schedule 5, section
9-3-5 of this title.
   A.   The driver of a bus shall:
      1.   Not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place other than at a
designated bus stop. The term "bus stop" is defined as a fixed area in the
roadway parallel and adjacent to the curb set aside for the expeditious loading
and unloading of passengers only.
      2.   Not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose
of loading or unloading passengers other than at a designated bus stop, except
in case of emergency.
      3.   Enter a bus stop zone on a public street in such a manner that the
bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers, shall be in a position with the
right front wheel of such bus not farther than eighteen inches from the curb
and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as to not unduly impede the
movement of other vehicular traffic.
   B.   No vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as
a bus stop. (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 5 of this code.
9-2-12: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a
longer consecutive period of time than the time permitted by the police
department, by ordinance or by signs so posted. For specific time limit
parking, see section
9-3-13, "Schedule 13, Time Limit Parking", of this title. (1981 Code)
9-2-13: SIGNS POSTED:
   A.   Authority To Post Signs: The chief of police shall cause signs to be
posted in all areas where traffic control is regulated, parking is limited, or
parking is prohibited by the village board, indicating such limitation or
prohibitions thereon.
   B.   Adoption Of MUTCD: All traffic control devices installed within the
public right of way shall follow the standards set forth in the most current
edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And
Highways" (MUTCD). Any proposed variance from these standards shall be subject
to the approval of the village engineer. (Ord. 3608, 8-8-2016)
9-2-14: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC:
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street in such a
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. (1981
Code)
9-2-15: PARKING DURING SNOWFALL:
It is unlawful to park any vehicle on any street or alley at any time after the
snow on the street or alley exceeds two inches in depth and for an eight hour
period following the cessation of the snowfall. (Ord. 3145, 1-9-2006)
9-2-16: TRAFFIC OFFENSES:
   A.   Clinging To Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person on any street
riding a bicycle, motorcycle or any toy vehicle or as a pedestrian, to cling to
or attach himself or his vehicle to any moving motor vehicle or wagon.
   B.   Toy Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a
skateboard, a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle to go upon any roadway other
than at a crosswalk.
   C.   Riding On Running Boards: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride
upon the fenders, running board or outside step of any vehicle or upon any part
of any vehicle other than the seats installed by the manufacturer.
   D.   Bicycles, Mopeds And Motorcycles: It shall be unlawful for more than
one person to ride upon any bicycle, moped or motorcycle other than upon a seat
attached to said vehicle.
   E.   Spilling Loads: It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be so loaded
that any part of its load spills or drops on any street or alley in the
village.
   F.   Negligent Driving: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any
vehicle upon a public way negligently, needlessly, and without due caution in a
manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any persons or property.
(1981 Code)
   G.   Driving Of Certain Motorized Vehicles Prohibited: No person shall use,
operate, or be in control of any all-terrain vehicle, go-kart, minibike,
motorized skateboard or scooter, or off road motorcycle, not capable of being
licensed under the Illinois vehicle code, on any public street or on any
private property without the express consent of the owner.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the above referenced
devices when participating in a parade authorized by the village, or when
operated by a law enforcement officer in the performance of official duties.
(Ord. 3016, 4-14-2003)
9-2-17: ACCESSIBLE PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in any parking place reserved for
persons with a disability or disabled veterans by any person using a motor
vehicle not bearing registration plates specified in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1301.1 or not displaying a special decal for accessible parking
specified in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.2.
   A.   Any motor vehicle bearing person with a disability registration plates
or a special decal for accessible parking as evidence that the vehicle is
operated by or for a person with a disability or disabled veteran may park, in
addition to any lawful place, in any parking space specifically reserved, by
posting of an official sign, for such vehicles. The official sign shall be
mounted on a post at a level and a location where it is clearly visible by the
driver of any motor vehicle approaching the parking place reserved for
accessible parking.
   B.   A special decal for accessible parking shall be the property of such
person with a disability and may be used by that person to designate and
identify a vehicle not owned or displaying a registration plate to designate
when the vehicle is being used to transport said person with a disability, and
thus is entitled to enjoy all the privileges that would be afforded a disabled
vehicle licensed for a person with disabilities. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 3139,
12-12-2005)
      1.   The River Forest Township authorities shall be responsible for the
provision of such decal, its issuance and designated placement within the
vehicle. The cost of such decal shall be at the discretion of the township
authorities. (1981 Code)
      2.   The chief of police shall maintain an up to date listing of all
persons who have been issued a special decal for accessible parking. (1981
Code; amd. Ord. 3139, 12-12-2005)
   C.   Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the
person to whom the special registration plates or decals were issued and to
qualified operators acting under his express direction while the disabled
person is present. (1981 Code)
   D.   For designated accessible parking zones, see section
9-3-20, "Schedule 20, Accessible Parking Zones Designated", of this title.
(Ord. 2415, 1-28-1991; amd. Ord. 3139, 12-12-2005)
9-2-18: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this title regulating the movement or parking of
vehicles shall not apply to emergency vehicles while the driver thereof is
engaged in the performance of emergency duties. Nor shall such provisions apply
to persons engaged in repairing or otherwise improving the streets under the
authority of the board or of the state. (Ord. 3099, 2-14-2005)
   B.   The police department upon the request of a resident shall be
authorized to waive parking restrictions except for the following: loading
zones, bus stops, parking during snow removal, accessible parking, village
parking lots, permit parking zones, daily parking zones, and business parking
permit zones. (Ord. 3099, 2-14-2005; amd. Ord. 3139, 12-12-2005)
9-2-19: PENALTY:
   A.   Alternate Penalties; Compliance Warning Tickets: Effective September 9,
2024, any person, pursuant to the issuance of a compliance warning ticket, who
is accused of a violation of certain sections of this code as hereinafter
described in subsection B of this section, except a traffic offense for which a
court appearance is required pursuant to chapter 110A Illinois Compiled
Statutes, 1992, may settle and compromise that ticket by paying to the village
a fine as listed in the Fine Payment Schedule of section 
9-6-9 of this title.
   The issuance of compliance warning citations shall be as a courtesy in lieu
of instituting prosecution in court for the alleged offense. If the person
accused of the violation does not settle the claim, a uniform traffic complaint
or notice to appear will be issued for that violation and otherwise that person
shall be subject to the general penalties set forth in the Illinois vehicle
code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 3487, 6-24-2013)
   B.   Compliance Violations: The following violations of the Illinois vehicle
code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as adopted by the village in section
9-2-1 of this chapter shall be subject to the procedures described in
subsection A of this section: (Ord. 2505, 7-27-1992)
      5/3-112(b) (failure to transfer title within five days)
      5/3-401(a) (no valid registration - never applied)
      5/3-404 (no bill of lading or manifest/dispatch record)
      5/3-411 (failure to carry registration card or reciprocity permit -
second division vehicle)
      5/3-413(a,b) (improper display of license plates)
      5/3-413(f) (operation of vehicle with expired registration plate or
sticker)
      5/3-416 (failure to notify the secretary of state of name/address change)
      5/3-417(a) (failure to immediately apply for replacement registration
card, plate or sticker)
      5/3-701(1) (no valid registration - no valid plate or sticker obtained)
      5/3-701(2) (no valid registration - reciprocity, prorate or
apportionment)
      5/5-201(h) (no in-transit plates)
      5/5-202(e) (failure to display three tow truck plates)
      5/6-107(e) (graduated driver's license holder under age 18, more than one
front seat passenger, and/or more rear seat passengers than safety belts
available)
      5/6-107(f) (graduated driver's license holder under age 18, any
passengers under age 19 not wearing safety belts)
      5/6-107(g) (graduated driver's license holder under age 18, more than one
passenger under age 20)
      5/6-112 (failure to carry or produce driver's license)
      5/6-116 (failure to notify secretary of state of driver's license address
change within 10 days, or a name change within 30 days)
      5/11-1401 (leaving running motor vehicle unattended)
      5/11-1404(a) (failure to wear eye protection, driver or passenger,
motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or motorized pedalcycle)
      5/11-1406 (obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanism)
      5/11-1407 (opening and closing vehicle doors)
      5/11-1410 (coasting prohibited)
      5/11-1411 (following fire apparatus prohibited)
      5/11-1413(a) (depositing material or litter upon public highway)
      5/11-1419.01 (failure to display Illinois motor fuel tax identification
card)
      5/11-1419.01 (failure to display external Illinois motor fuel tax
identification device)
      5/11-1507(a) (operation of bicycle without lamp reflector)
      5/12-101(a) (operation of vehicle with unsafe equipment)
      5/12-201(a) (operation of motorcycle without at least one lighted lamp)
      5/12-201(b) (driving vehicles without two lighted headlamps and tail
lamps when required)
      5/12-201(c) (no white rear registration light)
      5/12-202(a,b) (insufficient clearance, identification or side marker
lamps and reflectors - second division vehicle)
      5/12-203(a) (failure to use parking lights while vehicle is standing on
highway)
      5/12-204 (improper lamp or flag on projecting load)
      5/12-205 (improper use of lamps on towing and towed vehicles)
      5/12-207(a) (improper use of, or more than one spot lamp)
      5/12-207(b) (improper use of more than three auxiliary driving lamps)
      5/12-208(a) (no stop signal lamp or device)
      5/12-209(a,b) (marker or running board lights other than white or amber)
      5/12-209(c) (defective backup lights)
      5/12-210(a) (failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within 500
feet on approach of vehicle)
      5/12-210(b) (failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within 300
feet of vehicle in same direction)
      5/12-211(a) (improper lighting on vehicles other than motorcycles - only
one headlamp)
      5/12-211(b) (improper use of more than four lighted headlights/auxiliary
driving lamps)
      5/12-212(a) (improper use of red light visible from front of vehicle)
      5/12-212(b) (unlawful use of flashing lights)
      5/12-215 (unlawful use of oscillating, rotating or flashing lights)
      5/12-301 (use of defective brakes)
      5/12-401 (unlawful use of metal studded tire)
      5/12-405(d) (use of unsafe tire)
      5/12-501(a) (operation of vehicle without windshield)
      5/12-502 (operation of vehicle without rear reflecting mirror)
      5/12-503(a) (obstructed view of windshield or side windows adjacent to
driver)
      5/12-503(b) (unlawful application of tinted film to windshield or window
(s) adjacent to driver - all vehicles manufactured after 12/31/81)
      5/12-503(c) (obstructed view of any window by stationary or suspended
object(s))
      5/12-503(d) (operation of vehicle without windshield cleaning device;
operation of vehicle with view obstructed by snow, ice or moisture)
      5/12-503(e) (obstructed view due to defective condition or repair of any
window)
      5/12-601(a) (operation of vehicle with defective horn)
      5/12-601(b) (unlawful possession or use of siren)
      5/12-602 (operation of vehicle with defective or modified exhaust system)
      5/12-603(b) (operation of vehicle without two front seat safety belts -
vehicles of 1961 or later model years)
      5/12-603.1 (failure of driver/front seat occupant(s) to use seat safety
belt)
      5/12-604(a) (operation of vehicle with television receiver visible to
driver)
      5/12-606 (operation of tow truck without: (a) identifying sign attached
to each side; (b) required equipment - one broom, shovel, trash can and fire
extinguisher; (c) removing roadway debris and spreading dirt or sand on oil/
grease deposits; (d) insurance policy in cab)
      5/12-607(a) (operation of vehicle with unlawfully altered vehicle
suspension system - body lifted in excess of three inches from chassis)
      5/12-607.1(a) (operation of first division vehicle with frame in excess
of 22 inches above ground)
      5/12-607.1(b) (operation of second division vehicle with frame in excess
of statutory specified limits)
      5/12-608(a) (operation of vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating
(GVWR) of 9000 pounds or less or a recreational vehicle without two bumpers)
      5/12-608(a) (operation of vehicle with unlawful bumper height)
      5/12-610(a) (operation of vehicle while wearing headset receiver)
      5/12-610.1(b) (instructional permit or graduated driver's license holder
under 19 using wireless device while driving (unless contacting emergency
services agency))
      5/12-610.5(b) (license plate covers prohibited)
      5/12-611 (vehicle sound amplification system heard from more than 75
feet)
      5/12-613 (possession of police radar or police laser jamming device
prohibited)
      5/12-702(a) (operation of second division vehicle without carrying
flares/warning devices)
      5/12-702.1(c,d,e,f,g) (failure to use flares/warning devices when second
division vehicle is disabled)
      5/12-704(a) (failure to placard vehicle transporting explosives)
      5/12-704(b) (failure to carry fire extinguisher within vehicle
transporting explosives)
      5/12-707 (overload school bus, commuter van or motor vehicle used for
hire)
      5/12-711 (operation of garbage truck, roll off hoist or roll on container
without audible backing warning system)
      5/12-714 (possession of police radar or laser detector prohibited -
commercial motor vehicles only)
      5/12-806 (failure to cover school bus sign)
      5/12-808 (operating school bus without fire extinguisher)
      5/12-809 (operating school bus without first aid kit)
      5/12-810 (transporting persons with a disability without restraining
device)
      5/13-111 (operating without certificate of valid safety test attached to
windshield – second division vehicle)
      5/15-105 (load projecting in any excess beyond left fenders or six inches
beyond right fenders of first division vehicle)
      5/15-106 (failure to fasten loose projecting member)
      5/15-108 (failure to plank edge of pavement for any vehicle in excess of
eight thousand pounds)
      5/15-109(a) (spilling load on highway)
      5/15-109(b) (operating loaded vehicle without securely fastened covering)
      5/15-109.1 (operating second division vehicle with load falling, blowing
or dropping to highway)
      5/15-114 (unlawful pushing of disabled vehicle)
      5/18C-4104(a) (operation without registration - intrastate or interstate)
      5/18C-4604(1) (operation without current cab card and Illinois identifier
stamp)
      5/18C-4604(3) (use of a cab card and Illinois identifier stamp issued to
another carrier)
      5/18C-4604(4) (failure to display or present a cab card and an Illinois
identifier stamp)
      5/18C-4701(1) (operating without trade name, license and registration
number of carrier painted or affixed to both doors of power unit)
      5/603-1 (operation of unnumbered snowmobile)
      5/604-1 (operation of snowmobile without required: (a) one white headlamp
during darkness; (b) one rear taillight during darkness; (c) brake system in
good mechanical condition; (d) reflective material on each side of cowling; (e)
adequate sound suppression equipment)
      5/605-1(d) (operation of snowmobile without lighted headlamp and
taillight)
      (Ord. 2505, 7-27-1992; amd. Ord. 3139, 12-12-2005; Ord. 3285, 6-8-2009;
Ord. 3935, 9-9-2024)
9-2-20: VILLAGE PARKING LOTS:
   A.   Village Parking Lots Established: For the purpose of this section, the
words "Village parking lots" are hereby defined to mean the parking area north
of Park District headquarters at 401 Thatcher Avenue and south of the apartment
building at 411 - 419 Thatcher Avenue (known as the Thatcher Avenue east
parking lot); the parking area at the northwest corner of Thatcher Avenue and
Central Avenue (known as the Thatcher Avenue west parking lot); the parking
area at the southeast corner of Park Avenue and Lake Street (known as the park
and lake lot); the twenty five designated spaces at the CVS Pharmacy lot at
7929 W. North Avenue (known as the CVS lot); and the parking lot adjacent to
the Village Hall at 400 Park Avenue including the on street parking spaces
(diagonal and parallel spaces) along Central Avenue between Park Avenue and the
Village Hall driveway (known as the Village Hall lots); and the parking area at
418 Franklin Avenue known as the 418 Franklin lot).
   B.   Permit Or Daily Fee Required: The owner of any motor vehicle shall be
required to obtain and display the applicable current Village parking permit or
pay the daily fee in accordance with the fee schedule in subsection D of this
section.
   C.   Application For Permit: Any person requiring a parking permit for a
motor vehicle shall prepare an application upon a form provided by the Village
Administrator setting forth the name and address of the applicant and such
other information as may be prescribed. Upon payment of the applicable permit
fee, the Village Administrator shall issue the permit. (Ord. 2749, 12-8-1997)
   D.   Fees: The permit and daily fees for all Village parking lots shall be
as follows:
Category Of Use Fee Per Month Fee Per Month (Eff. 5-1- Fee Per Month (Eff. 5-1-
                              2019)                    2020)
Category Of Use         Fee Per Month Fee Per Month (Eff. Fee Per Month (Eff.
                                      5-1-2019)           5-1-2020)
Thatcher Avenue east                                     
lot:
  Daytime use (6:00
 A.M. through 2:00     $ 45.00       $ 50.00             $ 55.00
  P.M., resident only)
  Overnight use (6:00
 P.M. through 7:00     55.00         60.00               65.00
  A.M., resident only)
 24-hour use (resident 100.00        110.00              120.00
  only)
Thatcher Avenue west                                     
lot:
  Daytime use (6:00
 A.M. through 2:00     45.00         50.00               55.00
  P.M., resident only)
Park and lake lot:                                       
  Daytime use (6:00
 A.M. through 2:00     45.00         50.00               55.00
  P.M., resident only)
  Overnight use (6:00
 P.M. through 7:00     55.00         60.00               65.00
  A.M., resident only)
 24-hour use (resident 100.00        110.00              120.00
  only)
CVS lot:                                                 
  Overnight use (8:00
  P.M. through 9:00
  A.M., Monday through
 Friday and 8:00 P.M.  55.00         60.00               65.00
  through 8:00 A.M.,
  Saturday and Sunday,
  resident only, 16
  spaces)
 24-hour use (resident 100.00        110.00              120.00
  only, 9 spaces)
Village Hall lots:                                       
  24-hour use
 (employees and        n/a           n/a                 n/a
  visitors only)
418 Franklin Lot
 3-hour time limit     n/a           n/a                 n/a
  parking (20 spaces)
 24-hour use (resident n/a           110.00              120.00
  only, 8 spaces)
 
   E.   Advance Permit Purchase: Permits may be purchased for one to twelve
months in advance. Unused permits are not refundable. (Ord. 3326, 4-26-2010,
eff. 4-26-2010)
   F.   Restrictions:
      1.   No trucks shall be eligible to purchase an overnight parking permit.
      2.   No recreational vehicles shall be permitted.
      3.   Only vehicles displaying a current River Forest vehicle license and
a valid parking permit as described in this section shall be allowed to use the
Thatcher Avenue east lot, the park and lake lot, the twenty five designated
spaces in the CVS lot; and the eight designated spaces in the 418 Franklin lot.
      4.   Only overnight parking permit holders who can provide evidence of a
current monthly Metra commuter pass shall be eligible to make application for a
daytime parking permit in the Thatcher east lot.
      5.   Only vehicles in operable condition may be parked in a Village
parking lot.
      6.   No motor vehicle shall be parked in a Village parking lot between
two o'clock A.M. and six o'clock A.M. of any day, except as expressly permitted
by the Police Department or unless the motor vehicle has an overnight parking
permit.
      7.   Parking in a Village parking lot shall be only in spaces striped for
parking and it shall be unlawful to park in any area of a lot which is not
striped for parking or which has signs prohibiting parking, or to park a
vehicle in such a manner that incorporates the use of more than one designated
parking stall. The use of "Village Hall lots" shall be limited to Village of
River Forest employees and/or other authorized lot users.
      8.   Twenty spaces in the 418 Franklin lot shall be restricted to three
hour parking.
      9.   The use of a Village-owned electric vehicle charging station and
adjacent electric vehicle charging spaces shall be limited to electric vehicles
connected to an electric vehicle charging station. A fee of twenty-five cents
($0.25) per kilowatt-hour (kWh) of energy dispensed shall be paid by a user of
any of the village’s publicly accessible electric vehicle charging stations.
Vehicles who remain at an electric vehicle charging space after completion of
charging shall be charged an additional overstay fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
per sixty-minute interval hall, which take effect fifteen (15) minutes after
completion of charging. The overall usage fee for a charging session shall not
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   G.   Exemptions: Village officials and employees, while on duty, may park in
a Village parking lot without payment of fee, provided they display a parking
permit exemption decal on the rear window. (Ord. 2749, 12-8-1997; amd. Ord.
2818, 3-22-1999, eff. 5-1-1999; Ord. 2928, 6-11-2001; Ord. 2989, 11-11-2002;
Ord. 3326, 4-26-2019, eff. 4-26-2010; Ord. 3701, 6-11-2018, eff. 7-1- 2018;
Ord. 3786, 11-12-2019; Ord. 3921, 2-26-2024; Ord. 3965, 8-25-2025)
9-2-21: ALLEY PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle in an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property. (Ord. 2369, 12-11-1989)
9-2-22: PARKING IN STUDENT LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading
or unloading of passengers in any place designated as a student loading zone
and marked as such. For designated student loading zones, see section
9-3-16 of this title. (Ord. 2414, 1-28-1991)
9-2-23: RESIDENT PARKING ZONES:
   A.   Resident Parking Zones Established: Resident parking zones are hereby
established upon those streets or portions of streets for such days and times
as authorized by section
9-3-21 of this title.
   B.   Permit Required: Upon request, individual "one day visitor" parking
permits shall be issued to residents within a resident parking zone for use by
their nonresident visitors and guests. These permits shall be good for only one
day and shall expire at two o'clock A.M. on the day following the date printed
on the permit. These permits must be placed in a visible location on the
dashboard of the vehicle and must be validated by printing the date and address
of the resident host legibly on its face in the space provided for this
purpose.
   C.   Permit Fee: One "1-day visitor" parking permit shall be issued free of
charge upon request to any resident within a resident parking zone. This permit
form may be reproduced by the resident.
   D.   Regulations For Use: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
section to park any vehicle in a resident parking zone unless the vehicle: 1)
is registered to a Village resident and displays a current Village license or
2) displays a valid "one day visitor" permit in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this section. (Ord. 3090, 12-13-2004)
9-2-24: PERMIT PARKING ZONES:
   A.   Permit Parking Zones Established: Permit parking zones are hereby
established upon those streets or portions of streets and such other designated
areas for such days and times as authorized by section
9-3-22 of this title.
   B.   Permit Required: The owner of any motor vehicle shall be required to
obtain and display a current Village parking permit by hanging it from the
rearview mirror before parking in any designated permit parking zone.
   C.   Application For Permit: Any person requiring a parking permit for a
motor vehicle shall prepare an application upon a form provided by the Village
Administrator, setting forth the name, address, telephone number and other
applicable information as may be prescribed. Upon payment of the monthly permit
fee, the Village Administrator shall issue the permit.
   D.   Permit Fees: The permit fees to be paid on a monthly basis are forty
five dollars per month for residents. The fee shall increase to fifty dollars
on May 1, 2019 and fifty five dollars on May 1, 2020. The permit fee for
motorcycle/scooter parking shall be twenty five dollars on May 1, 2019 and
twenty seven dollars and fifty cents on May 1, 2020. All permit fees shall be
required during the days and times described for each location included in
section
9-3-22  and 9-3-26 of this title.
   E.   Advance Purchase: Permits may be purchased from one to twelve months in
advance except that permit fees for Special Permit Parking Zone A is an annual
fee payable in advance. Unused permits are not refundable.
   F.   Regulations For Use: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
section to park any vehicle in a permit parking zone unless the vehicle: 1)
displays a current River Forest vehicle license, 2) displays a valid parking
permit as described in this section, and 3) is parked so that the vehicle does
not occupy more than one designated parking stall. Except that vehicles using
the Special Permit Parking Zone A (south side of Central between Clinton Place
and Harlem) do not have to comply with item 1 of this subsection. (Ord. 2903,
11-27-2000; amd. Ord. 2749, 12- 8-1997; Ord. 3701, 6-11-2018, eff. 7-1-2018;
Ord. 3780, 9-23-2019)
9-2-25: DAILY PARKING ZONES:
   A.   Daily Parking Zones Established: Daily parking zones are hereby
established upon those streets, or portions of streets and such other
designated areas for such days and times as authorized by section
9-3-23  of this title.
   B.   Daily Parking Fee: The fee for use of the daily parking zone shall be
five dollars per day and shall be required during the days and times described
for each respective location included in section
9-3-23  of this title.
   C.   Daily Parking Fee - Motorcycles and Scooters: The fee for use of the
daily parking zone designated for motorcycles and scooters shall be two dollars
and fifty cents per day and shall be required during the days and times
described for each respective location included in section
9-3-26  of this title.
   D.   Regulations For Use: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
section for any person to park a vehicle in a daily parking zone without
depositing the appropriate fee as described in subsection B of this section
through electronic means in accordance with the posted instructions or to park
a vehicle in such a manner that incorporates the use of more than one
designated parking stall. (Ord. 3515, 4-15-2014, eff. 5-1-2014; amd. Ord. 2437,
7-8-1991; Ord. 3701, 6-11-2018, eff. 7-1-2018; Ord. 3780, 9-23-2019)
9-2-26: IMMOBILIZATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
(Rep. by Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
9-2-27: RESIDENT PARKING PERMIT ZONES:
   A.   Resident Parking Permit Zone Established: Resident parking permit zones
are hereby established upon those streets or portions of streets for such days
and times as authorized by section
9-3-24 of this title.
   B.   Permit Required: The owner of any motor vehicle registered to an
address within a resident parking permit zone or to the guest or an employee of
a resident living within the zone shall be required to obtain and display a
current resident parking permit zone permit by hanging it from the rearview
mirror while parking in a designated resident parking permit zone.
   C.   Permit Fee: The Village shall issue one resident parking permit zone
permit to each vehicle registered with the Village within the resident parking
permit zone designated in section
9-3-24 of this title, up to a maximum of two permits per household at no
charge. A fee of one dollar will be charged for any additional resident parking
permit zone permit issued.
   D.   Regulations For Use: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
section to park any vehicle in a resident parking permit zone unless the
vehicle: 1) displays a valid resident parking permit zone permit as described
in this section, and 2) is parked in accordance with all other applicable
Village parking regulations. (Ord. 2885, 6-26-2000, eff. 6-27-2000)
9-2-28: BUSINESS PARKING PERMIT ZONES:
   A.   Business Parking Permit Zone Established: Business parking permit zones
including Special Permit Parking Zone A are hereby established upon those
streets or portions of streets for such days and times as authorized by section
9-3-25 of this title.
   B.   Permit Required: The owner of any motor vehicle shall be required to
obtain and display a current business parking permit by hanging it from the
rearview mirror before parking in any designated business parking permit zone.
   C.   Application For Permit: Any business or individual requiring a business
parking permit for a motor vehicle shall prepare an application upon a form
provided by the Village Administrator, setting forth the name, address,
telephone number and other applicable information as may be prescribed. Upon
payment of the business parking permit fee, the Village Administrator shall
issue the permit.
   D.   Permit Fee: The business parking permit fee shall be paid on a
semiannual basis in an amount of two hundred ten dollars. The fee for Special
Permit Parking Zone A shall be paid on an annual basis in an amount of four
hundred eighty dollars. Unused permits are not refundable.
   E.   Regulations For Use: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
section to park any vehicle in a business parking permit zone unless the
vehicle displays a valid parking permit as described in this section, and is
parked so that the vehicle does not occupy more than one designated parking
stall. (Ord. 3326, 4-26-2010, eff. 4-26-2010)
9-2-29: PARKING RESERVE FUNDS:
A parking reserve shall be established by the Village Finance Director to
accumulate funds for the purpose of maintaining and repairing Village owned
parking lots or acquiring property and developing additional Village owned
parking lots. This reserve shall consist of fifty percent of the annual revenue
collected from monthly permit fees in accordance with subsections
9-2-20D and 9-2-24D of this chapter; and thirty three and one-third percent of
the annual revenue collected from daily commuter fees in accordance with
subsections
9-2-20D and
9-2-25B of this chapter. (Ord. 3473, 1-14-2013)
9-2-30: OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle with a weight,
including load, in excess of that permitted by the Illinois Vehicle Code for
driving on improved highways, or with a weight distributed in a manner not
conforming to such statute.
   A.   Authority Of Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer: Any violation
of the Illinois Vehicle Code relating to "overweight vehicle", specifically
violations of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-100 et seq., and 5/3-401(d)
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, may be decided by the Administrative Adjudication
Hearing Officer as set forth in chapter 6 of this title.
   B.   Penalties For Overweight Vehicle Violations:
      1.   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 and 5/3-401
(d), the owner or the driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such
violation and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted
for such violation. Any person, firm or corporation who is convicted for a
violation of section 15-111, including, but not limited to, a maximum axle or
gross limit specified on a regulatory sign posted in paragraph (g) or (h) of
section 15-111, shall be fined according to the following schedule except for
weights of five thousand five hundred or more pounds overweight.
Weight Fine Administrative Fee Total
Weight                                      Fine    Administrative Fee Total
Up to and including 2,000 pounds overweight $ 50.00 $25.00             $ 75.00
From 2,001 through 2,500 pounds overweight  135.00  25.00              160.00
From 2,501 through 3,000 pounds overweight  165.00  25.00              190.00
From 3,001 through 3,500 pounds overweight  260.00  25.00              285.00
From 3,501 through 4,000 pounds overweight  300.00  25.00              325.00
From 4,001 through 4,500 pounds overweight  425.00  25.00              450.00
From 4,501 through 5,000 pounds overweight  475.00  25.00              500.00
From 5,001 through 5,500 pounds overweight  725.00  25.00              750.00
 
      2.   If a second division vehicle and load are operated within the
Village of River Forest and the required fees and taxes for the gross weight of
the vehicle and load have not been paid or the vehicle and load exceed the
registered gross weight for which the required fees and taxes have been paid by
two thousand one pounds or more, the operator or owner shall be fined as stated
in subsection A of this section. For any unregistered vehicle or vehicle
displaying expired registration, no fine shall exceed the actual cost of what
the appropriate registration for that vehicle and load should have been as
established in the table below.
The following are the registration fees for vehicles and loads as set forth
below:
 
Gross Weight In Pounds Including Vehicle And Class Total Fees Each Fiscal Year
Maximum Load
8,000 and less                               B     $ 78.00
8,001 to 12,000                              D     138.00
12,001 to 16,000                             F     242.00
16,001 to 26,000                             H     490.00
26,001 to 28,000                             J     630.00
28,001 to 32,000                             K     750.00
 
(Ord. 3276, 4-27-2009)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Schedule 1, Through Streets
9-3-2: Schedule 2, Stop Intersections
9-3-3: Schedule 3, One-Way Streets And Alleys
9-3-4: Schedule 4, Yield Right-Of-Way Intersections
9-3-5: Schedule 5, Bus Stops
9-3-6: Schedule 6, Truck And Bus Routes, Limited Load Streets
9-3-7: Schedule 7, Speed Limits
9-3-8: Schedule 8, No Left Turns
9-3-9: Schedule 9, No Turns On Red Lights
9-3-10: Schedule 10, U-Turns
9-3-11: Schedule 11, Do Not Enter
9-3-12: Schedule 12, No Parking
9-3-13: Schedule 13, Time Limit Parking
9-3-14: Schedule 14, No Right Turn
9-3-15: Schedule 15, Loading Zones Designated
9-3-16: Schedule 16, Student Loading Zones Designated
9-3-17: Schedule 17, No Stopping, Standing Or Parking Zones Designated
9-3-18: Schedule 18, No Turns
9-3-19: Schedule 19, No Turns On Red Lights When Pedestrians Are Present
9-3-20: Schedule 20, Accessible Parking Zones Designated
9-3-21: Schedule 21, Resident Parking Zones Designated
9-3-22: Schedule 22, Permit Parking Zones Designated
9-3-23: Schedule 23, Daily Parking Zones Designated
9-3-24: Schedule 24, Resident Parking Permit Zones Designated
9-3-25: Schedule 25, Business Parking Permit Zones Designated
9-3-26: Schedule 26, Motorcycle/Scooter Parking Zones
9-3-1: SCHEDULE 1, THROUGH STREETS:
Pursuant to section
9-2-3 of this title, the following streets are hereby declared to constitute
through streets in the Village:
Chicago Avenue
Division Street
Harlem Avenue
Lake Street
Lathrop Avenue
Madison Street
North Avenue
Thatcher Avenue
Washington Boulevard
 
(1981 Code)
9-3-2: SCHEDULE 2, STOP INTERSECTIONS:
Pursuant to section
9-2-4 of this title, the following are hereby declared stop streets in the
Village:
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Oak
Avenue.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Division
Street.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Madison Street.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with
Washington Boulevard.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with North Avenue.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Lake
Street.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Chicago
Avenue.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Augusta
Street.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Central
Avenue.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Hawthorne
Avenue.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with
Greenfield Street.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Linden
Street.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with LeMoyne
Street.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Iowa
Street.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Vine
Street.
   AUGUSTA STREET, westbound at its intersection with Thatcher Avenue.
   AUGUSTA STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Lathrop
Avenue.
   AUGUSTA STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Monroe
Avenue.
   AUGUSTA STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Keystone
Avenue.
   AUGUSTA STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Franklin
Avenue.
   AUVERGNE PLACE, southbound at its intersection with Lake Street.
   BERKSHIRE STREET, westbound at its intersection with Lathrop Avenue.
   BERKSHIRE STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Jackson
Avenue.
   BERKSHIRE STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Monroe
Avenue.
   BERKSHIRE STREET, eastbound at its intersection with William Street.
   BONNIE BRAE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Oak Avenue.
   BONNIE BRAE, southbound at its intersection with Central Avenue.
   BONNIE BRAE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Chicago
Avenue.
   BONNIE BRAE, northbound at its intersection with North Avenue.
   BONNIE BRAE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Augusta
Street.
   BONNIE BRAE, northbound at its intersection with Division Street.
   BONNIE BRAE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Quick
Avenue.
   BONNIE BRAE, southbound at its intersection with Greenfield Street.
   BONNIE BRAE PLACE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with
Lemoyne Avenue.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, eastbound at its intersection with William Street.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Franklin
Avenue.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Lathrop
Avenue.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, westbound at its intersection with Keystone Avenue.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Ashland
Avenue.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, eastbound at its intersection with Bonnie Brae.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, westbound at its intersection with Park Avenue.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, eastbound at its intersection with Thatcher Avenue.
   CHICAGO AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Park
Avenue.
   CHICAGO AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with William
Street.
   CLINTON PLACE, southbound at its intersection with Central Avenue.
   CLINTON PLACE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Chicago
Avenue.
   CLINTON PLACE, northbound at its intersection with Lake Street.
   CLINTON PLACE, northbound at its intersection with North Avenue.
   CLINTON PLACE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with LeMoyne
Street.
   CLINTON PLACE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Quick
Avenue.
   CLINTON PLACE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Iowa
Street.
   CLINTON PLACE, southbound at its intersection with Greenfield Street.
   CLINTON PLACE, northbound at its intersection with Augusta Street.
   CLINTON PLACE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Iowa
Street.
   CLINTON PLACE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Oak
Avenue.
   CLINTON PLACE, southbound at its intersection with Holly Court.
   DIVISION STREET, westbound at its intersection with Thatcher Avenue.
   DIVISION STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Lathrop
Avenue.
   DIVISION STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Park
Avenue.
   DIVISION STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Monroe
Avenue.
   DIVISION STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Franklin
Avenue.
   EDGEWOOD PLACE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Lake
Street.
   FOREST AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Chicago
Avenue.
   FOREST AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Madison Street.
   FOREST AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Lake Street.
   FOREST AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with Division Street.
   FOREST AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with Washington Boulevard.
   FOREST AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with North Avenue.
   FOREST AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Oak
Avenue.
   FOREST AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Augusta
Street.
   FOREST AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Greenfield Street.
   FOREST AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Thomas
Street.
   FOREST AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with Hawthorne Avenue.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Augusta
Boulevard.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Chicago
Avenue.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Madison Street.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Lake
Street.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Division
Street.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with North Avenue.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with LeMoyne
Street.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Central
Avenue.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with
Hawthorne Avenue.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Vine
Street.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Linden
Street.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with
Greenfield Street.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Oak
Avenue.
   GALE AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Madison Street.
   GALE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Washington
Boulevard.
   GALE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Vine Street.
   GALE AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with Hawthorne Avenue.
   GARDEN STREET, westbound at its intersection with William Street.
   GREENFIELD STREET, westbound at its intersection with Thatcher Avenue.
   GREENFIELD STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Lathrop
Avenue.
   GREENFIELD STREET, eastbound at its intersection with Harlem Avenue.
   GREENFIELD STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Monroe
Avenue.
   GREENFIELD STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Franklin
Avenue.
   GREENFIELD STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Ashland
Avenue.
   GREENFIELD STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Park
Avenue.
   HAWTHORNE AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Ashland
Avenue.
   HAWTHORNE AVENUE, westbound at its intersection with Thatcher Avenue.
   HAWTHORNE AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Franklin
Avenue.
   HAWTHORNE AVENUE, eastbound at its intersection with Lathrop Avenue.
   HAWTHORNE AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Keystone
Avenue.
   HOLLY COURT, westbound at its intersection with William Street.
   HOLLY COURT, eastbound at its intersection with Bonnie Brae.
   IOWA STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Lathrop
Avenue.
   IOWA STREET, eastbound at its intersection with Harlem Avenue.
   IOWA STREET, westbound at its intersection with Thatcher Avenue.
   IOWA STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Bonnie Brae.
   IOWA STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Monroe Avenue.
   IOWA STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Keystone
Avenue.
   IOWA STREET, eastbound at its intersection with Forest Avenue.
   IOWA STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Park Avenue.
   IOWA STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Franklin
Avenue.
   JACKSON AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Chicago
Avenue.
   JACKSON AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Lake Street.
   JACKSON AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Division
Street.
   JACKSON AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with
Greenfield Street.
   JACKSON AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with North Avenue.
   JACKSON AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with LeMoyne
Street.
   JACKSON AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Augusta
Street.
   JACKSON AVENUE, northbound and southbound at Oak Avenue.
   JACKSON AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Iowa
Street.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Chicago
Avenue.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Madison Street.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with
Washington Boulevard.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Lake
Street.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with Division Street.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Augusta
Street.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Oak
Avenue.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Hawthorne Avenue.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with Central Avenue.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Vine
Street.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Greenfield Street.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with Hawthorne Avenue.
   LATHROP AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Madison Street.
   LATHROP AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Division
Street.
   LATHROP AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Augusta
Street.
   LATHROP AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with
Greenfield Street.
   LATHROP AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with LeMoyne
Street.
   LATHROP AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Oak
Avenue.
   LATHROP AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Central
Avenue.
   LeMOYNE PARKWAY, westbound at its intersection with Park Avenue.
   LeMOYNE STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Jackson
Avenue.
   LeMOYNE STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Lathrop
Avenue.
   LeMOYNE STREET, eastbound at its intersection with Harlem Avenue.
   LeMOYNE STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Franklin
Avenue.
   LeMOYNE STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Clinton
Place.
   LeMOYNE STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Bonnie
Brae.
   LINDEN STREET, eastbound at its intersection with Lathrop Avenue.
   LINDEN STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Ashland
Avenue.
   LINDEN STREET, westbound at its intersection with Thatcher Avenue.
   LINDEN STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Keystone
Avenue.
   LINDEN STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Gale Avenue.
   LINDEN STREET, eastbound at its intersection with Forest Avenue.
   LINDEN STREET, westbound at its intersection with Park Avenue.
   LINDEN STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Franklin
Avenue.
   MONROE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Chicago
Avenue.
   MONROE AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Lake Street.
   MONROE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Division
Street.
   MONROE AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with North Avenue.
   MONROE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Augusta
Street.
   MONROE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with
Greenfield.
   MONROE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Lemoyne
Avenue.
   MONROE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Oak
Avenue.
   MONROE AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Quick
Avenue.
   OAK AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Bonnie Brae.
   OAK AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Thatcher
Avenue.
   OAK AVENUE, eastbound at its intersection with Harlem Avenue.
   OAK AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Lathrop Avenue.
   OAK AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Park Avenue.
   OAK AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Keystone
Avenue.
   OAK AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Jackson Avenue.
   OAK AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with William Street.
   OAK AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Franklin
Avenue.
   PARK AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Chicago
Avenue.
   PARK AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Central Avenue.
   PARK AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Washington
Boulevard.
   PARK AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Madison Street.
   PARK AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Lake Street.
   PARK AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Division
Street.
   PARK AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with North Avenue.
   PARK AVENUE, northbound at its intersection with Hawthorne Avenue.
   PARK AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Augusta
Street.
   PARK AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Oak Avenue.
   PARK AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Greenfield
Street.
   PARK AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Thomas
Street.
   QUICK AVENUE, eastbound at its intersection with Harlem Avenue.
   QUICK AVENUE, westbound at its intersection with Lathrop Avenue.
   QUICK AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Jackson
Avenue.
   QUICK AVENUE, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with William
Street.
   RIVER OAKS, southbound at its intersection with Lake Street.
   THATCHER AVENUE, northbound and southbound at its intersection with
Washington Boulevard.
   THATCHER AVENUE, southbound at its intersection with Madison Street.
   THOMAS STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Lathrop
Avenue.
   THOMAS STREET, eastbound at its intersection with Harlem Avenue.
   THOMAS STREET, westbound at its intersection with Keystone Avenue.
   THOMAS STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Franklin
Avenue.
   THOMAS STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Ashland
Avenue.
   THOMAS STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Jackson
Avenue.
   THOMAS STREET, eastbound at its intersection with Monroe Avenue.
   VINE STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Franklin
Avenue.
   VINE STREET, eastbound at its intersection with Lathrop Avenue.
   VINE STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Gale Avenue.
   VINE STREET, eastbound at its intersection with Forest Avenue.
   VINE STREET, westbound at its intersection with Park Avenue.
   VINE STREET, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with Ashland
Avenue.
   WASHINGTON BOULEVARD, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with
Thatcher Avenue.
   WASHINGTON BOULEVARD, eastbound and westbound at its intersection with
Keystone Avenue.
   WILLIAM STREET, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Chicago
Avenue.
   WILLIAM STREET, northbound at its intersection with North Avenue.
   WILLIAM STREET, southbound at its intersection with Division Street.
   WILLIAM STREET, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Lake
Street.
   WILLIAM STREET, northbound and southbound at its intersection with LeMoyne
Street.
   WILLIAM STREET, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Oak
Avenue.
   WILLIAM STREET, northbound and southbound at its intersection with
Greenfield Street.
   WILLIAM STREET, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Quick
Street.
   WILLIAM STREET, northbound and southbound at its intersection with Iowa
Street.
   WILLIAM STREET, northbound at its intersection with Augusta Street.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2079, 7-27-1981; Ord. 2092, 3-22-1982; Ord. 2095, 5-24-
1982; Ord. 2140, 1-23-1984; Ord. 2161, 11-16-1984; Ord. 2168, 1-14-1985; Ord.
2172, 3-25-1985; Ord. 2192, 11-11-1985; Ord. 2206, 3-10-1986; Ord. 2213, 6-23-
1986; Ord. 2217, 7-14-1986; Ord. 2224, 11-10-1986; Ord. 2284, 4-11-1988; Ord.
2319, 1-9-1989; Ord. 2423, 4-9-1991; Ord. 2462, 12-9-1991; Ord. 2498, 6-8-1992;
Ord. 2601, 7-25-1994; Ord. 2934, 9-10-2001; Ord. 2943, 10-22-2001; Ord. 2990,
11-11-2002; Ord. 3010, 1-27-2003; Ord. 3064, 2-23-2004; Ord. 3090, 12-13-2004;
Ord. 3100, 2-14-2005; Ord. 3102, 3-28-2005; Ord. 3130, 10-11-2005; Ord. 3196,
5-29-2007; Ord. 3206, 8-13-2007; Ord. 3255, 12-8-2008; Ord. 3272, 4-27-2009;
Ord. 3273, 4-27-2009; Ord. 3274, 4-27-2009; Ord. 3337, 8-9-2010; Ord. 3349, 12-
16-2010; Ord. 3462, 10-22-2012; Ord. 3463, 10-22-2012; Ord. 3464, 10-22-2012;
Ord. 3551, 4-13-2015; Ord. 3561, 5-26-2015; Ord. 3618, 10-10-2016; Ord. 3667,
11-27-2017; Ord. 3698, 5-29-2018; Ord. 3715, 10-15-2018; Ord. 3721, 11-26-2018;
Ord. 3748, 5-13-2019; Ord. 3853, 1-24-2022)
9-3-3: SCHEDULE 3, ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Pursuant to the provisions of section
9-2-5 of this title, the following are hereby declared one-way streets and
alleys in the Village:
   A.   One-Way Streets:
   ASHLAND AVENUE, northbound between Lake Street and Oak Avenue, between seven
thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, southbound between Greenfield Street and Division Street,
between seven thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, eastbound between William Street and Harlem Avenue.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, westbound between Park Avenue and Keystone Avenue.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, northbound between Division Street and Greenfield Street,
between seven thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, southbound between Lake Street and Oak Avenue, between
seven thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   GREENFIELD STREET, eastbound between the alley just east of Bonnie Brae and
Harlem Avenue.
   JACKSON AVENUE, southbound between Chicago Avenue and Quick Avenue, between
seven thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   JACKSON AVENUE, southbound between Chicago Avenue and Quick Avenue, between
seven thirty o’clock A.M. and four o’clock P.M. on school days.
   LeMOYNE STREET, eastbound between Bonnie Brae and Harlem Avenue.
   LeMOYNE STREET, eastbound between the alley just east of Bonnie Brae and
Harlem Avenue.
   LeMOYNE STREET, westbound between Jackson Avenue and Lathrop Avenue during
the hours of seven thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   PARK AVENUE, northbound between Lake Street and Oak Avenue, between seven
thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   PARK DRIVE, southwestbound.
   QUICK AVENUE, eastbound between Bonnie Brae and Harlem Avenue.
   QUICK AVENUE, westbound between Jackson Avenue and Lathrop Avenue, between
eight o'clock A.M. and two o'clock P.M. on Sundays.
   THOMAS STREET, eastbound between Bonnie Brae and Harlem Avenue.
   B.   One-Way Alleys:
Alley between Oak Avenue and Quick Avenue, eastbound from Bonnie Brae to Harlem
Avenue.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2344, 5-22-1989; Ord. 2403, 9-24-1990; Ord. 2601, 7-25-
1994; Ord. 2788, 9-28-1998; Ord. 2862, 12-13-1999; Ord. 2938, 9-10-2001; Ord.
3040, 8-11-2003; Ord. 3302, 9-14-2009; Ord. 3393, 10-11-2011; Ord. 3542, 1-26-
2015, eff. 8-1-2015; Ord. 3876, 10-10-2022; Ord. 3893, 4-10-2023)
9-3-4: SCHEDULE 4, YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS:
The following streets are hereby declared to be yield right- of-way
intersections:
   THATCHER AVENUE, southbound to yield the right-of-way to vehicular traffic
on Hawthorne Avenue.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2079, 7-27-1981; Ord. 2092, 3-22-1982; Ord. 2528, 11-23-
1992; Ord. 2602, 7-25-1994; Ord. 2644, 6-26-1995; Ord. 2693, 12-9-1996; Ord.
2904, 11-27-2000; Ord. 2934, 9-10-2001; Ord. 3016, 4-14-2003; Ord. 3064, 2-23-
2004; Ord. 3130, 10-11-2005; Ord. 3196, 5-29-2007; Ord. 3206, 8-13-2007; Ord.
3255, 12-8-2008; Ord. 3462, 10-22-2012; Ord. 3463, 10-22-2012; Ord. 3749, 5-13-
2019)
9-3-5: SCHEDULE 5, BUS STOPS:
Pursuant to the provisions of section
9-2-11 of this title, the following areas are hereby declared bus stops:
   HARLEM AVENUE, along the west curb for a distance of eighty feet north of
the north curb line of the following streets:
      Augusta Street
      Berkshire Street
      Chicago Avenue
      Division Street
      Greenfield Street
      Iowa Street
      LeMoyne Street
      Oak Avenue
      Thomas Street
   HARLEM AVENUE, along the west curb from a point one hundred forty feet south
of Quick Avenue, continuing south for a distance of eighty feet.
   HARLEM AVENUE, along the west curb for a distance of two hundred feet north
of the north curb line of Lake Street.
   LAKE STREET, along the north curb for a distance of eighty feet east of the
east curb line of the following streets:
      Ashland Avenue
      Auvergne Place
      Bonnie Brae
      Clinton Place
      Edgewood Place
      Forest Avenue
      Franklin Avenue
      Jackson Avenue
      Keystone Avenue
      Lathrop Avenue
      Monroe Avenue
      Park Avenue
      River Oaks Drive
      William Street
   LAKE STREET, along the north curb for a distance of one hundred two feet
east of the east curb line of Thatcher Avenue.
   LAKE STREET, along the north curb for a distance of one hundred twenty feet
west of the west curb line of Harlem Avenue.
   LAKE STREET, along the south curb for a distance of eighty feet west of the
west curb line of the following streets:
      Ashland Avenue
      Auvergne Place
      Clinton Place
      Edgewood Place
      Forest Avenue
      Franklin Avenue
      Harlem Avenue
      Jackson Avenue
      Keystone Avenue
      Lathrop Avenue
      Monroe Avenue
      Park Avenue
      River Oaks Drive
      William Street
   LAKE STREET, along the south curb for a distance of one hundred twenty four
feet west of the west curb line of Thatcher Avenue.
   LAKE STREET, along the south curb for a distance of eighty feet east of the
east curb line of Bonnie Brae.
   MADISON STREET, along the north curb for a distance of eighty feet east of
the east curb line of Forest Avenue.
   MADISON STREET, along the north curb for a distance of eighty feet east of
the east curb line of the following streets:
      Gale Avenue
      Keystone Avenue
      Thatcher Avenue
   NORTH AVENUE, along the south curb for a distance of eighty feet west of the
west curb line of the following streets:
      Clinton Place
      Forest Avenue
      Franklin Avenue
      Harlem Avenue
      Monroe Avenue
   NORTH AVENUE, along the south curb for a distance of eighty feet east of the
east curb line of Lathrop Avenue.
   NORTH AVENUE, along the south curb for a distance of one hundred twenty feet
east of the east curb line of Thatcher Avenue.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2469, 1-13-1992; Ord. 2510, 8-10-1992; Ord. 2601, 7-25-
1994; Ord. 3669, 11-27-2017)
9-3-6: SCHEDULE 6, TRUCK AND BUS ROUTES, LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
   Through truck and bus traffic shall be prohibited, pursuant to the
provisions of section
9-2-6 of this title, on the following streets:
      Augusta Street
      Bonnie Brae
      Clinton Place between Lake Street and North Avenue
      Chicago Avenue
      Division Street
      Greenfield Street, between Park Avenue and Harlem Avenue
      Jackson Avenue
      Lathrop Street
      Le Moyne Street
      Monroe Avenue
      Oak Avenue
      Quick Avenue
   THATCHER AVENUE, between North Avenue and Madison Street.
   WASHINGTON BOULEVARD.
   WILLIAM STREET, between Lake Street and North Avenue.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2114, 2-28-1983; Ord. 2510, 8-10-1992; Ord. 3934, 8-12-
2024)
9-3-7: SCHEDULE 7, SPEED LIMITS:
It is hereby determined that the absolute maximum speed limit for a motor
vehicle in the Village shall be twenty five miles per hour on all streets,
except for the following:
 
Alleys                                                           10 mph
Harlem Avenue                                                    30 mph
Lake Street                                                      30 mph
North Avenue                                                     30 mph
Chicago Avenue between Thatcher Avenue and the Des Plaines River 35 mph
 
(Ord. 3113, 5-23-2005; amd. Ord. 3205, 8-13-2007)
9-3-8: SCHEDULE 8, NO LEFT TURNS:
Left turns are hereby prohibited on the following streets:
   BONNIE BRAE, northbound traffic where it intersects with North Avenue.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, eastbound traffic where it intersects with William Street.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, southbound traffic where it intersects with Lake Street
during the hours from seven thirty o'clock A.M. to nine o'clock A.M. and from
two o'clock P.M. to four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   HARLEM AVENUE, northbound traffic where it intersects with Central Avenue.
   HARLEM AVENUE, northbound traffic where it intersects with Quick Avenue.
   HARLEM AVENUE, from the vehicular exits at the properties commonly known as
624 Harlem Avenue and 630 Harlem Avenue.
   HARLEM AVENUE, northbound traffic where it intersects with Greenfield Street
during the hours from seven o'clock A.M. to nine o'clock A.M. and from four
o'clock P.M. to six o'clock P.M.
   HARLEM AVENUE, northbound traffic where it intersects with LeMoyne Street
during the hours from seven o'clock A.M. to nine o'clock A.M. and from four
o'clock P.M. to six o'clock P.M.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, southbound traffic where it intersects with Central Avenue.
   LAKE STREET, eastbound traffic where it intersects with Edgewood Place
during the hours from seven o'clock A.M. to nine o'clock A.M. and from four
o'clock P.M. to six o'clock P.M.
   LATHROP AVENUE, southbound traffic where it intersects with Madison Avenue
during the hours from seven o'clock A.M. to nine o'clock A.M. and from four
o'clock P.M. to six o'clock P.M.
   LATHROP AVENUE, southbound traffic where it intersects with any off street
parking lot from Roosevelt Middle School or the River Forest Public Library
during the hours from seven thirty o'clock A.M. to four thirty o'clock P.M. on
school days.
   LeMOYNE STREET, eastbound traffic where it intersects with Harlem Avenue.
   MADISON AVENUE, eastbound traffic where it intersects with Forest Avenue.
   MADISON STREET, eastbound traffic where it intersects with Keystone Avenue
during the hours from seven o’clock A.M. to nine o’clock A.M. and from four
o’clock P.M. to six o’clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   NORTH AVENUE, from the vehicular exit located on the east side of the
premises commonly described as 7225 North Avenue; and from the Shell Oil
station premises located at the southwest corner of Harlem Avenue and North
Avenue.
   QUICK AVENUE, eastbound traffic where it intersects with Harlem Avenue.
   RIVER FOREST STATE BANK AND TRUST COMPANY PARKING LOT, on entering Lake
Street.
   RIVER FOREST TOWN CENTER PARKING LOT, located at the southwest corner of the
intersection of Harlem Avenue and Lake Street, for both inbound and outbound
traffic at the vehicular driveways located on Lake Street and on Harlem Avenue.
   RIVER FOREST TOWN CENTER PARKING LOT, located at the southwest corner of the
intersection of Bonnie Brae and Lake Street, for both inbound and outbound
traffic at the vehicular driveway located on Lake Street.
   THATCHER AVENUE, southbound traffic where it intersects with Augusta Street.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2114, 2-28-1983; Ord. 2601, 7-25-1994; Ord. 2615, 9-26-
1994; Ord. 2674, 6-10-1996; Ord. 2991, 11-11-2002; Ord. 3542, 1-26-2015, eff.
8-1-2015; Ord. 3726, 1-28-2019; Ord. 3783, 10-14-2019; Ord. 3875, 10-10-2022)
9-3-9: SCHEDULE 9, NO TURNS ON RED LIGHTS:
No turns shall be made on red lights at the following intersections:
   CENTRAL AVENUE, eastbound traffic at its intersection with Harlem Avenue.
   CHICAGO AVENUE, at its intersection with Lathrop Avenue.
   HARLEM AVENUE, at its intersection with Lake Street.
   LAKE STREET, at its intersection with Lathrop Avenue.
   LAKE STREET, at its intersection with Harlem Avenue.
   LATHROP AVENUE, at its intersection with Lake Street.
   LATHROP AVENUE, at its intersection with North Avenue.
   NORTH AVENUE, at its intersection with Lathrop Avenue.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2348, 6-12-1989)
9-3-10: SCHEDULE 10, U-TURNS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make U-turns on the
following named streets, pursuant to the provisions of section
 
9-2-2 of this title:
   Chicago Avenue
   Division Street
   Harlem Avenue
   Lake Street
   Lathrop Avenue
   Madison Street
   North Avenue
   Thatcher Avenue
   Washington Boulevard
(1981 Code)
9-3-11: SCHEDULE 11, DO NOT ENTER:
   ALLEY, between the 300 blocks of Lathrop Avenue and Ashland Avenue, except
for the one hundred sixty feet south of Hawthorne Avenue.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, at Division Street shall be closed to traffic entering from
the south, eight o’clock A.M. to four o’clock P.M. on school days.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, at Oak Avenue shall be closed to traffic entering from the
north, eight o’clock A.M. to four o’clock P.M. on school days.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, at Keystone Avenue shall be closed to traffic entering from
the west.
   FOREST AVENUE, at North Avenue shall be closed to traffic entering from the
north.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, at Greenfield Street shall be closed to traffic entering
from the north, eight o’clock A.M. to four o’clock P.M. on school days.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, at Lake Street shall be closed to traffic entering from the
south, eight o’clock A.M. to four o’clock P.M., Monday through Friday, except
during the summer when school is not in session.
   GARDEN STREET, at William Street shall be closed to traffic entering from
the west.
   GREENFIELD STREET, at Harlem Avenue shall be closed to traffic entering from
the east and the south.
   JACKSON AVENUE, at Oak Avenue shall be closed to traffic entering from the
south, seven thirty o’clock A.M. to four o’clock P.M. on school days.
   JACKSON AVENUE, at Quick Avenue shall be closed to traffic entering from the
south, seven thirty o’clock A.M. to four o’clock P.M. on school days.
   LeMOYNE STREET, at Harlem Avenue shall be closed to traffic entering from
the east and the south.
   LeMOYNE STREET, at Lathrop Avenue shall be closed to traffic entering from
the west, eight o’clock A.M. to four o’clock P.M. on school days.
   OAK AVENUE, at Lathrop heading east and Jackson heading west during the
hours of eight o’clock A.M. and four o’clock P.M. on school days.
   PARK AVENUE, at North Avenue shall be closed to traffic entering from the
north.
   QUICK AVENUE, at Harlem Avenue shall be closed to traffic entering from the
east.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2200, 1-27-1986; Ord. 2565, 9-29-1993; Ord. 2938, 9-10-
2001; Ord. 3045, 9-22-2003; Ord. 3542, 1-26-2015, eff. 8-1-2015; Ord. 3874, 10-
10-2022; Ord. 3888, 4-10-2023; Ord. 3908, 10-23-2023; Ord. 3909, 10-23-2023)
9-3-12: SCHEDULE 12, NO PARKING:
Pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, parking is prohibited
on the following streets and alleys or parts thereof:
   ALLEY, on both sides between the 1100 blocks of Harlem Avenue and Bonnie
Brae.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, on the west side of the street in the 1200 block from the
south point of the Willard School grounds to the north driveway of the school.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the west side from the south curb of Lake Street for a
distance of sixty feet.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the east side between Madison Street and the alley north of
Madison Street.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the east side from the south curb of North Avenue, extending
south for a distance of one hundred fifty feet.
   AUGUSTA STREET, the north and south sides from Harlem Avenue to Monroe
Avenue.
   AUGUSTA STREET, between Keystone Avenue and Thatcher Avenue.
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side from Oak Avenue to Quick Avenue.
   BONNIE BRAE, on the east side between Augusta Street and Division Street.
   BONNIE BRAE, east and west sides for a distance of seventy feet north of the
north crosswalk on Chicago Avenue where Chicago Avenue intersects Bonnie Brae.
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side from the alley south of North Avenue to LeMoyne
Street and the east side from North Avenue to the alley south of North Avenue.
   BONNIE BRAE, the east and west sides from Central Avenue to Lake Street.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side from one hundred eighty five feet west of the
west curb of Harlem Avenue to Harlem Avenue.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the north side from Bonnie Brae to Harlem Avenue.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side between Lathrop Avenue and Keystone Avenue.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the north side between William Street and ninety feet east
of the east curb of William Street.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the north side from two hundred forty feet east of the east
curb of Lathrop Avenue to William Street.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side from the east curb line of Lathrop Avenue
continuing east for a distance of one hundred twenty five feet.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side from thirty five feet west of the west curb
line extended of William Street continuing east for a distance of one hundred
fifty five feet.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side from one hundred forty five feet west of the
west curb line extended of Clinton Place continuing east for a distance of
seventy five feet.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side at its tee intersection with Bonnie Brae a
distance of forty five feet.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side from a point eighty five feet east of the
east curb line of Bonnie Brae and continuing east for a distance of one hundred
ten feet.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the north side from eighty feet west of the west curb of
Lathrop Avenue continuing west for a distance of one hundred thirty feet.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the north side from one hundred eighty five feet east of the
east curb line of Franklin Avenue continuing east for a distance of seventy two
feet.
   CHICAGO AVENUE, the north and south sides from Harlem Avenue to Bonnie Brae.
   CLINTON PLACE, west side from Lake Street to Central Avenue.
   CLINTON PLACE, the west side from LeMoyne Street to the alley south of North
Avenue.
   CLINTON PLACE, the east side from the south curb line of Lake Street
continuing south for a distance of ninety feet.
   DIVISION STREET, south side between Thatcher Avenue and Park Avenue.
   DIVISION STREET, the north side between Thatcher Avenue and Park Avenue for
a distance of forty feet on each side of both entrances to Rosary College.
   DIVISION STREET, the north side from the east curb line of Park Avenue
continuing east for a distance of one hundred forty six feet.
   DIVISION STREET, the north side from the west curb line of Park Avenue
continuing west for a distance of one hundred eighteen feet.
   DIVISION STREET, the south side from the east curb line of Park Avenue
continuing east for a distance of one hundred seventeen feet.
   DIVISION STREET, the north side for a distance of thirty feet either side of
the western driveway of Dominican University.
   DIVISION STREET, the north side from the west curb of Monroe Avenue
continuing west for a distance of eighty six and one- half feet.
   DIVISION STREET, the north side from the west curb of William Street
continuing west for a distance of ninety two feet.
   DIVISION STREET, the north side, beginning one hundred twenty five feet west
of the west curb of William, continuing west for a distance of one hundred
eighty five feet.
   DIVISION STREET, the north side from the east curb of Thatcher Avenue,
extending east for a distance of one hundred twenty feet.
   FOREST AVENUE, the east side from Madison Street to Vine Street.
   FOREST AVENUE, the east side from Washington Boulevard to 118 Forest Avenue.
   FOREST AVENUE, the cul-de-sac in the 200 block.
   FOREST AVENUE, the west side from Division Street to a point eighty feet
south of the south curb of Division Street.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, the east and west sides from Madison Street to the alley
north of Madison Street.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, the east side from 133 Franklin Avenue to Washington
Boulevard.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, the west side from 210 Franklin Avenue to Washington
Boulevard.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, the east side from Central Avenue to Lake Street.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, the east side between Lake Street and the north property
line of Lincoln School, between the hours of seven thirty o'clock A.M. and nine
o'clock A.M. and between two o'clock P.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   GALE AVENUE, the west side between Madison Street and Vine Street.
   GALE AVENUE, the east side beginning one hundred forty feet north from the
north curb of Madison Street and continuing for a distance of thirty feet.
   GARDEN STREET, the north and south sides from Bonnie Brae to William Street.
   HARLEM AVENUE, the west side between North Avenue and Central Avenue.
   HAWTHORNE AVENUE, the north side from Ashland Avenue to Lathrop Avenue.
   HOLLY COURT, the north side from Bonnie Brae to William Street.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the west side from the south curb of North Avenue for a
distance of four hundred fifty five feet, except Sundays.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the west side from a distance of four hundred fifty five
feet south of the south curb on North Avenue to LeMoyne Street.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the east side between LeMoyne Avenue and North Avenue.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the west side from Central Avenue to the alley south of the
Jewel property.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the east and west sides from the north curb of Lake Street
for a distance of three hundred seventy five feet.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the east and west sides from twenty feet north of the north
curb of Augusta Street continuing north for a distance of fifty feet.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the east and west sides from twenty feet south of the south
curb of Augusta Street continuing south for a distance of fifty feet.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, the cul-de-sac in the 1500 block.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, the east side between Central Avenue and Lake Street.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, the west side from Division Street to a point eighty feet
south of the south curb of Division Street.
   LAKE STREET, the south side for a distance of twenty five feet east of where
Lake Street and Franklin Avenue intersect.
   LAKE STREET, the south side beginning sixty five feet east of where Lake
Street and Franklin Avenue intersect and extending to Ashland Avenue.
   LAKE STREET, the south side from Harlem Avenue to Clinton Place.
   LAKE STREET, the north side from Harlem Avenue to 7318 Lake Street.
   LAKE STREET, the north side from Monroe Avenue to Jackson Avenue.
   LAKE STREET, the south side from the east side of the property line at 7575
Lake Street to two hundred feet east of the east curb of William Street.
   LAKE STREET, the north side from the west curb of Forest Avenue, continuing
west for a distance of sixty one feet.
   LAKE STREET, the south side, beginning seventy nine feet west of the west
curb of Forest Avenue extended, continuing east for a distance of one hundred
sixty five feet.
   LAKE STREET, the south side, from the east curb of Park Avenue, continuing
east for a distance of sixty five feet.
   LAKE STREET, the south side from a point one hundred thirty five feet east
of the east curb line of Lathrop Avenue proceeding east for a distance of
thirty five feet.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side from Washington Boulevard to the alley north
of Washington Boulevard.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side from Madison Street to the alley north of
Madison Street.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the east side from Lake Street to Quick Avenue.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the east side from the north curb of Central Avenue for a
distance of seventy five feet north and from the south curb of Lake Street for
a distance of one hundred seventy feet south.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side from the north curb of Central Avenue for a
distance of seventy one feet north and from the south curb of Lake Street for a
distance of one hundred fifty eight feet south.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the east side from Chicago Avenue to two hundred twenty feet
south of the south curb of Chicago Avenue.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side from the north curb of Lake Street for a
distance of two hundred fifteen feet.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side, from the south curb of Hawthorne Avenue,
continuing south for a distance of one hundred fifty one feet.
   LINDEN AVENUE, the north side from Lathrop Avenue to Park Avenue.
   LINDEN STREET, the north side between Thatcher Avenue and Gale Avenue.
   MADISON STREET, the north side from Park Avenue to Forest Avenue.
   MADISON STREET, the north side beginning at the west curb of Gale Avenue and
continuing west for a distance of sixty feet.
   MONROE AVENUE, the west side from two hundred feet south of North Avenue to
LeMoyne Street.
   MONROE AVENUE, the west side between Augusta Street and Division Street.
   NORTH AVENUE, the south side from the east line of Bonnie Brae to the west
line of Harlem Avenue.
   NORTH AVENUE, the south side between Thatcher Avenue and Park Avenue.
   NORTH AVENUE, the south side between Ashland Avenue and Jackson Avenue,
except in designated parking turnouts.
   OAK AVENUE, the north side from Harlem Avenue to William Street.
   PARK AVENUE, the east side of the 1200 and 1300 blocks.
   PARK AVENUE, the east side between Chicago Avenue and Division Street.
   PARK AVENUE, the west side for a distance of ten feet south of the driveway
entrance to Rosary College.
   PARK AVENUE, the west side from Lake Street up to, and including, the north
two diagonal spaces in front of the Municipal complex at 400 Park Avenue, said
diagonal spaces being designated for police use only.
   PARK AVENUE, the west side from Central Avenue to one hundred eighty feet
north of Central Avenue.
   PARK AVENUE, the east side from Lake Street to three hundred sixty five feet
south of Lake Street.
   PARK AVENUE, the west side between Lake Street and the north property line
of Lincoln School, between the hours of seven thirty o'clock A.M. and nine
o'clock A.M. and between two o'clock P.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   PARK DRIVE, the west side from Park Avenue to Franklin Avenue.
   QUICK AVENUE, the north side from Harlem Avenue to Bonnie Brae.
   QUICK AVENUE, the north side from Jackson Avenue to Lathrop Avenue, except
on Sundays.
   THATCHER AVENUE, the east side of Chicago Avenue to Lake Street.
   THATCHER AVENUE, the west side from Hawthorne Avenue to Madison Street.
   THATCHER AVENUE, the east side from Division Street to Greenfield Street.
   THATCHER AVENUE, the east side from the north curb of Greenfield Street,
extending north for a distance of one hundred seventy-five feet.
   THOMAS STREET, the south side from Harlem Avenue to Bonnie Brae.
   WASHINGTON BOULEVARD, the north side from the east curb line of Keystone
Avenue continuing east to twelve feet east of the west boundary of Washington
Commons Park.
   WASHINGTON BOULEVARD, the south side from Forest Avenue to the Canadian
National Wisconsin Central Viaduct.
   WILLIAM STREET, the west side from a point one hundred thirty feet south of
the south curb of North Avenue to LeMoyne Street.
   WILLIAM STREET, the west side from Lake Street to Central Avenue.
   WILLIAM STREET, the east side from Lake Street to eighty feet south of the
south curb of Lake Street.
   WILLIAM STREET, the east side from Central Avenue to three hundred five feet
north of the north curb of Central Avenue.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2072, 4-27-1981; Ord. 2079, 7-27-1981; Ord. 2090, 3-8-
1982; Ord. 2124, 6-27-1983; Ord. 2192, 11-11-1985; Ord. 2319, 1-9-1989; Ord.
2361, 10-30-1989; Ord. 2377, 3-26-1990; Ord. 2388, 6-11-1990; Ord. 2392, 6-25-
1990; Ord. 2407, 11-26-1990; Ord. 2410, 12-10-1990; Ord. 2411, 12-17-1990; Ord.
2450, 9-9-1991; Ord. 2465, 12-9-1991; Ord. 2486, 4-13-1992; Ord. 2504, 7-27-
1992; Ord. 2516, 8-24-1992; Ord. 2545, 4-12-1993; Ord. 2581, 2-28-1994; Ord.
2601, 7-25-1994; Ord. 2628, 2-13-1995; Ord. 2638, 5-16-1995; Ord. 2682, 8-6-
1996; Ord. 2685, 8-26-1996; Ord. 2726, 4-28-1997; Ord. 2749, 12-8-1997; Ord.
2773, 6-8-1998; Ord. 2780, 8-10-1998; Ord. 2827, 5-20-1999; Ord. 2921, 4-9-
2001; Ord. 2950, 12-10-2001; Ord. 2959, 3-25-2002; Ord. 2971, 6-10-2002; Ord.
3001, 12-9-2002; Ord. 3003, 1-13-2003; Ord. 3063, 2-23-2004; Ord. 3083, 8-9-
2004; Ord. 3090, 12-13-2004; Ord. 3104, 3-28-2005; Ord. 3130, 10-11-2005; Ord.
3212, 11-12-2007; Ord. 3247, 7-28-2008; Ord. 3409, 2-13-2012; Ord. 3574, 9-28-
2015; Ord. 3583, 1-25-2016; Ord. 3607, 8-8-2016; Ord. 3668, 11-27-2017; Ord.
3684, 3-12-2018; Ord. 3716, 10-15-2018; Ord. 3719, 11-26-2018; Ord. 3725, 1-28-
2019; Ord. 3753, 5-28-2019; Ord. 3756, 5-28-2019; Ord. 3795, 1-27-2020; Ord.
3816, 7-13-2020)
9-3-13: SCHEDULE 13, TIME LIMIT PARKING:
Pursuant to the provisions of section
9-2-12 of this title, parking is hereby limited on the following designated
streets and alleys:
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the east side, between Greenfield Avenue and Division
Street, two hour parking permitted on school days between seven o'clock A.M.
and four o'clock P.M.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the east side, between Hawthorne Avenue and Linden Street,
no parking six o'clock A.M. to two o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   AUGUSTA STREET, the north side, between Monroe Avenue and Jackson Avenue,
parking prohibited from eight o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M., Monday through
Friday.
   AUGUSTA STREET, the north side, between Jackson Avenue and Keystone Avenue,
no parking four o'clock P.M. to six o'clock P.M., except Sundays and holidays.
   AUGUSTA STREET, the south side, between Monroe Avenue and Jackson Avenue,
parking prohibited from eight o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M., Monday through
Friday.
   AUGUSTA STREET, the south side, between Jackson Avenue and Keystone Avenue,
no parking seven o'clock A.M. to nine o'clock A.M., except Sundays and
holidays.
   BONNIE BRAE, the east side between LeMoyne Street and the alley just south
of North Avenue, two hour parking permitted.
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side from one hundred fifteen feet north of the north
curb of Lake Street to Quick Avenue, no parking nine o'clock A.M. to ten
o'clock P.M., except Sundays.
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side between Garden Street and Central Avenue, two
hour parking permitted.
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side from North Avenue to the alley south of North
Avenue, two hour parking permitted.
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side beginning ninety five feet south of the south
curb of Division Street and continuing south for a distance of one hundred
seventy five feet, one hour parking permitted between eight forty five o'clock
A.M. and two o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday on school days.
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side from a point two hundred fifty five feet north of
the north curb line of Augusta to a point two hundred seventy feet south of the
south curb of Division Street, two hour parking permitted.
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side between Oak Avenue and Chicago Avenue, four hour
parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   BONNIE BRAE, the east side from one hundred fifteen feet north of the north
curb of Lake Street to Chicago Avenue, four hour parking permitted between
eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   BONNIE BRAE, the east and west sides between Iowa Street and Chicago Avenue,
two hour parking permitted.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the north side from the west side of the Police Department
driveway extending west for a distance of two hundred five feet, three hour
parking permitted between six o'clock A.M. and two o'clock P.M., Monday through
Friday.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the north side beginning ninety feet from the east curb of
William Street to Clinton Place, two hour parking permitted.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the north side beginning sixty six feet from the east curb
of Lathrop Avenue to a point two hundred forty feet east of the east curb of
Lathrop Avenue, one hour parking permitted.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side beginning at a point one hundred twenty five
feet east of the east curb line of Lathrop Avenue and continuing east for a
distance of one hundred ten feet, two hour parking permitted.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the north side from Franklin Avenue to the west driveway of
the Municipal complex parking lot, two hour parking permitted.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side beginning at a point two hundred sixty feet
west of the west curb line of William Street and continuing west for a distance
of two hundred thirty feet, two hour parking permitted.
   CLINTON PLACE, the east and west sides between Augusta Street and Iowa
Street, no parking nine o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M., Monday through
Friday.
   CLINTON PLACE, the east side from LeMoyne Street to the alley south of North
Avenue, two hour parking permitted.
   CLINTON PLACE, the east side beginning at a point ninety feet south of the
south curb line of Lake Street and continuing south for a distance of seventy
four feet, two hour parking permitted.
   CLINTON PLACE, the east and west sides between Holly Court and Chicago
Avenue, four hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock
P.M., Monday through Friday.
   DIVISION STREET, the south side from the west side of the Concordia
University driveway and extending west for a distance of one hundred fifty
feet, thirty minute parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and four
o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday on days when Grace Lutheran School is in
session.
   DIVISION STREET, the south side beginning seventy five feet west of the west
curb of Bonnie Brae, and continuing west for a distance of seventy five feet,
between eight forty five o'clock A.M. and two o'clock P.M., Monday through
Friday on school days.
   FOREST AVENUE, both sides of 1300 block, parking prohibited from eight
o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M. on weekdays.
   FOREST AVENUE, both sides of 1100 block, resident only parking permitted
between eight o'clock A.M. and eight o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   FOREST AVENUE, the 1500 block, two hour parking permitted eight o'clock A.M.
to six o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   FOREST AVENUE, the west side between Washington Boulevard and Vine Street,
two hour parking permitted from nine o'clock A.M. to ten o'clock P.M.
   FOREST AVENUE, the east and west sides between Washington Commons Park and
Linden Avenue, two hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five
o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, the west side between Central Avenue and Lake Street, two
hour parking permitted.
   GALE AVENUE, the east and west sides between Vine Street and Washington
Boulevard, two hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five
o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   GALE AVENUE, the east and west sides between Washington Boulevard and Linden
Avenue, two hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock
P.M., Monday through Friday.
   GREENFIELD STREET, the north side from Thatcher Avenue to Park Avenue,
parking prohibited from eight o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M. on weekdays.
   GREENFIELD STREET, the south side from Park Avenue west up to and including
the frontage at 7855 Greenfield Avenue, parking prohibited from eight o'clock
A.M. to five o'clock P.M. on weekdays.
   GREENFIELD STREET, the south side from Thatcher Avenue extending east for a
distance of five hundred thirty five feet, parking prohibited from eight
o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M. on weekdays.
   HAWTHORNE AVENUE, the south side between Thatcher Avenue and Franklin
Avenue, parking prohibited from six o'clock A.M. to two o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   HOLLY COURT, the south side between William Street and Bonnie Brae, four
hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the east side between Central Avenue and the alley south of
the Jewel property, two hour parking permitted.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the east and west sides between a point three hundred
seventy five feet north of the northern curb line of Lake Street and Quick
Avenue, two hour parking permitted.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the west side from sixty feet north of the north curb line
of Oak Avenue to three hundred twenty feet north of the north curb line of Oak
Avenue, between nine o'clock A.M. and two o'clock P.M. on school days for
visitor parking.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the west side from sixty feet south of the south curb line
of Oak Avenue to two hundred thirty five feet south of the south curb line of
Oak Avenue, between nine o'clock A.M. and two o'clock P.M. on school days for
visitor parking.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the east side from sixty feet south of the south curb line
of Chicago Avenue to sixty feet north of the north curb line of Oak Avenue from
seven thirty o'clock A.M. to four o'clock P.M. on school days, three hour
parking permitted.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the east side from sixty feet south of the south curb line
of Oak Avenue to sixty feet north of the north curb line of Quick Avenue from
seven thirty o'clock A.M. to four o'clock P.M. on school days, three hour
parking permitted.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the west side from sixty feet south of the south curb line
of Chicago Avenue to two hundred eighty five feet south of the south curb line
of Chicago Avenue, between seven thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on
school days.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, both sides of 1300 and 1400 blocks, parking prohibited from
eight o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M. on weekdays.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, both sides in the area one hundred twenty five feet north
of Madison Street, two hour parking permitted.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, the west side between Central Avenue and Lake Street, three
hour parking permitted between six o'clock A.M. and two o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, the east and west sides between Washington Boulevard and
Linden Avenue, two hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five
o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   LAKE STREET, the north side from Monroe Avenue to the east side of the
property at 7318 Lake Street, two hour parking permitted.
   LAKE STREET, the south side beginning twenty five feet east of where Lake
Street intersects with Franklin Avenue and extending for a distance of forty
feet east, fifteen minute parking permitted at all times, including Sundays and
holidays, notwithstanding the exceptions stated in section
9-2-12 of this title.
   LAKE STREET, the north side between Jackson Avenue and the Wisconsin Central
Railroad Viaduct, two hour parking permitted.
   LAKE STREET, the south side between the east property line of 7575 Lake
Street and Ashland Avenue, two hour parking permitted.
   LAKE STREET, the south side from Clinton Place to two hundred feet east of
the east curb of William Street.
   LAKE STREET, the north side from a point eighty feet east of the east curb
line of Franklin proceeding east to Ashland, two hour parking permitted.
   LAKE STREET, the south side from a point fifty five feet east of the east
curb line of Lathrop Avenue proceeding east for a distance of twenty feet,
thirty minute parking permitted.
   LAKE STREET, the south side between Park Avenue and the Wisconsin Central
Railroad Viaduct, two hour parking permitted.
   LAKE STREET, the south side between Franklin Avenue and Park Avenue, three
hour parking permitted.
   LAKE STREET, the north side between the Wisconsin Central right-of-way and
Edgewood Place, three hour parking permitted between six o'clock A.M. and two
o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   LAKE STREET, the south side between the Wisconsin Central right-of-way and
Thatcher Avenue, three hour parking permitted between six o'clock A.M. and two
o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday, except for the existing loading zone on
the south side of Lake Street just east of 7969 pursuant to section
9-3-15 of this chapter.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side between Oak Avenue and Chicago Avenue, two
hour parking permitted.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side between Hawthorne Avenue and Linden Street,
two hour parking permitted.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side from the alley just north of Madison Street to
Vine Street, two hour parking permitted seven o'clock A.M. to five o'clock
P.M., except holidays.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side between Division Street and Berkshire Street,
parking prohibited from eight o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M., Monday through
Friday.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side between LeMoyne Street and North Avenue,
parking prohibited from eight o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M., Monday through
Friday.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the east side from a point seventy five feet north of the
north curb of Central Avenue to a point one hundred seventy feet south of the
south curb of Lake Street, two hour parking permitted except from four o'clock
P.M. to six o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side from a point seventy one feet north of the
north curb of Central Avenue to a point one hundred fifty eight feet south of
the south curb of Lake Street, two hour parking permitted.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the east side beginning at a point two hundred twenty feet
south of the south curb of Chicago Avenue to two hundred ninety feet south of
the south curb of Chicago Avenue, one hour parking permitted.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the east side from three hundred ten feet south of the south
curb of Chicago Avenue to three hundred sixty feet south of the south curb of
Chicago Avenue, one hour parking permitted.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the west side from three hundred eighty five feet north of
the north curb of Lake Street to Oak Avenue, two hour parking permitted, eight
o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M., except Sundays and holidays.
LeMOYNE STREET, the north and south sides between Harlem Avenue and Bonnie
Brae, two hour parking permitted.
   LINDEN AVENUE, the south side from Lathrop Avenue to Ashland Avenue, two
hour parking permitted Monday through Friday.
   MADISON STREET, the north side between Gale Avenue and Forest Avenue, two
hour parking permitted.
   MADISON STREET, the north side from Lathrop Avenue to 7708 Madison Street,
two hour parking permitted.
   MONROE AVENUE, the east side between Augusta Street and Division Street, two
hour parking permitted between nine o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   MONROE AVENUE, the east side between North Avenue and LeMoyne Street, two
hour parking permitted.
   MONROE AVENUE, the east and west sides between Lake Street and Chicago
Avenue, four hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock
P.M., Monday through Friday.
   NORTH AVENUE, the south side between William Street and Bonnie Brae, two
hour parking permitted.
   NORTH AVENUE, the south side in front of 7323 North Avenue, for a distance
of two parking spaces, fifteen minute parking permitted at all times, including
Sundays and holidays, notwithstanding the exceptions stated in section
9-2-12 of this title.
   NORTH AVENUE, the south side from a point sixty feet west of the west curb
of Lathrop Avenue, extending west for a distance of one hundred feet, two hour
parking permitted.
   OAK AVENUE, the south side from Jackson Avenue to Monroe Avenue from seven
thirty o'clock A.M. to four o'clock P.M. on school days, three hour parking
permitted.
   OAK AVENUE, the south side from Ashland Avenue to Lathrop Avenue from seven
thirty o'clock A.M. to four o'clock P.M. on school days, three hour parking
permitted.
   OAK AVENUE, the north side between Monroe Avenue and William Street, four
hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   OAK AVENUE, the south side between Monroe Avenue and Harlem Avenue, four
hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   PARK AVENUE, both sides of 1100 block, parking prohibited from eight o'clock
A.M. to five o'clock P.M. on weekdays.
   PARK AVENUE, the east and west sides from Madison Street to the alley just
north of Madison Street, no parking from five o'clock P.M. to seven o'clock
A.M.
   PARK AVENUE, the west side, the southernmost diagonal space in front of the
Municipal complex at 400 Park Avenue, thirty minute parking permitted.
   PARK AVENUE, the east side from Central Avenue to sixty five feet north of
Central Avenue, thirty minute parking permitted.
   PARK AVENUE, the west side of the 1300 block from the north end of the
Dominican University driveway to the south side of Greenfield, parking
prohibited from eight o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M. on weekdays.
   PARK AVENUE, the west side from the north curb of Greenfield Street west of
Park Avenue continuing north for a distance of two hundred sixty-five feet, no
parking from eight o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   QUICK AVENUE, the north side between Bonnie Brae and William Street, no
parking nine o'clock A.M. to ten o'clock P.M.
   QUICK AVENUE, the north side between Monroe Avenue and William Street, four
hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   QUICK AVENUE, the south side between Monroe Avenue and Harlem Avenue, four
hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   THATCHER AVENUE, both sides between Madison Street and Vine Street, two hour
parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday, except that said two hour parking restriction shall not pertain
to that part of the east side of Thatcher Avenue which is contiguous to Laidlaw
brothers' property.
   THATCHER AVENUE, the east side between Washington Boulevard and Linden
Avenue, two hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock
P.M., Monday through Friday.
   THOMAS STREET, both sides between Jackson Avenue and Monroe Avenue, two hour
parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   VINE STREET, the north and south sides between Forest Avenue and Keystone
Avenue, no parking from eight o'clock A.M. to eight o'clock P.M.
   VINE STREET, the north and south sides between Thatcher Avenue and Keystone
Avenue, two hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock
P.M., Monday through Friday.
   WILLIAM STREET, the east and west sides between Iowa Street and Augusta
Street, parking prohibited nine o'clock A.M. to five o'clock P.M. on weekdays.
   WILLIAM STREET, the east side between North Avenue and LeMoyne Street, two
hour parking permitted.
   WILLIAM STREET, the east side from eighty feet south of the south curb of
Lake Street to one hundred fifty feet south of the south curb of Lake Street,
fifteen minute parking permitted.
   WILLIAM STREET, the west side from a point forty feet south of the south
curb of North Avenue extending south for a distance of ninety feet, fifteen
minute parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M.,
Monday through Friday on days when school is in session with two hour parking
permitted at all other times.
   WILLIAM STREET, the east and west sides between Oak Avenue and Quick Avenue,
two hour parking permitted.
   WILLIAM STREET, the east and west sides between Lake Street and Chicago
Avenue, four hour parking permitted between eight o'clock A.M. and five o'clock
P.M., Monday through Friday.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2079, 2-27-1981; Ord. 2090, 3-8-1982; Ord. 2095, 5-24-
1982; Ord. 2106, 10-25-1982; Ord. 2120, 5-23-1983; Ord. 2128, 8-8-1983; Ord.
2149, 5-14-1984; Ord. 2158, 10-9-1984; Ord. 2175, 4-22-1985; Ord. 2204, 2-24-
1986; Ord. 2241, 3-23-1987; Ord. 2319, 1-9-1989; Ord. 2328, 3-13-1989; Ord.
2344, 5-22-1989; Ord. 2359, 9-26-1989; Ord. 2361, 10-30-1989; Ord. 2367, 11-27-
1989; Ord. 2377, 3-26-1990; Ord. 2388, 6-11-1990; Ord. 2411, 12-17-1990; Ord.
2416, 1-28-1991; Ord. 2437, 7-8-1991; Ord. 2447, 8-26-1991; Ord. 2472, 1-27-
1992; Ord. 2484, 4-13-1992; Ord. 2490, 4-13-1992; Ord. 2532, 12-14-1992; Ord.
2545, 4-12-1993; Ord. 2557, 7-26-1993; Ord. 2566, 10-12-1993; Ord. 2581, 2-28-
1994; Ord. 2592, 4-25-1994; Ord. 2601, 7-25-1994; Ord. 2603, 7-25-1994; Ord.
2682, 8-6-1996; Ord. 2685, 8-26-1996; Ord. 2749, 12-8-1997; Ord. 2754, 3-9-
1998; Ord. 2766, 6-8-1998; Ord. 2787, 9-28-1998; Ord. 2827, 5-20-1999; Ord.
2840, 7-26-1999; Ord. 2869, 2-14-2000; Ord. 2872, 3-27-2000; Ord. 2885, 6-26-
2000, eff. 6-27-2000; Ord. 2921, 4-9-2001; Ord. 2950, 12-10-2001; Ord. 2992,
11-25-2002; Ord. 3003, 1-13-2003; Ord. 3004, 1-13-2003; Ord. 3066, 3-22-2004;
Ord. 3069, 4-12-2004; Ord. 3078, 6-14-2004; Ord. 3090, 12-13-2004; Ord. 3104,
3-28-2005; Ord. 3126, 9-12-2005; Ord. 3170, 9-11-2006; Ord. 3178, 11-27-2006;
Ord. 3211, 10-9-2007; Ord. 3247, 7-28-2008; Ord. 3292, 6-22-2009; Ord. 3394,
10-11-2011; Ord. 3405, 1-23-2012; Ord. 3436, 6-18-2012; Ord. 3449, 7-9-2012;
Ord. 3458, 10-8-2012; Ord. 3542, 1-26-2015, eff. 8-1-2015; Ord. 3544, 2-23-
2015; Ord. 3575, 9-28-2015; Ord. 3580, 12-14-2015; Ord. 3601, 7-12-2016; Ord.
3661, 10-9-2017; Ord. 3750, 5-13-2019; Ord. 3752, 5-28-2019; Ord. 3754, 5-28-
2019; Ord. 3771, 7-22-2019; Ord. 3779, 9-23-2019; Ord. 3816, 7-13-2020)
9-3-14: SCHEDULE 14, NO RIGHT TURN:
Right turns are hereby prohibited on the following streets:
   GARDEN STREET, from the vehicular exit at the property commonly known as 401
William Street (River Forest Post Office).
   NORTH AVENUE, eastbound at its intersection with Franklin Avenue.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2938, 9-10-2001; Ord. 3045, 9-22-2003; Ord. 3488, 8-19-
2013)
9-3-15: SCHEDULE 15, LOADING ZONES DESIGNATED:
The following streets or parts are hereby designated as loading zones:
   BONNIE BRAE, the east side for a distance of ninety feet, south of Lake
Street, between eight o'clock A.M. and six o'clock P.M., except on Sunday.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side across from 7440 Central Avenue for a
distance of one hundred feet between eight o'clock A.M. and six o'clock P.M.,
except on Sunday.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, the east side from Madison Street north for a distance of
one hundred and ten feet.
   LAKE STREET, the south side, east of the driveway of 7969 Lake Street, for a
distance of seventy five feet, from seven o'clock A.M. to three o'clock P.M.,
Monday through Friday.
   MONROE AVENUE, on the west side from North Avenue south for a distance of
two hundred feet between eight o'clock A.M. and six o'clock P.M., except
Sunday.
(Ord. 2407, 11-26-1990; amd. Ord. 2437, 7-8-1991; Ord. 2532, 12-14-1992; Ord.
2581, 2-28-1994; Ord. 3826, 11-30-2020)
9-3-16: SCHEDULE 16, STUDENT LOADING ZONES DESIGNATED:
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as student
loading zones, in addition to existing parking restrictions which continue:
   ASHLAND AVENUE, on the west side of the street in the 1200 block starting
thirty feet north from the south point of the Willard School grounds, to the
north driveway of the school, between eight o'clock A.M. and eleven o'clock
A.M., and between one o'clock P.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the east side from Lake Street north for a distance of one
hundred twenty feet, between eight o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school
days.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the east side from the driveway of St. Luke School south for
a distance of ninety feet, between eight o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on
school days.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the east side from the driveway of St. Luke School north for
a distance of one hundred eighty five feet, between eight o'clock A.M. and
eight thirty o'clock A.M. on school days.
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side beginning ninety five feet south of the south
curb of Division Street and continuing south for a distance of one hundred
seventy five feet, between seven forty five o'clock A.M. and eight forty five
o'clock A.M., and two o'clock P.M. and three fifteen o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday on school days.
   DIVISION STREET, the south side beginning seventy five feet west of the west
curb of Bonnie Brae and continuing west for a distance of seventy five feet,
between seven forty five o'clock A.M. and eight forty five o'clock A.M., and
two o'clock P.M. and three fifteen o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday on
school days.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, the east side of the street in the 1200 block from the
south point of the Willard School grounds, to the north point of the Willard
School grounds, between eight o'clock A.M. and eleven o'clock A.M., and between
one o'clock P.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, the east side beginning four hundred eighty feet north of
Division Street and continuing north for a distance of three hundred twenty
four feet, between eight o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, the west side from Lake Street to the north property line
of Lincoln School, between eight o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school
days.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the west side from LeMoyne Street to the north end of the
St. Vincent Ferrer School yard, between eight o'clock A.M. and four o'clock
P.M. on school days.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the west side from sixty feet north of the north curb line
of Oak Avenue to three hundred feet north of the north curb line of Oak Avenue,
from eight o'clock A.M. to nine o'clock A.M. and two o'clock P.M. to four
o'clock P.M. on school days.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the west side from sixty feet south of the south curb line
of Oak Avenue to two hundred thirty five feet south of the south curb line of
Oak Avenue, from eight o'clock A.M. to nine o'clock A.M. and two o'clock P.M.
to four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   LeMOYNE STREET, the north side between Lathrop Avenue and Jackson Avenue,
between eight o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   PARK AVENUE, the east side from Lake Street to the north property line of
Lincoln School, between eight o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school
days.
(Ord. 2414, 1-28-1991; amd. Ord. 2432, 6-24-1991; Ord. 2469, 1-13-1992; Ord.
2534, 2-22-1993; Ord. 2545, 4-12-1993; Ord. 2592, 4-25-1994; Ord. 2606, 8-8-
1994; Ord. 2685, 8-26-1996; Ord. 2734, 8-11-1997; Ord. 2840, 7-26-1999; Ord.
2872, 3-27-2000; Ord. 2959, 3-25-2002; Ord. 3542, 1-26-2015, eff. 8-1-2015)
9-3-17: SCHEDULE 17, NO STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING ZONES DESIGNATED:
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as no stopping,
standing or parking zones:
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the west side beginning eighty three feet south of the south
curb of Lake Street and continuing south for a distance of twenty eight feet
(stopping for the purposes of loading passengers shall be permitted).
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side beginning forty feet south of the south curb of
Division Street, and continuing south for a distance of fifty five feet, no
standing or parking permitted (stopping for purposes of loading passengers
shall be permitted).
   DIVISION STREET, the north side between Lathrop Avenue and Jackson Avenue,
between eight o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   DIVISION STREET, the south side beginning one hundred fifty feet west of the
west curb of Bonnie Brae, and continuing west for a distance of fifty five
feet, no standing or parking permitted (stopping for purposes of loading
passengers shall be permitted).
   JACKSON AVENUE, the east and west sides from the north curb line of Oak
Avenue to sixty feet north of the north curb line of Oak Avenue.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the east and west sides from the south curb line of Oak
Avenue to sixty feet south of the south curb line of Oak Avenue.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the east side between Oak Avenue and the public library
property.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the east side between Division Street and Berkshire Street.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the east side between LeMoyne Street and the north end of
the St. Vincent Ferrer School yard.
   OAK AVENUE, the north side from Jackson Avenue to Monroe Avenue from seven
thirty o'clock A.M. to four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   OAK AVENUE, the north side from Ashland Avenue to Lathrop Avenue from seven
thirty o'clock A.M. to four o'clock P.M. on school days.
(Ord. 2128, 8-8-1983; amd. Ord. 2534, 2-22-1993; Ord. 2542, 3-22-1993; Ord.
2872, 3-27-2000; Ord. 3078, 6-14-2004; Ord. 3542, 1-26-2015, eff. 8-1-2015;
Ord. 3575, 9-28-2015)
9-3-18: SCHEDULE 18, NO TURNS:
No turns shall be made at the following intersections:
   NORTH AVENUE, the eastbound and westbound traffic where it intersects with
Forest Avenue.
   NORTH AVENUE, the eastbound and westbound traffic where it intersects with
Park Avenue.
(Ord. 2344, 5-22-1989)
9-3-19: SCHEDULE 19, NO TURNS ON RED LIGHTS WHEN PEDESTRIANS ARE PRESENT:
No turns shall be made on red lights when pedestrians are present at the
following intersections:
   LAKE STREET, at its intersection with Thatcher Avenue.
   THATCHER AVENUE, at its intersection with Lake Street.
(Ord. 2348, 6-12-1989)
9-3-20: SCHEDULE 20, ACCESSIBLE PARKING ZONES DESIGNATED:
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as accessible
parking zones:
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as accessible
parking zones:
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the east side beginning ninety feet south of the driveway of
the St. Luke parking lot and extending south for a distance of thirty feet.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, on the west side of the street in the 1200 block starting
from the south point of the Willard School grounds extending north for a
distance of thirty feet.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, beginning at a point fifty two feet south of the south curb
line of Lake Street and continuing south for a distance of thirty feet.
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side from ninety five feet south of the south curb of
Division Street continuing south for a distance of eighty feet.
   BONNIE BRAE PLACE, the east side from 213 feet north of the north curb of
Greenfield Street continuing north for a distance of 25 feet.
   DIVISION STREET, the south side beginning seventy five feet east of the
driveway of Grace Lutheran Church and extending east for a distance of sixty
feet.
   DIVISION STREET, the south side beginning one hundred fifty feet west of
Harlem Avenue and extending west for a distance of forty five feet.
   DIVISION STREET, the south side beginning thirty five feet west of the west
curb of Bonnie Brae and continuing west for a distance of forty feet.
   DIVISION STREET, the south side beginning seventy five feet west of the west
curb of Bonnie Brae and continuing west for a distance of seventy five feet,
Sundays only.
   EDGEWOOD PLACE, the west side from one hundred seventeen feet south of the
south curb
of Lake Street continuing south for a distance of thirty feet.
   FRANKLIN AVENUE, the west side beginning at a point two hundred six feet
north of the north curb line of Lake Street and continuing north for a distance
of thirty feet.
   HAWTHORNE AVENUE, the north side beginning at the east edge of the entrance
to the Metra Commuter Train Station and extending east at a distance of twenty
feet.
   LAKE STREET, the north side beginning twenty one feet east of the east curb
of Clinton Place extended and extending east a distance of twenty two feet.
   LATHROP AVENUE, the east side beginning at a point two hundred ninety feet
south of the south curb of Chicago Avenue to three hundred ten feet south of
the south curb of Chicago Avenue.
   LINDEN STREET, the north side beginning at a point one hundred ten feet west
of the west curb of Gale Avenue extending west for a distance of thirty feet.
   MONROE AVENUE, the west side beginning at a point one hundred twenty five
feet north of the north curb of Quick Avenue extending north for a distance of
thirty feet.
   NORTH AVENUE, the south side beginning at a point one hundred feet east of
the east curb of William Street extending east for a distance of thirty feet.
   THOMAS STREET, on the north side of the street in the 7200 block beginning
at a point eighty feet west of the west curb line of Harlem Avenue and
continuing west for a distance of thirty feet.
   VINE STREET, the south side from 100 feet west of the west curb of Lathrop
Avenue continuing west for a distance of 25 feet.
(Ord. 2415, 1-28-1991; amd. Ord. 2458, 11-25-1991; Ord. 2469, 1-13-1992; Ord.
2533, 1-25-1993; Ord. 2567, 10-12-1993; Ord. 2755, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2840, 7-26-
1999; Ord. 2872, 3-27-2000; Ord. 2959, 3-25-2002; Ord. 3138, 12-12-2005; Ord.
3178, 11-27-2006; Ord. 3210, 10-9-2007; Ord. 3242, 6-23-2008; Ord. 3381, 7-18-
2011; Ord. 3430, 5-21-2012; Ord. 3436, 6-18-2012; Ord. 3458, 10-8-2012; Ord.
3621, 11-7-2016; Ord. 3644, 3-13-2017; Ord. 3660, 8-21-2017; Ord. 3686, 4-9-
2018; Ord. 3758, 6-24-2019; Ord. 3767, 7-22-2019; Ord. 3776, 9-23-2019; Ord.
3777, 9-23-2019; Ord. 3804, 4-13-2020; Ord. 3881, 12-12-2022; Ord. 3911, - - ;
Ord. 3922, 3-11-2024)
9-3-21: SCHEDULE 21, RESIDENT PARKING ZONES DESIGNATED:
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as resident
parking zones:
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the east side between the alley north of Madison Street and
Vine Street, between the hours of five o'clock P.M. and two o'clock A.M.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the west side between Madison Street and Vine Street between
the hours of five o'clock P.M. and two o'clock A.M.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the west side between LeMoyne Street and North Avenue,
between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. and eight o'clock P.M., excluding
holidays.
   ASHLAND AVENUE, the east side from LeMoyne Street to a point one hundred
fifty feet south of the south curb of North Avenue, between the hours of eight
o'clock A.M. and eight o'clock P.M., excluding holidays.
   BONNIE BRAE, the west side from a point sixty eight feet north of the north
curb line of Augusta to a point two hundred fifty five feet north of the north
curb line of Augusta, between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. to eight o'clock
P.M.
   BONNIE BRAE, the east and west sides between Iowa Street and Augusta Street,
between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. and eight o'clock P.M., Monday through
Friday.
   BONNIE BRAE, the east and west sides between Chicago Avenue and Iowa Street,
between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. and eight o'clock P.M.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side, between the east and west curb lines of
Clinton Place extended.
   CHICAGO AVENUE, the north and south sides between William Street and Bonnie
Brae, between the hours of seven o'clock A.M. and six o'clock P.M.
   CLINTON PLACE, the east and west sides between Iowa Street and Augusta
Street, between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. and eight o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   DIVISION STREET, the south side from Bonnie Brae to a point one hundred
ninety feet west of the west curb of Harlem Avenue, between the hours of eight
o'clock A.M. and eight o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   IOWA STREET, the north and south sides between Harlem Avenue and Bonnie
Brae.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the east and west sides between Augusta Street and Thomas
Street, between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday excluding holidays.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, the east and west sides between Thomas and Division
Streets, from eight o'clock A.M. to eight o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   MONROE AVENUE, the east side between Augusta Street and Thomas Street,
between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. and eight o'clock P.M., Monday through
Friday excluding holidays.
   MONROE AVENUE, the east side between Thomas Street and Division Street.
   MONROE AVENUE, the east and west sides between Iowa Street and Augusta
Street, between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. and eight o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
   THATCHER AVENUE, the east side from Division Street to the Canadian National
Railroad tracks (1100 block of Thatcher), eight o'clock A.M. to eight o'clock
P.M.
   THOMAS STREET, the north side from Bonnie Brae to a point one hundred twenty
feet west of the west curb of Harlem Avenue, between the hours of eight o'clock
A.M. and eight o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   THOMAS STREET, the north side from the west curb of Harlem Avenue to a point
eighty feet west of Harlem Avenue, between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. and
eight o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   WILLIAM STREET, the east and west sides between Iowa Street and Augusta
Street, between the hours of eight o'clock A.M. and eight o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
(Ord. 2885, 6-26-2000, eff. 6-27-2000; amd. Ord. 3090, 12-13-2004; Ord. 3164,
7-10-2006; Ord. 3170, 9-11-2006; Ord. 3173, 10-23-2006; Ord. 3176, 10-23-2006;
Ord. 3196, 5-29-2007; Ord. 3332, 6-14-2010; Ord. 3643, 2-27-2017; Ord. 3720,
11-26-2018; Ord. 3755, 5-28-2019; Ord. 3816, 7-13-2020; Ord. 3818, 9-29-2020;
Ord. 3819, 9-29-2020)
9-3-22: SCHEDULE 22, PERMIT PARKING ZONES DESIGNATED:
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as permit
parking zones:
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the north side between Edgewood Place and Thatcher Avenue,
six o'clock A.M. to two o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side beginning at a point one hundred ninety five
feet east of the east curb line of Bonnie Brae and continuing east to a point
one hundred eighty five feet west of the west curb line of Harlem Avenue, six
o'clock A.M. to two o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   HAWTHORNE AVENUE, the north side between Thatcher Avenue and Keystone
Avenue, six o'clock A.M. to two o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the west side from sixty feet south of the south curb line
of Chicago Avenue to four hundred twenty five feet south of the south curb line
of Chicago Avenue, between seven thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on
school days.
   JACKSON AVENUE, the west side from two hundred thirty five feet south of the
south curb line of Oak to forty feet north of the north curb line of Quick
between seven thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   OAK AVENUE, the north side from sixty feet east of east curb line of Lathrop
Avenue to sixty feet west of the west curb line of Jackson Avenue, between
seven thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
   OAK AVENUE, the south side from sixty feet east of east curb line of Lathrop
Avenue to sixty feet west of the west curb line of Jackson Avenue, between
seven thirty o'clock A.M. and four o'clock P.M. on school days.
(Ord. 2903, 11-27-2000; amd. Ord. 3003, 1-13-2003; Ord. 3542, 1-26-2015, eff.
8-1-2015; Ord. 3580, 12-14-2015; Ord. 3816, 7-13-2020)
9-3-23: SCHEDULE 23, DAILY PARKING ZONES DESIGNATED:
The following streets are hereby designated as daily parking zones:
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the north side from a point two hundred five feet west of
the west side of the Municipal complex driveway extending west to Keystone
Avenue, six o'clock A.M. to two o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side beginning at the east curb line of Bonnie
Brae and continuing east for a distance of eighty five feet, six o'clock A.M.
to two o'clock P.M., Monday through Friday, resident only.
   HAWTHORNE AVENUE, the north side from a point one hundred feet east of the
east curb of Keystone Avenue to a point four hundred eighty four feet east of
the Wisconsin Central Ltd. Bridge, six o'clock A.M. to two o'clock P.M., Monday
through Friday.
(Ord. 2885, 6-26-2000, eff. 6-27-2000; amd. Ord. 3772, 7-22-2019; Ord. 3816, 7-
13-2020)
9-3-24: SCHEDULE 24, RESIDENT PARKING PERMIT ZONES DESIGNATED:
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as resident
parking permit zones:
   EDGEWOOD PLACE, east and west side of the 400 block, six o'clock A.M. to ten
o'clock A.M., Monday through Friday.
   EDGEWOOD PLACE, east and west side of the 500 block, six o'clock A.M. to ten
o'clock A.M., Monday through Friday.
   FOREST AVENUE, east and west side of the 500 block, six o'clock A.M. to ten
o'clock A.M., Monday through Friday.
   FOREST AVENUE, east and west side of the 300 block, six o'clock A.M. to ten
o'clock A.M., Monday through Friday.
   GALE AVENUE, east and west side of the 300 block, six o'clock A.M. to ten
o'clock A.M., Monday through Friday.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, east and west side of the 300 block, six o'clock A.M. to
ten o'clock A.M., Monday through Friday.
   KEYSTONE AVENUE, east and west side of the 500 block, six o'clock A.M. to
ten o'clock A.M., Monday through Friday.
   LAKE STREET, the north and south sides from the west curb line of Edgewood
Place to a point six hundred fifty feet west, six o'clock A.M. to ten o'clock
A.M., Monday through Friday.
   LAKE STREET, the south side of the 8000 block, six o'clock A.M. to ten
o'clock A.M., Monday through Friday.
   LINDEN AVENUE, the north and south side from Forest Avenue to Gale Avenue,
six o'clock A.M. to ten o'clock A.M., Monday through Friday.
   LINDEN AVENUE, the south side between Thatcher Avenue and Gale Avenue, six
o’clock A.M. to ten o’clock A.M., Monday through Friday.
   PARK AVENUE, east and west side of the 300 block, six o'clock A.M. to ten
o'clock A.M., Monday through Friday.
   THATCHER AVENUE, east side of the 300 block, six o'clock A.M. to ten o'clock
A.M., Monday through Friday.
   THATCHER AVENUE, west side of the 500 block, six o'clock A.M. to ten o'clock
A.M., Monday through Friday.
(Ord. 2885, 6-26-2000, eff. 6-27-2000; amd. Ord. 3309, 11-9-2009; Ord. 3779, 9-
23-2019; Ord. 3816, 7-13-2020)
9-3-25: SCHEDULE 25, BUSINESS PARKING PERMIT ZONES DESIGNATED:
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as business
parking permit zones:
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side beginning at a point two hundred thirty five
feet east of the east curb of Lathrop Avenue and continuing east for a distance
of one thousand forty feet.
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side beginning at a point five feet west of the
west curb line of Clinton Place and continuing west for a distance of forty
five feet (hereby identified as Special Permit Parking Zone A).
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side beginning from a point seven feet east of the
east curb line of Clinton Place and continuing east to a point twenty feet west
of the west curb line of Bonnie Brae (hereby identified as Special Permit
Parking Zone A).
   CENTRAL AVENUE, the south side from a point forty feet west of the west curb
of William Street, extending west for a distance of two hundred sixty feet
(hereby identified as Special Permit Parking Zone A).
   CLINTON PLACE, the east side beginning at a point forty one feet north of
the north curb line of Central Avenue and continuing north for a distance of
two hundred feet (hereby identified as Special Permit Parking Zone A).
(Ord. 2929, 6-11-2001, eff. 6-12-2001; amd. Ord. 3003, 1-13-2003; Ord. 3066, 3-
22-2004; Ord. 3816, 7-13-2020)
9-3-26: SCHEDULE 26, MOTORCYCLE/SCOOTER PARKING ZONES:
   A.   In a designated area on the south side of Central Avenue at its
intersection with Clinton Place.
   B.   In a designated off-street area north of Central Avenue and west of
Thatcher Avenue.
   C.   In a designated area on the north side of Hawthorne Avenue aligned with
the west curb of Keystone Avenue as it extends south of Hawthorne Avenue. (Ord.
3780, 9-23- 2019)
CHAPTER 4
BICYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Bicycle Registration
9-4-2: Issuance Of Licenses
9-4-3: Attachment Of Bicycle License
9-4-4: Inspection
9-4-5: Transfer Of Ownership
9-4-6: Deface, Destroy Serial Number Or Bicycle License
9-4-7: Buying, Selling Or Renting Bicycles
9-4-8: Helmets Required
9-4-9: Parking Bicycle
9-4-10: Motor Scooters
9-4-11: Application Of Rules
9-4-12: Traffic Laws Apply To Persons Riding Bicycles
9-4-13: Riding On Bicycles
9-4-14: Clinging To Vehicles
9-4-15: Position Of Bicycles And Motorized Petal Cycles On Roadways - Riding On
Roadways And Bicycle Paths
9-4-16: Persons Riding Bicycles Or Motorized Petal Cycles Upon A Roadway Shall
Not Ride More Than Two (2) Abreast
9-4-17: Carrying Articles
9-4-18: Lamps And Other Equipment On Bicycles
9-4-19: Lamps On Mopeds
9-4-20: Bicycle Identifying Number
9-4-21: Inspecting Bicycles (Police Authority)
9-4-22: Left Turns For Bicycles And Mopeds
9-4-23: Turn And Stop Signals For Bicycles
9-4-24: Bicycles On Sidewalks
9-4-25: Bicycle Parking (State Provisions)
9-4-26: Bicycle Racing
9-4-27: Low-Speed Gas Bicycles
9-4-28: Low-Speed Electric Bicycles
9-4-29: Low-Speed Electric Scooters
9-4-30: Adoption Of Illinois Vehicle Code, Article XV (Bicycles)
9-4-1: BICYCLE REGISTRATION:
Residents may voluntarily register their bicycles with the police department
and receive a River Forest bicycle license.
Application for a bicycle license shall be made on the bicycle registration
form provided by the police department. There will be no charge for the
registering and licensing of bicycles for village residents. (Ord. 2355, 8-14-
1989)
9-4-2: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES:
   A.   Upon receiving a completed bicycle registration form, the police
department is authorized to issue a bicycle license which shall be permanently
affixed to the bicycle.
   B.   No bicycle will be accepted for registration and licensing unless it
bears a stamped manufacturer's serial number or other unique number (such as
the person's social security number) that is acceptable to the police
department engraved on the frame of the bicycle. (Ord. 2355, 8-14-1989)
   C.   The police department shall keep a record of the number of each bicycle
registered, the name and address of the person to whom the license was issued
and the color and serial number of the bicycle for which the license was
issued.
   D.   If the person subject to the requirements of this chapter is a minor,
the requirements herein imposed shall be performed by his or her parent or
guardian. (1981 Code)
9-4-3: ATTACHMENT OF BICYCLE LICENSE:
   A.   The police department, upon issuing a license which shall contain the
name "River Forest" and a number, shall cause the same to be permanently
affixed to the bicycle frame, immediately below the saddle post of the bicycle
and facing towards the front of the bicycle for which the license is issued.
(Ord. 2355, 8-14-1989)
   B.   The license shall be permanently assigned to this bicycle, and no
person shall remove this license from the bicycle, except upon transfer of
ownership or in the event the bicycle is wrecked, junked or dismantled and is
no longer used upon the streets of the village. (1981 Code)
9-4-4: INSPECTION:
The chief of police may cause the inspection of each bicycle before approving
the licensing of same and may refuse to approve a license for any bicycle which
he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. (1981 Code)
9-4-5: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
Upon the sale of the bicycle, the license shall be removed and the police
department notified that the bicycle is no longer in the possession of the
former owner. Any bicycle registered by a new owner must have a new license.
(1981 Code)
9-4-6: DEFACE, DESTROY SERIAL NUMBER OR BICYCLE LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful to destroy, remove, alter, cover or deface the
manufacturer's serial number or the River Forest bicycle license number on any
bicycle. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or have custody of a
bicycle on which the original serial number or the River Forest bicycle license
number has been destroyed, removed, altered, covered or defaced. (Ord. 2355, 8-
14-1989)
9-4-7: BUYING, SELLING OR RENTING BICYCLES:
   A.   Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging
bicycles in the village shall maintain for five years a record containing the
name, color, type and serial number of each bicycle bought, sold or exchanged,
and shall contain the name and address of each person buying, selling or
exchanging a bicycle, which record shall be open to inspection by a
representative of the police department during reasonable business hours.
   B.   A rental agency shall not rent or offer to rent any bicycle unless the
bicycle is licensed and the license plate is firmly attached as provided
herein, and such bicycle is equipped with lamps and other equipment as required
in this chapter. (1981 Code)
9-4-8: HELMETS REQUIRED:
   A.   Every person under the age of sixteen years shall wear a properly
fitted and fastened protective helmet that meets the standards promulgated by
the American National Standards Institute, the American Society for Testing
Materials and/or the Snell Memorial Foundation, Inc., whenever that person is:
1) riding or being carried on any bicycle or any carrier attached to or pulled
by a bicycle upon any public street, sidewalk or bicycle path; and 2) riding a
motorized scooter or motorized skateboard (neither of which are eligible to be
licensed under the Illinois vehicle code) upon any public sidewalk. (Ord. 3038,
7-14-2003)
   B.   For a first offense, every person found to have violated subsection A
of this section shall be issued a written warning notice of violation.
   C.   For a second offense, every person found to have violated subsection A
of this section shall be required to attend a bicycle safety education program
as designated by the chief of police. However, notwithstanding anything
contained herein to the contrary, the person to whom a second violation has
been issued may demonstrate within ten days following such issuance, compliance
with subsection A of this section by presenting at the office of the police
department proof of possession of a helmet that meets the standards specified
in subsection A of this section and solely with respect to the second such
offense then such person shall not be required to attend a bicycle safety
education program.
   D.   For a third or subsequent violation, every person found to have
violated subsection A of this section shall be punished by the imposition of a
requirement that such person perform up to ten hours of public service work.
   E.   A violation of subsection A of this section shall not constitute
negligence, contributory negligence, assumption of risk, be considered in
mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence, or be the
subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising
out of the operation of any bicycle, nor shall anything in this section change
any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any civil action. (Ord.
2969, 6-10-2002)
9-4-9: PARKING BICYCLE:
No person shall park a bicycle in any manner which obstructs pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on any roadway or sidewalk. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2969, 6-10-
2002)
9-4-10: MOTOR SCOOTERS:
   A.   Definition: For the purposes of this section, "motor vehicle" shall
mean every vehicle which is propelled otherwise than by muscular power,
including, but not limited to, motorcycles, motor driven cycles, pole trailers,
reconstructed vehicles, road tractors, school buses, semitrailers, special
mobile equipment, specially constructed vehicles, trackless trailer coaches,
trailers, trucks, truck tractors, as well as motorcycles, power cycles,
bicycles with motor attached, or power scooters with a motor which produces not
to exceed five brake horsepower.
   B.   Age And License Requirements: No person shall operate or drive any
motor vehicle on any street, highway or public way within the village unless
such person has a valid license or permit as an operator or chauffeur or a
restricted driving permit issued by the secretary of state, except for a
nonresident of the state of Illinois who is at least sixteen years of age and
who has in his immediate possession a valid operator's or chauffeur's license
or permit, issued to him in his home state or county.
   C.   Limit Number Of Riders: It shall be unlawful for more than one person
to ride, drive or be a passenger upon a motorcycle, bicycle with motor
attached, power cycle, or power scooter with a motor which produces not to
exceed five brake horsepower.
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating the terms of this section shall be fined
not less than ten dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for each offense.
(1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2969, 6-10-2002)
9-4-11: APPLICATION OF RULES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this chapter.
   B.   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1501) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-12: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of the
rights, including, but not limited to, rights under Article IX of this chapter,
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by this code, except as to special regulations in this article XV and those
provisions of this code which by their nature can have no application. (Source:
625 ILCS 5/11-1502) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-13: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
   A.   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride
a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   B.   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persona at one (1) time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped, except that an adult rider may
carry a child securely attached to his person in a backpack or sling. (Source:
625 ILCS 5/11-1503) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-14: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle
shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. (Source: 625
ILCS 5/11-1504) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-15: POSITION OF BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED PEDAL CYCLES ON ROADWAYS - RIDING ON
ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS:
   A.   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle upon a roadway
at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable and safe to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under the following situations:
      1.   When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedal cycle
or vehicle proceeding in the same direction; or
      2.   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private
road of driveway; or
      3.   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not
limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, motorized petal
cycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that
make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge. For purposes of
this subsection a “substandard width lane” means a lane that is too narrow for
a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle and a vehicle to travel safely side by side
within the lane; or
      4.   When approaching a place where a right turn is authorized.
   B.   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle upon a one-way
highway with two (2) or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left-
hand curb or edge of such roadway as practicable (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1505)
   C.   A motorized pedal cycle, or moped, is defined as a vehicle with an
engine size of less than fifty (50) cc capable of speeds up to thirty (30) mph
on level ground equipped with pedals for manual propulsion and featuring an
automatic transmission. (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-16: PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES OR MOTORIZED PEDAL CYCLES UPON A ROADWAY SHALL
NOT RIDE MORE THAN TWO (2) ABREAST:
Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedal cycles upon a roadway shall not ride
more than two (2) abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for
their exclusive use. Persons riding two (2) abreast shall not impede the normal
and reasonable movement of traffic and on a laned roadway shall ride within a
single lane subject to the provisions of section
9-4-15. (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1505.1) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-17: CARRYING ARTICLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which
prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of the bicycle. A
person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one (1) hand on the handlebars
at all times. (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1506) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-18: LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES:
   A.   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a
type approved by the department which shall be visible from all distances from
one hundred (100) feet to six hundred (600) feet to the rear when directly in
front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp
emitting a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of five hundred
(500) feet to the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the red
reflector.
   B.   A bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a
bicycle any siren. This subsection (B) does not apply to a bicycle that is a
police vehicle or fire department vehicle.
   C.   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately
control movement of and stop and hold such bicycle.
   D.   No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that
is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed
by the department on each pedal visible from the front and rear of the bicycle
during darkness from a distance of two hundred (200) feet.
   E.   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with side reflectors. Such reflectors shall be visible from each side
of the bicycle from a distance of five hundred (500) feet and shall be
essentially colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and
essentially colorless or amber to the front of the center of the bicycle
provided. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by reflective materials
which shall be at least 3/16 of an inch wide on each side of each tire or rim
to indicate as clearly as possible the continuous circular shape and size of
the tires or rims of such bicycle and which reflective materials may be of the
same color on both the front and rear tire or rim. Such reflectors shall
conform to specifications prescribed by the department.
   F.   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector. (Source: 625
ILCS 5/11-1507) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-19: LAMPS ON MOPEDS:
Every moped, when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five
hundred (500) feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
approved by the department which shall be visible from all distances from one
hundred (100) feet to six hundred (600) feet to the rear when in front of
lawful low-powered beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a
red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear may be
used in addition to the red reflector. (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-5/11-1507.1)
(Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-20: BICYCLE IDENTIFYING NUMBER:
A person engaged in the business of selling bicycles at retail shall not sell
any bicycle unless the bicycle has an identifying number permanently stamped or
cast on its frame. (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1507.1) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-21: INSPECTING BICYCLES (POLICE AUTHORITY):
A uniformed police officer may at any time upon reasonable cause to believe
that a bicycle is unsafe or not equipped as required by law, or that its
equipment is not in proper adjustment or repair, require the person riding the
bicycle to stop and submit the bicycle to an inspection and such test with
reference thereto as may be appropriate. (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1509) (Ord.
3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-22: LEFT TURNS FOR BICYCLES AND MOPEDS:
   A.   A person riding a bicycle or moped intending to turn left shall follow
a course described in section 11-801 of the Illinois vehicle code or in
paragraph (B) of this section.
   B.   A person riding a bicycle or moped intending to turn left shall
approach the turn as close as practicable to the right curb or edge of the
roadway. After proceeding across the intersecting roadway to the far corner of
the curb or intersection of the roadway edges, the bicyclist or moped driver
shall stop, as much as practicable out of the way of traffic. After stopping
the person shall yield to any traffic proceeding in either direction along the
roadway such person had been using. After yielding, the bicycle or moped driver
shall comply with any official traffic control device or police officer
regulating traffic on the highway along which he intends to proceed, and the
bicyclist or moped driver may proceed in the new direction.
   C.   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the department and local
authorities in their respective jurisdictions may cause official traffic-
control devices to be placed and thereby require and direct that a specific
course be traveled by turning bicycles and moped, and when such devices are so
placed, no person shall turn a bicycle or moped other than as directed and
required by such devices. (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1510) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-23: TURN AND STOP SIGNALS FOR BICYCLES:
   A.   Except as provided in this section, a person riding a bicycle shall
comply with section 11-804 of the Illinois vehicle code.
   B.   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be
given during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the
bicycle before turning, and shall be given while the bicycle is stopped waiting
to turn. A signal by hand and arm need not be given continuously if the hand is
needed in the control or operation of the bicycle. (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1511)
(Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-24: BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS:
   A.   A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk shall yield the right of way to any
pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such
pedestrian.
   B.   A person shall not ride a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across
roadway upon and along a crosswalk, where such use of bicycles is prohibited by
official traffic-control devices.
   C.   A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances. (Sources: 625 ILCS 5/
11-1512) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-25: BICYCLE PARKING (STATE PROVISIONS):
   A.   A person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk unless prohibited or
restricted by an official traffic-control device.
   B.   A bicycle parked on a sidewalk shall not impede the normal and
reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.
   C.   A bicycle may be parked on the roadway at any angle to the curb or edge
of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed.
   D.   A bicycle may be parked on the roadway abreast of another bicycle or
bicycles near the side of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed.
   E.   A person shall not park a bicycle on a roadway in such a manner as to
obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle.
   F.   In all other respects bicycles parked anywhere on a highway shall
conform with the provisions of this code regulating the parking of vehicles.
(Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1513)
   G.   This section complements section
9-4-9 of the River Forest ordinance, which provides a general prohibition on
parking that obstructs traffic. (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-26: BICYCLE RACING:
   A.   Bicycle racing on highway shall not be unlawful when a racing event has
been approved by state or local authorities on any highway under their
respective jurisdictions. Approval of bicycle highway racing events shall be
granted only under conditions which assure reasonable safety for all race
participants, spectators and other highways users, and which prevent
unreasonable interference with traffic flow which would seriously inconvenience
other highway users.
   B.   By agreement with the approving authority, participants in an approved
bicycle highway racing event may be exempted from compliance with any traffic
laws otherwise applicable thereto, provided that traffic control is adequate to
assure the safety of all highway users. (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1514) (Ord.
3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-27: LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLES:
   A.   A low-speed gas bicycle is defined as a bicycle equipped with a gas
motor that has a maximum speed of twenty (20) miles per hour on level ground.
The motor should not exceed one (1) horsepower or seven hundred fifty (750)
watts.
   B.   A person may operate a low-speed gas bicycle only if the person is at
least sixteen (16) years of age.
   C.   A person may not operate a low-speed gas bicycle at a speed greater
than twenty (20) miles per hour upon any highway, street, or roadway.
   D.   A person may not operate a low-speed gas bicycle on a sidewalk.
   E.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions of this
Article XV that apply to bicycles also apply to low-speed gas bicycles.
(Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1516) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-28: LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLES:
   A.   Definitions:
   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE: A class 1 electric bicycle is defined as a bicycle
equipped with both pedals and a motor not exceeding seven hundred fifty (750)
watts, with a maximum speed of twenty (20) miles per hour. There is no state
minimum age requirement for operation, and these bicycles are permitted on
roads and bike lanes and prohibited from sidewalks. Additionally, the bicycle
must be equipped with a functioning white front light and a red rear light.
   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE: A class 2 electric bicycle is defined as a bicycle
equipped with both pedals and a throttle-actuated motor not exceeding seven
hundred fifty (750) watts, with a maximum speed of twenty (20) miles per hour
when using the motor. There is no minimum age requirement for operation, and
these bicycles are permitted on roads and bike lanes and prohibited from
sidewalks. Additionally, the bicycle must be equipped with a functioning white
front light and a red rear light.
   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE: A class 3 electric bicycle is defined as a bicycle
equipped with both pedals and a motor not exceeding seven hundred fifty (750)
watts with a maximum speed of twenty-eight (28) miles per hour when using the
motor. Riders must be at least sixteen (16) years old to operate these
bicycles. The bicycles are permitted on roads and bike lanes and prohibited
from sidewalks. Additionally, the bicycles must be equipped with a functioning
white front light and a red rear light.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions of this
chapter that apply to bicycles also apply to low-speed electric bicycles. Low-
speed electric bicycles and personal mobility devices may be operated on any
street or bike lane and are prohibited from sidewalks. The provisions set forth
in section
9-4-24 of this chapter apply.
   C.   Each low-speed electric bicycle operating in this state shall comply
with equipment and manufacturing requirements adopted by the united states
consumer product safety commission under 16 CFR 1512. Each class 3 low-speed
electric bicycle shall be equipped with a speedometer that displays the speed
the bicycle is traveling in miles per hour.
   D.   Beginning on or after January 1, 2018, every manufacturer and
distributor of low-speed electric bicycle shall apply a label that is
permanently affixed to the bicycle in a prominent location. The label shall
contain, in arial font in at least nine (9) point type:
      1.   A classification number for the bicycle that corresponds with a
class under section 1-140.10 of the Illinois vehicle code;
      2.   The bicycle’s top assisted speed; and
      3.   The bicycle’s motor wattage.
   E.   No person shall knowingly tamper or modify the speed capability or
engagement of a low-speed electric bicycle without replacing the label required
under this subsection (C).
      1.   A class 2 low-speed electric bicycle shall operate in a manner so
that the electric motor is disengaged or ceases to function when the brakes are
applied. A class 1 low-speed electric bicycle and a class 3 low-speed electric
bicycle shall operate in a manner so that the electric motor is disengaged or
ceases to function when the rider stops pedaling.
   F.   A person may operate a low-speed electric bicycle upon any highway,
street, or roadway authorized for use by bicycle, including, but not limited
to, bicycle lanes.
   G.   A person may operate a low-speed electric bicycle upon any bicycle path
unless the municipality, county, or local authority with jurisdiction prohibits
the use of low-speed electric bicycles or a specific class of low-speed
electric bicycles on that path.
   H.   A person may not operate a low-speed electric bicycle on a sidewalk.
   I.   A person may operate a class 3 low-speed electric bicycle only if he or
she is sixteen (16) years of age or older. A person who is less than sixteen
(16) years of age as a passenger on a class 3 low-speed electric bicycle that
is designed to accommodate passengers. (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1517) (Ord. 3964,
7-14-2025)
9-4-29: LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC SCOOTERS:
   A.   Definitions:
      LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC SCOOTER: A low-speed electric scooter is defined as a
scooter weighing less than one hundred (100) pounds, equipped with two (2) to
three (3) wheels, and capable of a maximum speed of ten (10) miles per hour,
and a motor not exceeding seven hundred fifty (750) watts. Riders must be at
least eighteen (18) years old to operate these scooters. Low-speed electric
scooters are permitted on roads and bike lanes and prohibited on sidewalks
within the boundaries of the village.
      Additionally, low-speed electric scooters must be equipped with a
functioning white front light and a red rear light.
      HIGH-SPEED ELECTRIC SCOOTER: A high-speed electronic scooter is defined
as any scooter that exceeds the specifications of a low-speed electric scooters
are allowed on roads and bike lanes and prohibited on sidewalks. Additionally,
high-speed electronic scooters must be equipped with a functioning white front
light and a red rear light.
   B.   Subject to the restrictions of this section, a municipality, park
district, forest preserve district, or conservation district may authorize and
regulate the operation of low-speed electric scooters within the unit of local
government on any or all highways under their respective jurisdiction,
sidewalks, trails, or other public right-of-way where the operation of bicycles
is permitted. The use of low-speed electric scooters within any municipality,
park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district is allowed
only if authorized by the municipality, park district, forest preserve
district, or conservation district under this section. Any authorization or
regulation by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation
district applies only on property owned, managed, or leased by the park
district, forest preserve district, or conservation district.
   C.   A person may not operate a low-speed electric scooter on a highway with
a posted speed limit in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
   D.   No person shall operate a low-speed electric bicycle or high-speed
electric scooter at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
then existing conditions.
   E.   A person may not operate a low-speed electric scooter unless he or she
is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
   F.   A low-speed electric scooter may be parked in the same manner and at
the same locations as a bicycle may be parked.
   G.   Every low-speed electric scooter when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front the emits a white light visible from a
distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a red
reflector on the rear that is visible from all distances from one hundred (100)
feet to six hundred (600) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful
lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp emitting a
steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet
to the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the red reflector.
   H.   A low-speed electric scooter shall not be equipped with nor shall any
person use upon a low-speed electric scooter any siren. This substance does not
apply to a low-speed electric scooter that is a police vehicle or fire
department vehicle.
   I.   Every low-speed electric scooter shall be equipped with a brake that
will adequately control movement of and stop and hold the low-speed electric
scooter.
   J.   A person may not operate a low-speed electric scooter while carrying
any package, bundle, or article that prevents the operator from keeping at
least one (1) hand upon the handlebars.
   K.   A person may not use a low-speed electric scooter to carry more than
one (1) person at a time. A person operating a low-speed electric scooter may
not attach himself or herself or the scooter to any other vehicle being
operated on the public right-of-way.
   L.   A person may not operate a low-speed electric scooter upon any public
highway in the state while under the influence of alcohol or any drug.
   M.   The use of low-speed electric scooters is not permitted on state
highways.
   N.   Every low-speed electric scooter shall be well-maintained and in good
operating condition. (Source: 625 ILCS 5/11-1518) (Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
9-4-30: ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE, ARTICLE XV (BICYCLES):
   A.   The provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 ILCS 5/chapter 11
article XV, pertaining to bicycles and motorized pedal cycles, as it currently
exists or may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated into this chapter 4 as if fully set forth herein.
   B.   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter 4
and the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/chapter 11 article XV, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
   C.   This section is intended to ensure that all rules and regulations
governing bicycles and motorized pedal cycles within the Village of River
Forest are consistent with the current laws of the State of Illinois. (Source:
625 ILCS 5/11-1501. et seq., as amended)
   D.   Definitions And Regulations; Electric Scooters And Regulations: Refer
to the table titled ‘Definitions and regulations: electric scooters and
bicycles’ for detailed definitions and regulatory requirements for various
types of electric scooters and bicycles.
Table: DEFINITIONS AND REGULATIONS; ELECTRIC SCOOTERS AND REGULATIONS
Type Definition Age/License Where Allowed Equipment And Notes
Table: DEFINITIONS AND REGULATIONS; ELECTRIC SCOOTERS AND REGULATIONS
Type           Definition       Age/License       Where Allowed  Equipment And
                                                                 Notes
               < 100 lb, 2-                                      Functioning
Low-Speed      3 wheels, >10    > 18/no           Roads and bike white front
E-Scooter      mph                                lanes          light and red
                                                                 rear light
                                                                 Functioning
High-Speed E-  Anything > low-  > 18/no           Roads and bike white front
Scooter        speed category                     lanes          light and red
                                                                 rear light
               Pedal + < 750 W                                   Functioning
E-Bike Class 1 motor, 20 mph    No state minage*  Roads and bike white front
               max speed                          lanes          light and red
                                                                 rear light
               Pedal, throttle                                   Functioning
E-Bike Class 2 + < 750 W motor, No state minage*  Roads and bike white front
               20 mph max                         lanes          light and red
                                                                 rear light
               Pedal-assist + <                                  Functioning
E-Bike Class 3 750 W, 28 mph    > 16              Roads and bike white front
               max speed, no                      lanes          light and red
               throttle                                          rear light
                                                                 Functioning
Out Of Class   > 750 W motor    > 16 + driver’s Roads only     white front
Ebikes (OCEV)                   license                          light and red
                                                                 rear light
 
(Ord. 3964, 7-14-2025)
CHAPTER 5
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definitions
9-5-2: Towing Without Prior Notice
9-5-3: Towing With Prior Notice
9-5-4: Notification Of Registered Owner
9-5-5: Pretow Hearing
9-5-6: Posttow Hearing
9-5-7: Recovery Of Towed Vehicles
9-5-8: Hearings
9-5-9: Disposal Of Unclaimed Motor Vehicles
9-5-10: Towing With Consent
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the meaning
ascribed to them as follows:
   ABANDONED VEHICLE: A motor vehicle parked in a public place or on private
property in view of the public and has not been moved for at least seven days.
   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE: A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the
health, safety or welfare of the members of the public; is disabled on a public
street or alley that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a
potential danger to pedestrians and other operators of vehicles; or is parked
in a fire lane on private property, provided that the village has entered into
a specific agreement with the owner of said property with respect to the
enforcement of fire lane violations. (Ord. 3232, 4-28-2008)
9-5-2: TOWING WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE:
Motor vehicles may be towed without prior notice to the registered owner where,
in the opinion of a police officer at the scene:
   A.   The motor vehicle is a hazard and presents an immediate danger to the
health, safety or welfare of the members of the public;
   B.   The motor vehicle is parked on any street or alley after a snowfall of
two inches or more and in violation of section
9-2-15 of this title;
   C.   The person legally entitled to possession of the motor vehicle is,
although present at the scene, physically or mentally incapable of moving the
vehicle;
   D.   The motor vehicle has been reported stolen;
   E.   The motor vehicle has been used in the commission of a crime and its
retention is necessary as evidence;
   F.   The motor vehicle is on public property and its major components have
been removed or damaged to such extent as to make the vehicle incapable of
being driven or useless to repair, and the vehicle bears no registration or a
registration that has not been current for more than three months. (Ord. 3232,
4-28-2008)
9-5-3: TOWING WITH PRIOR NOTICE:
Motor vehicles may be towed after notice to the registered owner and the
affording of an opportunity for a hearing in the manner hereinafter described
under the following circumstances:
   A.   Where the motor vehicle has been abandoned.
   B.   A motor vehicle that has been unlawfully parked in excess of twenty
four hours. (Ord. 3232, 4-28-2008)
9-5-4: NOTIFICATION OF REGISTERED OWNER:
Notice shall be forwarded by certified mail to the address of the owner of the
motor vehicle as indicated in the most current available state registration
information. The notice shall specify that the vehicle has been towed or placed
on the list to be towed, as the case may be; that the owner is entitled to
recovery of the vehicle and/or a hearing, as the case may be; and the procedure
to be followed by the owner in requesting a hearing, if so desired. In the case
of towing without prior notice, as authorized by section
9-5-2 of this chapter, notice shall be sent as soon as practicable, but in no
event later than two business days after the vehicle has been towed. (Ord.
3232, 4-28-2008)
9-5-5: PRETOW HEARING:
The owner or person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle shall have
seven days after the date of mailing of notice to request a hearing. This
request is to be made in writing to the chief of police, or his designee, at
the River Forest police facility during normal business hours. A hearing date
will be scheduled at the convenience of the requesting party and the police
department. Towing of the vehicle shall be delayed pending the outcome of this
hearing though in no case will the village be required to delay towing more
than seven days after a request for hearing is received. In the event no such
request for hearing is received within the seven day period, the motor vehicle
may be disposed of in accordance with this chapter and applicable law. (Ord.
3232, 4-28-2008)
9-5-6: POSTTOW HEARING:
The owner or person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle towed without
notice as provided in section
9-5-2 of this chapter may request a hearing relative to the propriety of the
tow. Said request shall be made in writing to the chief of police, or his
designee, at the River Forest police facility during normal business hours,
within fourteen days of the mailing date of notification or release of the
vehicle, whichever occurs first. A hearing date will be scheduled at the
convenience of the requesting party and the police department. (Ord. 3232, 4-
28-2008)
9-5-7: RECOVERY OF TOWED VEHICLES:
The owner or person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle may recover the
vehicle by:
   A.   Paying the towing and storage fees due and redeem the vehicle;
   B.   Requesting a hearing relative to the propriety of the tow conducted
prior to redeeming the vehicle; or
   C.   Requesting a hearing relative to the propriety of the tow and redeem
the vehicle by making a deposit in the amount of the towing and storage fees
claimed due.
Requests for hearings are to be made in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 3232, 4-28-2008)
9-5-8: HEARINGS:
   A.   When requested by the owner or other person legally entitled to
possession of the motor vehicle, a hearing shall be conducted by the village
administrator, or his designee, regardless of whether such request is pretow or
posttow. The hearing shall be conducted at the River Forest village hall and
shall be scheduled during normal business hours either within the business week
during which the request for hearing was made or the business week immediately
following the request. The village administrator or his designee may grant a
continuance of the hearing date, however, no continuance shall exceed thirty
days.
   B.   If the tow or removal was proper under this chapter, then redemption of
said vehicle shall be allowed upon the payment of the towing and storage fees
incurred by the village.
   C.   If improper under this chapter then the owner shall redeem said vehicle
without assessment of costs.
   D.   The hearing officer shall make his finding, in writing, with a brief
description of the facts and designating the violation under section
9-5-2 or
9-5-3 of this chapter specifying the subsection thereunder.
   E.   Appeal of the finding made by said hearing officer shall be under the
administrative review act of the state of Illinois, 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (Ord. 3232, 4-28-2008)
9-5-9: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED MOTOR VEHICLES:
Disposal of unclaimed motor vehicles shall be done in accordance with the
provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-201 et seq., or as may
hereafter be provided. (Ord. 3232, 4-28-2008)
9-5-10: TOWING WITH CONSENT:
The provisions set forth in this chapter shall not apply in those circumstances
in which a motor vehicle is towed upon the request of, or, with the consent of
the owner or other person legally entitled to possession of the motor vehicle.
(Ord. 3232, 4-28-2008)
CHAPTER 6
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Purpose
9-6-2: Personnel
9-6-3: Procedures
9-6-4: Hearings
9-6-5: Additional Notices
9-6-6: Final Determination Of Liability
9-6-7: Appeal
9-6-8: Nonresident Procedures
9-6-9: Schedule Of Fines And Penalties
9-6-10: Reports
9-6-11: Immobilization, Towing And Impoundment
9-6-12: Judicial Review
9-6-13: Debt To Village
9-6-14: Judgment
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for fair and efficient
enforcement of municipal vehicular standing, parking, and condition of vehicle
regulation violations, and other municipal regulation violations as may be
allowed by law, through administrative adjudication of violations of municipal
ordinances regulating the standing, parking, and condition of vehicles within
the geographic boundaries of the village and a schedule of uniform fines and
penalties, and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and
penalties.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "compliance violation" means a violation
of a municipal regulation governing the condition or use of equipment on a
vehicle or governing the display of a municipal wheel tax license. (Ord. 3202,
6-11-2007)
9-6-2: PERSONNEL:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations shall provide for a traffic compliance
administrator, hearing officer, computer operator/system coordinator and
hearing room personnel (deputy), with the power, authority and limitations as
are hereinafter set forth:
   A.   Traffic Compliance Administrator: The traffic compliance administrator
shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to:
      1.   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violations.
      2.   Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and compliance
violation notices and other notices as may be required under this chapter or as
may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
      3.   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final
determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violations liability.
      4.   Certify copies of final determinations of standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations liability and factual reports verifying that
the final determination of standing, parking, and compliance regulation
violations liability was issued in accordance with this chapter and 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3.
      5.   Certify reports to the secretary of state concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
6-306.5.
      6.   Review final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations liability, validity of notices of impending
impoundment or validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension, in
an administrative review capacity in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, hereinafter set forth.
      7.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
      8.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the
circuit court, or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on
behalf of the village in filing complaints seeking judgments for unpaid fines
or penalties and pursuit of all postjudgment remedies available by current law.
      9.   Select or appoint an individual, agency or firm to tow and impound
vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, hereinafter set
forth.
      10.   Report directly to the village administrator with respect to all
his activities.
   B.   Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall be empowered and is hereby
authorized and directed to:
      1.   Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein, as the
adjudicator.
      2.   Administer oaths.
      3.   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and production
of relevant papers or documentation.
      4.   Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violations as are established in section
9-6-9 of this chapter.
      5.   Make final determination of:
         a.   Vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violations
liability.
         b.   Validity of notice of impending impoundment.
         c.   Validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter hereinafter set forth.
      6.   Provide for the accurate recording of the administrative
adjudication hearings.
      7.   The term of this position shall be one year to expire on April 30.
   C.   System Coordinator/Computer Operator: The system coordinator/computer
operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer
programs for the administrative adjudication system hereby created, on a day to
day basis, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Input of violation notice information.
      2.   Hearing dates and notice dates.
      3.   Fine and penalty assessments and payments.
      4.   Issue payment receipts.
      5.   Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates, final determination of
liability, notice of impending impoundment, and notice of impending driver's
license suspension, as directed by the traffic compliance administrator in
accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
      6.   Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
   D.   Hearing Room Personnel: Hearing room personnel are hereby authorized
and directed to:
      1.   Maintain hearing room decorum.
      2.   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the circuit court.
      3.   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and
as directed by the hearing officer or traffic compliance administrator.
      4.   This position is limited to police officers or community service
officers.
   E.   Appointments: The village president is hereby authorized to appoint
persons to hold the position of hearing officer with the concurrence of the
village board of trustees. The balance of the positions provided herein shall
be appointed by the village administrator. The village administrator shall also
appoint a temporary hearing officer during the absence of the appointed hearing
officer, to conduct hearings with the same power and authority as is set forth
herein. Except for the hearing officer, one person may hold and fulfill the
requirements of one or more of the above stated positions.
   F.   Compensation: Compensation to be paid for each of the above stated
positions shall be as determined by the village president and approved by the
village board of trustees. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
9-6-3: PROCEDURES:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations shall be in accordance with the following
procedures, and final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violations liability, validity of notices of impending
impoundment, validity of notices of impending driver's license suspension,
impoundment of vehicles, and collections shall be made only in accordance with
the provisions set forth below:
   A.   Violation Notice: Vehicular standing, parking, and compliance
regulation violations notices ("violation notices") shall be issued by the
persons authorized herein and shall contain information and shall be served,
certified and have evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter set forth.
   B.   Authorization: All police officers and community service officers, as
well as other specifically appointed individuals, shall have the authority to
issue violations notices.
   C.   Detection Of Violations: Any individual authorized hereby to issue
violations notices and who detects a violation of any section of any applicable
municipal ordinance shall issue a notice of violation thereof, and shall make
service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.
   D.   Contents Of Notice: The violation notice shall contain, but shall not
be limited to, the following information:
      1.   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
      2.   The particular vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violated.
      3.   Vehicle make and state registration number.
      4.   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
      5.   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.
      6.   A section entitled "request for hearing" which shall clearly set
forth that the registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial
administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the
date and at the time and place as specified in the violation notice by:
         a.   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified, "request for hearing".
         b.   Placing his name and current address in the place provided.
         c.   Signing his name in the appropriate indicated place.
         d.   Filing the violation notice with the "request for hearing"
portion fully completed with the traffic compliance administrator postmarked
within ten days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed
filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.
      7.   The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which the
violation may be contested on its merits.
      8.   That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty
shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.
      9.   A section entitled, "nonresident request for hearing -
nonappearance", which clearly sets forth that a nonresident registered owner or
lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the violation notice without personally appearing by:
         a.   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified, "nonresident request for hearing - nonappearance".
         b.   Placing his name and current address in the place provided.
         c.   Signing his name in the appropriate indicated place.
         d.   Filing the violation notice with the "nonresident request for
hearing - nonappearance" portion fully completed, with the traffic compliance
administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation notice issuance. The
request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance
administrator.
         e.   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the traffic
compliance administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation notice
issuance. The request shall be deemed filed, if postmarked by the due dates
herein specified.
         f.   A clearly marked statement that execution of the nonresident
request for hearing is a waiver of the nonresident's right to a personal
appearance and that the adjudication will be made based upon the notarized
statement of facts submitted by the nonresident and the facts contained in the
violation notice. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
   E.   Service Of Notice: Service of the violation notice shall be made by the
person issuing such notice by:
      1.   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully
standing or parked vehicle; or
      2.   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of
the vehicle, if present; or
      3.   Mailing by first class mail with postage prepaid of the original or
a facsimile of the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of the
vehicle. (Ord. 3398, 11-14-2011)
   F.   Certification Of Facts: The correctness of facts contained in the
violation notice shall be certified by the person issuing said notice by:
      1.   Signing his name to the notice at the time of service; or
      2.   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate, to be kept by the traffic compliance administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his control.
   G.   Records Kept: The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall
be retained by the traffic compliance administrator and kept as a record in the
ordinary course of business.
   H.   Prima Facie Evidence Of Correctness: Any violation notice issued,
signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be
prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the
facts shown on the notice.
   I.   Admissibility: The violation notice or a copy shall be admissible in
any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
9-6-4: HEARINGS:
   A.   Granting: An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation on its merits shall be granted to
the registered owner or operator of the cited vehicle, pursuant to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, or the lessee of the cited vehicle, pursuant to
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
   B.   Hearing Dates: An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged
violation on its merits shall be at the date, time and place as is set forth in
the violation notice issued and served, or such additional notices issued in
accordance with this chapter. Violators shall be given no less than two
opportunities to appear and failure to appear by the second scheduled hearing
date will result in a "final determination of liability" as hereinafter set
forth. (Ord. 3297, 8-10-2009)
   C.   Records: An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged violation
on its merits shall be tape recorded.
   D.   Determination: An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged
violation on its merits shall culminate in a determination of liability or
nonliability made by the hearing officer, who shall consider testimony and
other evidence without the application of the formal or technical rules of
evidence. The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess
fines and penalties in accordance with section
9-6-9 of this chapter.
   E.   Representation: Persons appearing to contest the alleged standing,
parking, or compliance violation on its merits may be represented by counsel at
their own expense.
   F.   Review: The final determination of any matter which may be decided by
the hearing officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 3202, 6-
11-2007)
9-6-5: ADDITIONAL NOTICES:
Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle to appear
at the administrative hearing indicated in the violation notice, or upon final
determination of violation liability, the traffic compliance administrator
shall send or cause to be sent additional notices which:
   A.   Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle at
the address as is recorded with the secretary of state.
   B.   Shall be sent to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the address last
known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease.
   C.   Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.
   D.   Service of additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   E.   The additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the
following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:
      1.   Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the cited
vehicle to appear at the hearing set forth in the violation notice, additional
notices shall be sent, as above set forth, and shall contain, but not be
limited to, the following information:
         a.   Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice.
         b.   Particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violated.
         c.   Vehicle make and state registration.
         d.   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
         e.   Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current status,
other than paid in full.
         f.   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
         g.   Statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable
penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at
the time and place specified will result in a final determination of vehicle
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation liability for the cited
violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated.
         h.   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violation liability for the failure,
and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available administrative or
judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a
debt due and owing the village. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
      2.   A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation liability shall be sent following an appearance
by the violator and a determination of liability, or the failure to appear by
the violator by the second and final hearing date upon conclusion of any
administrative and/or judicial review, as is hereinafter set forth, and the
notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and
warnings: (Ord. 3297, 8-10-2009)
         a.   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a
debt due and owing the village.
         b.   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and
owing the village within the time specified may result in the village's filing
a complaint in the circuit court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a
judgment in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3(f),
incorporated herein by reference.
         c.   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within
the village may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for five or
more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations.
         d.   A warning that the person's driver's license may be suspended for
failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more vehicular standing or parking
violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, incorporated herein
by reference.
      3.   A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license
shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine
or penalty that remains due and owing on ten or more vehicular standing or
parking regulation violations:
         a.   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or
penalty owing within forty five days of the date of the notice will result in
the village's notifying the secretary of state that the person is eligible for
initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
306.5, incorporated herein by reference.
         b.   The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent
by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
secretary of state. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
9-6-6: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation liability shall:
   A.   Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty
after the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation liability, and the exhaustion of or the failure
to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth; or
   B.   Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the final
administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged violation on the date
and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed notice, the
hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation liability shall become final:
      1.   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or
      2.   Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition without a
filing having been made. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
9-6-7: APPEAL:
A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation liability may be filed by a person owing an
unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the restrictions and
grounds hereinafter set forth:
   A.   A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be
filed in writing and in the office of the traffic compliance administrator
within, but not later than, fourteen days from the date the determination of
liability is made.
   B.   The traffic compliance administrator shall act upon the petition timely
filed and render a decision thereon within fourteen days of the date filed.
   C.   The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be
limited to the following:
      1.   The person against whom the determination of liability is made was
not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notices
were issued.
      2.   The person had paid the fine or penalty prior to the determination
of liability for the violation in question.
      3.   The person's failure to appear at or request a new date for a
hearing was found to be excusable.
   D.   Should the determination of liability be set aside, the traffic
compliance administrator shall:
      1.   Notify the registered owner or lessee, as the case may be, that the
determination of liability has been set aside.
      2.   Notify the registered owner or lessee, as the case may be, of a
date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the violation for which
determination of liability has been set aside.
      3.   Notice of the setting aside of the determination of liability and
the notice of the hearing date shall be sent by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the address set forth on the petition to set aside the
determination of liability.
      4.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notices are
deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
9-6-8: NONRESIDENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Nonresidents of the village who have been served vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation notices in accordance with this
chapter may contest the alleged violation on its merits, as could a resident,
or may contest the validity without personally appearing at an administrative
hearing by:
      1.   Completing, in full, the "nonresident request for hearing -
nonappearance" section of the violation notice, served upon him pursuant to
this chapter.
      2.   Signing the nonresident request for hearing in the space specified
in the violation notice, and acknowledging that his personal appearance is
waived, and submitting to an adjudication based upon the notarized statement
filed by him and the facts contained in the violation notice.
      3.   Filing the violation notice with the "nonresident request for
hearing - nonappearance" section fully completed with the traffic compliance
administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation notice issuance. The
request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance
administrator.
      4.   Filing a sworn or certified statement of facts specifying the
grounds for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the
traffic compliance administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation
notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic
compliance administrator. The acceptance of a "nonresident request for hearing
- nonappearance" after the due date or with cause, at the discretion of the
traffic compliance administrator, may be accepted for hearing consideration and
decision.
   B.   The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set
forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident as is
contained in the violation notice.
   C.   Notice of the determination of the hearing officer shall be served upon
the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.
   D.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is
placed in the United States mail.
   E.   All other provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to
nonresidents of this village. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
9-6-9: SCHEDULE OF FINES AND PENALTIES:
 
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 3929,
passed 4-29-2024). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
   A.   The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations shall be as
follows:
FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE
 
Fine Schedule         General Fine Amount Handi- capped Fine Vehicle Compliance
                                          Amount             Fine Amount
Step 1: Upon service
of a violation notice
issued and paid prior
to or on the          $ 45.00             $350.00            $ 45.00
commencement of the
first hearing date
the fine amount shall
be:
Step 2: Having failed
to pay the fine
amount specified in
step 1 prior to or on
the first hearing     75.00               350.00             75.00
date, the fine
amount, if paid prior
to the second hearing
date, shall be:
Step 3: Having failed
to pay the fine
amount specified in
step 2 prior to or on
the second hearing    150.00              350.00             150.00
date, the fine
amount, if paid prior
to the third hearing
date, shall be:
 
   B.   The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly applied for
each violation of any applicable village ordinance or village code regulation.
Payment of a fine does not constitute an admission of liability. In the event
that a finding of liability is subsequently reversed pursuant to administrative
or judicial review, any fine previously paid shall be refunded. (Ord. 3389, 9-
12-2011; amd. Ord. 3929, 4-29-2024)
9-6-10: REPORTS:
   A.   Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing the
village after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth herein for
ten or more vehicular parking regulation violations, the traffic compliance
administrator shall make a certified report to the secretary of state stating
that the owner of a registered vehicle has failed to pay any fine or penalty
due and owing the village as a result of ten or more violations of village
vehicular standing or parking regulations and thereby cause the suspension of
that person's driver's license.
   B.   The traffic compliance administrator shall take no further action
unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the village are paid or
upon determination that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified
report was in error. At such time, the traffic compliance administrator shall
submit to the secretary of state a notification which shall result in the
halting of a driver's license suspension proceedings. The person named therein
shall receive a certified copy of such notification by mail at no charge.
   C.   Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by
completing a form provided by the office of the traffic compliance
administrator. The form shall specify the grounds on which such challenge is
based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the following:
      1.   The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the vehicle
receiving ten or more violation notices on the date or dates such notices were
issued; or
      2.   The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the ten or more
violations indicated on the certified report.
   D.   The traffic compliance administrator shall render a determination
within fourteen business days of receipt of the objection form and shall notify
the objector of the determination. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
9-6-11: IMMOBILIZATION, TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Authority: Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined
to be liable for five or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violations, for which the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid,
may be immobilized or towed and impounded if:
      1.   The chief of police or traffic compliance administrator has
determined that a person has been found liable for five or more vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations, the fines or penalties
for which remain unpaid.
      2.   The person determined to be liable for five or more violations is
the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the village geographical
boundaries.
      3.   A pretowing notice has been sent to the registered owner of the
motor vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the village which
contains, but shall not be limited to, the following:
         a.   That a final determination has been made on five or more
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations, the fines and
penalties for which remain unpaid.
         b.   A listing of the violations for which the person has been
determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
            (1)   The vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation notice number.
            (2)   Date of issuance.
            (3)   Total amount of fine and penalty assessed.
         c.   The motor vehicle owned by the person and located within the
village is subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines
and penalties are not paid within fourteen days of the date of the notice.
         d.   The registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by
fully completing and signing the request for hearing portion of the notice and
by filing the request for hearing with the traffic compliance administrator
within, but not later than, fourteen days of the date of the notice. The
request for hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic
compliance administrator.
      4.   The registered owner of the motor vehicle to whom notice is sent has
failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice and
no timely request for hearing has been filed with the traffic compliance
administrator to contest the validity of the notice.
      5.   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity
of the notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment, the
traffic compliance administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to
contest the validity of said notice, by disproving liability for the unpaid
final determinations of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability
listed on the notice, on the next available hearing date, but in no case shall
the hearing be scheduled later than sixty days after the request for hearing is
filed.
         a.   The traffic compliance administrator shall serve notice of the
hearing date upon the registered owner.
         b.   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
         c.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed
in the United States mail.
   B.   Procedures: The registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or towed and
impounded under this section shall have the right to a prompt administrative
hearing without the requirement of payment of outstanding fines and penalties
for which final determination has been made.
      1.   The traffic compliance administrator shall serve a posttowing notice
upon the registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or towed and impounded under
this section which notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         a.   Date of immobilization or towing and date of impoundment.
         b.   Location of vehicle.
         c.   The vehicle was immobilized under this section for nonpayment of
fines or penalties assessed for the violation of five or more violations of
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation for which the registered
owner has been determined liable and notified of impending immobilization or
towing and impoundment.
         d.   Date of notice of impending immobilization or towing and
impoundment.
         e.   The registered owner may contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment by completing and signing the request
for hearing portion of the notice and filing the request for hearing with the
traffic compliance administrator within, but not later than, fourteen days of
the date of the notice which shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic
compliance administrator.
      2.   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity
of the immobilization or towing and impoundment, the traffic compliance
administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next available hearing
date or if sooner scheduled by the traffic compliance administrator for good
cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than sixty
days after the request for hearing is filed.
         a.   The traffic compliance administrator shall serve notice of the
hearing date upon the registered owner.
         b.   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
         c.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed
in the United States mail.
      3.   An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment is a final administrative decision.
   C.   Release Of Vehicle: A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall
be released to the registered owner thereof, or his agent, upon payment of the
fines and penalties due and owing the village as specified in the notice sent
in accordance with this section, plus a fifty dollar immobilization fee, in
addition to the payment of towing charges and accrued daily impound charges, or
upon order of the hearing officer following hearing contesting the validity of
the impoundment.
   D.   Towing Services: The traffic compliance administrator shall appoint or
retain the services of an individual agency or company to tow and impound
vehicles in accordance herewith, provided:
      1.   The individual, agency or company is fully licensed according to
local and state law.
      2.   The individual, agency or company is fully insured.
      3.   The individual, agency or company has available a secured impound
area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of
this section a "secured area" shall mean an area bounded by a fence, chainlink
or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize
or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-
2007)
9-6-12: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violations and final administrative decisions issued
after hearings regarding vehicle immobilization or towing and impoundment made
under this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the administrative
review law as is set forth in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq.
(Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
9-6-13: DEBT TO VILLAGE:
Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion
of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies created under this
chapter and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures, shall be a debt
due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in accordance with
applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from a
standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute a final disposition
of that violation. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
9-6-14: JUDGMENT:
The traffic compliance administrator shall, following the expiration of the
period within which administrative or judicial review may be sought for a final
determination of violation liability, take all necessary actions, execute all
required documents, and appoint or retain any individual or agency deemed
appropriate, to obtain a judgment against, and collect monies from, the persons
who have been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid and have become a
debt due and owing the village in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 by:
   A.   Filing a complaint in the circuit court praying for the entry of a
judgment against the person for whom a final determination of standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation liability has been made.
   B.   The complaint filed by the traffic compliance administrator, or
individual or agency on behalf of the village, seeking entry of a judgment
against an individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties pursuant to a final
determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation
liability shall have appended:
      1.   A certified copy of the final determination of the standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation liability.
      2.   A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the final
determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation
liability was issued in accordance with this chapter and 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-208.3.
   C.   The village may consolidate multiple final determinations of standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation liability in an action in the
circuit court against an individual.
   D.   Pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money
judgments. (Ord. 3202, 6-11-2007)
CHAPTER 7
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-7-1: Definitions
9-7-2: Vehicle Use During Commission Of Offense
9-7-3: Notice Of Seizure And Impoundment
9-7-4: Preliminary Hearing
9-7-5: Final Administrative Hearing
9-7-6: Appeal
9-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning
ascribed to them as follows:
   HEARING OFFICER: An attorney licensed in the State of Illinois for a minimum
of three years.
   OWNER: A person who holds legal title to a motor vehicle or the right of
possession of the vehicle. (Ord. 3415, 4-9-2012)
9-7-2: VEHICLE USE DURING COMMISSION OF OFFENSE:
   A.   Vehicles Used During Commission Of Offense: Any motor vehicle operated
or used, with the express or implied permission of the registered owner of
record or lessee (as registered with the Secretary of State, State of
Illinois), during the commission of or in furtherance of any offense or
violation set forth in subsection B of this section, shall be subject to
seizure and impoundment by the Village, and the owner of record or lessee of
said vehicle may be liable to the Village for an administrative fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), in addition to any towing and storage fees as
hereinafter provided. (Ord. 3415, 4-9-2012)
   B.   Violations Or Offenses Subject To Seizure And Impoundment:
      1.   Operating without a valid driver's license/permit (625 ILCS 5/6-
101):
         a.   Operating a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license and
the period expiration is greater than one (1) year.
         b.   Operating of a motor vehicle without having ever been issued a
driver's license or permit or operating a motor vehicle without ever having
been issued a driver's license or permit due to person's age.
         c.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that a driver violated sections 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois
vehicle code, or
      2.   Driving while suspended or revoked (625 ILCS 5/6-303):
         a.   Driving while driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked.
         b.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that a driver violated sections 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois
vehicle code, or
      3.   Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer (625 ILCS 5/11-204),
or
      4.   Aggravated fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer (625 ILCS
5/11-204.1), or
      5.   Leaving the scene of an accident involving death or personal
injuries (625 ILCS 5/11- 401), or
      6.   Leaving the scene of an accident involving damage to vehicle (625
ILCS 5/11-402), or
      7.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs,
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof (625 ILCS 5/11-
501):
         a.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs,
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof.
         b.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that a driver violated sections 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois
vehicle code, or
      8.   Reckless driving (625 ILCS 5/11-503), or
      9.   Street racing; aggravated street racing or a similar provision of
this code 625 ILCS 5/11-506), or
      10.   Speeding forty (40) miles per hour or more in excess of the
applicable limit (625 ILCS 5/11- 601.5), or
      11.   Forcible Felony: Any crime described as a "forcible felony" when it
also involves the use of a vehicle (720 ILCS 5/2-8), or
      12.   Solicitation of a sexual act (720 ILCS 5/11-14.1), or
      13.   Soliciting for a prostitute (720 ILCS 5/11-15), or
      14.   Theft over one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) (720 ILCS 5/16-1),
or
      15.   Theft of lost or mislaid property over one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) (720 ILCS 5/16-2), or
      16.   Retail theft over one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) (720 ILCS 5/
16-25), or
      17.   Unlawful use of a firearm/weapon (720 ILCS 5/24-1), or
      18.   Unlawful use or possession of weapons by a felon (720 ILCS 5/24-
1.1), or
      19.   Aggravated discharge of a firearm (720 ILCS 5/24-1.2), or
      20.   Reckless discharge of a firearm (720 ILCS 5/24-1.5), or
      21.   Aggravated unlawful use of weapon (720 ILCS 5/24-1.6), or
      22.   Unlawful possession of a firearm or firearm ammunition (720 ILCS 5/
24-3.1), or
      23.   Forfeiture of motor vehicles (720 ILCS 5-36-1 et seq.):
         a.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or
attempted commission of any offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to 720 ILCS 5-36-1 et seq., or
      24.   Operation of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance (720 ILCS
550/1 et seq.):
         a.   Operation of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance as defined
by the Illinois Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq), or the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570-lOOet1 seq), or
      25.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with felony
offenses under the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/2):
         a.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the
commission or attempted commission of any felony offense in violation of the
provision of the Illinois Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/2), or
      26.   Operation of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess a controlled substance (720 ILCS 570-100 et
seq.):
         a.   Operation of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance as defined
by the Illinois Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq), or the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570-100et2 seq), or
      27.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in commission of offenses
violating the Illinois Controlled Substance Act (720 ILCS 570-101 et seq.):
         a.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or
attempted commission of any offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substance Act (720 ILCS 570-101 et seq). (Ord. 3415, 4-9-2012; amd. Ord. 3958,
7-14-2025)
9-7-3: NOTICE OF SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, and the police
officer has effected an arrest for any of the offenses set forth in subsection
9-7-2B of this chapter, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the
vehicle to a facility authorized by the Chief of Police. Prior to the vehicle
being towed, the police officer shall notify any person identifying himself as
the owner or lessee of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control
of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, and who is physically
present at the scene, that the vehicle will be seized and impounded, and that
the owner or lessee has the right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment
hearing and participate in an administrative hearing. If the owner or lessee is
present at the scene, the police officer shall inform the owner or lessee that
he/she has a right to make a written request for a preliminary vehicle
impoundment hearing within forty eight hours of the seizure in accordance with
the provisions of section
 9-7-4 of this chapter. If the owner or lessee of the vehicle is not present at
the scene, the Village shall send the owner or lessee written notice of the
seizure and impoundment by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the
address listed on the owner or lessee's vehicle registration within twenty four
hours of impoundment, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or Village holidays. Said
notice shall inform the owner or lessee that he/she has the right to request a
preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing within forty eight hours of the owner
or lessee's receipt of the notice in accordance with section
 9-7-4 of this chapter. The Village shall also provide notice that said motor
vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearings provided for
in this chapter, unless the owner or lessee of the motor vehicle or a
lienholder of record posts with the Village a cash bond as set forth in section
9-7-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the
arresting police officer may release the vehicle prior to towing if the vehicle
subject to seizure and impoundment was not owned by the person placed under
arrest and the registered owner or person legally authorized to possess the
vehicle shall arrive at the scene of the arrest prior to the actual removal or
towing of the vehicle and the lawful owner or person lawfully entitled to
possession of the vehicle possesses a valid operator's license, proof of
ownership or registration, proof of liability insurance and would not, as
determined by the arresting police officer, indicate a lack of ability to
operate the motor vehicle in a safe manner, or who would otherwise, by
operating the motor vehicle, be in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   C.   Said vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the
preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing provided for in section
 9-7-4 of this chapter, unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a
lienholder posts with the Village a cash bond, or pays by money order or
certified check to the Village of River Forest the amount of five hundred
dollars, plus any accrued towing and storage charges. (Ord. 3415, 4-9-2012)
9-7-4: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
If the owner of record or lessee of a vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to
this chapter desires to appeal the seizure, said owner or lessee must make a
request for a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing within forty eight hours
of the seizure, or within forty eight hours of receipt of notice by the owner
or lessee of the seizure if the owner or lessee was not present at the time of
the seizure. Said request shall be in writing and filed with the Chief of
Police or his designee who shall conduct such preliminary hearing within forty
eight hours after receipt of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or
Village holidays. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing. The
formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably
prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after the hearing, the
Chief of Police or his designee determines by a preponderance of the evidence
that the vehicle was properly subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to
this chapter, he shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as
provided in this section, unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a
lienholder posts with the Village a cash bond, or pays by money order,
certified check, or approved credit card service the amount of five hundred
dollars, plus any applicable towing and storage fees. If the Chief of Police or
his designee determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was
improperly seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the vehicle will be
returned without penalty or other fees. (Ord. 3415, 4-9-2012)
9-7-5: FINAL ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
   A.   Unless the owner or lessee of the motor vehicle prevails at a
preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing held pursuant to section
9-7-4 of this chapter, or the owner or lessee affirmatively waives his/her
right to a final administrative hearing, within ten business days after a motor
vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the Village shall
notify the owner of record, or lessee and any lienholders of record by personal
service or first class mail, of the date, time and location of a hearing that
will be conducted pursuant to this section. The notice shall state the fees
that may be imposed, and that a motor vehicle not released by cash bond or
other form of payment acceptable to the Village may be sold or disposed of by
the Village in accordance with applicable law.
   B.   The final administrative hearing shall be conducted and held, unless
the owner or lessee prevailed at a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing,
affirmatively waives the hearing, or the hearing is continued by order of the
Hearing Officer, no later than forty five days after the motor vehicle was
seized. The hearing shall be conducted and the case decided by a Hearing
Officer appointed by the Village Administrator. All interested persons shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time prior to
the hearing date, the Hearing Officer may, at the request of either party,
direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules
of evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons
in the conduct of their affairs. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer
determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle, operated
with the permission, express or implied of the owner or lessee, was properly
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the Hearing
Officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record or lessee of the motor
vehicle civilly liable to the Village for an administrative fee in an amount of
five hundred dollars and requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded
until the administrative fee is paid to the Village, plus any applicable towing
and storage fees. If the owner of record or lessee fails to appear at the
hearing, the Hearing Officer shall enter a default order in favor of the
Village, a copy of which shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee via
certified mail, return receipt requested. If a cash bond or other acceptable
form of payment has been posted, that amount shall be applied to the amount
owed. If the Hearing Officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the
vehicle was improperly seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the
Hearing Officer shall order the immediate return of the owner or lessee's
vehicle or cash bond without fees. All orders issued by the Hearing Officer
shall be in writing.
   C.   If an administrative fee is imposed pursuant to section
9-7-2 of this chapter, such fee shall constitute a debt due and owing to the
Village. If a cash bond or other form of monetary payment acceptable to the
Village has been posted pursuant to this chapter, such amount shall be applied
to the administrative fee. If a vehicle has been impounded when such an
administrative fee is imposed, the Village may seek to obtain a judgment on the
debt and enforce such judgment against the vehicle as provided by law. Except
as provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded
until the administrative fee is paid to the Village and any applicable towing
and storage fees are paid to the tower, in which case possession of the vehicle
shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle, or
the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment to enforce a
lien as provided by law. If the administrative fee and other applicable fees
are not paid within thirty five days after an administrative fee is imposed
against an owner of record or lessee who defaults by failing to appear at the
hearing, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the
manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles. In all other
cases, if the administrative fee and other applicable fees are not paid within
thirty five days after the expiration of time at which administrative review of
the Hearing Officer's determination may be sought, or within thirty days after
an action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the
Village, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and
shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
unclaimed vehicles under the Illinois Vehicle Code. Unless stayed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty, or administrative fee imposed under
this chapter which remains unpaid in whole or in part after the expiration of
the deadline for seeking judicial review under the Administrative Review Act
may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   D.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law or if the Hearing
Officer found by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was
improperly seized and impounded, no owner, lienholder, or other person shall be
legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle impounded under this chapter
until the administrative fee and other applicable fees under this chapter have
been paid in full. However, whenever a person with a lien of record against an
impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the
vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she agrees in writing to refund
to the Village the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any
amounts required to pay all lienholders of record, not to exceed the
administrative penalty, plus the applicable fees. (Ord. 3415, 4-9-2012)
   E.   If the Hearing Officer finds that the Village exceeded its authority
under this chapter in the seizure and impoundment of a motor vehicle, the
Village shall be liable to the owner of record or lessee of the motor vehicle
for the cost of storage fees and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 3620, 10-24-
2016)
9-7-6: APPEAL:
Any party may appeal a final decision of the Hearing Officer pursuant to the
provision of the Illinois Administrative Review Act. (Ord. 3415, 4-9-2012)
CHAPTER 8
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM
SECTION:
9-8-1: Definitions
9-8-2: Violations
9-8-3: Defenses
9-8-4: Notice Of Violation
9-8-5: Hearing
9-8-6: Nonresidents
9-8-7: Final Determination
9-8-8: Notice Of Determination Of Liability
9-8-9: Notice Of Final Determination
9-8-10: Petitions To Set Aside Determination
9-8-11: Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension
9-8-12: Driver's License Suspension
9-8-13: Penalty
9-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM: A device within the village with
one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light
signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection
against a steady or flashing red signal indication in violation of section 11-
306 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-306, or
similar violation of this code.
   DISREGARDING A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE: Failure to stop and remain stopped
before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as provided for in
section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code.
   HEARING OFFICER: The person appointed as such pursuant to section 11-208.6
of the Illinois vehicle code.
   NO TURN ON RED: Failure to stop and remain stopped, and not proceeding to
turn right at, an intersection controlled by both a sign indicating "No turn on
red", or other similar language, and a red signal as provided for in section
11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code.
   RECORDED IMAGES: Images produced by the automated traffic law enforcement
system, which consist of either two or more photographs; two or more
microphotographs; two or more electronic images; or, a video recording showing
the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the recording,
clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle.
   TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR: The person appointed as such through
article 25 of the Illinois vehicle code and shall have the following additional
powers: adopt, distribute and process automated traffic law violation notices
and other notices required by this chapter, collect money paid as fines and
penalties, operate the automated traffic law enforcement system, and make
certified reports to the secretary of state as required by this chapter. (Ord.
3387, 8-15-2011)
9-8-2: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for a vehicle to disregard a traffic
control device or to turn on red in violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois
vehicle code. (Ord. 3387, 8-15-2011)
9-8-3: DEFENSES:
The following may be considered defenses by the hearing officer for a violation
of section
9-8-2 of this chapter:
   A.   That the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were
stolen before the violation occurred, and not under the control of or in the
possession of the owner at the time of the violation;
   B.   That the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the
light was red either: 1) in order to yield the right of way to an emergency
vehicle or 2) as part of a funeral procession.
To demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen
before the violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of
the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a
report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed
with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner. (Ord. 3387, 8-15-2011)
9-8-4: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor vehicle
entering an intersection in violation of section
9-8-2 of this chapter, the village shall issue a written "notice of violation"
to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, which shall be delivered by
U.S. mail within thirty days after the Illinois secretary of state notifies the
village of the identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, and
in no event later than ninety days following the violation. The village shall
only be required to notify a lessee if the leasing company/lessor provides the
lessee's name by an affidavit and a copy of the lease within sixty days of the
notice's issuance. If the driver information is not provided within sixty days,
the leasing company/lessor may be found liable. If any notice to an address is
returned as undeliverable, a second notice shall be sent to the last known
address recorded in a United States post office approved database of the owner
or lessee of the cited vehicle. The second notice shall be made by first class
mail postage prepaid. Service of such notices shall be deemed complete as of
the date of deposit in the United States mail.
A notice of violation associated with an automated traffic law violation shall
require a review of the associated recorded image by the traffic compliance
administrator, who shall inspect the image and determine whether the motor
vehicle was being operated in violation of section
9-8-2 of this chapter, or whether one of the defenses enumerated in section
9-8-3 of this chapter is visibly and plainly applicable upon inspection. Upon
determination that the recorded image captures a violation and that no defense
applies, the notice of violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle
owner in the manner provided for above. The traffic compliance administrator
shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded images and other
correspondence mailed to the owner of the vehicle. Each notice of violation
shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is
admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of the above noted statutory
and local provisions and shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject
to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in this chapter.
The notice of violation shall include the following information:
   A.   The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle,
as indicated by the records of the secretary of state, or, if such information
is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded in a United
States post office approved database;
   B.   The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the motor
vehicle involved in the violation;
   C.   The violation charged;
   D.   The location where the violation occurred;
   E.   The date and time of the violation;
   F.   A copy of the recorded images;
   G.   The amount of the civil penalty and the date by which the penalty
should be paid (twenty one days from the date of issuance), if a hearing is not
requested, and a statement that the payment of the fine shall operate as a
final disposition of the violation;
   H.   A statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date noted
may result in an additional late fee being assessed against the owner or
lessee;
   I.   The amount of the late fee;
   J.   A statement that the failure to pay the civil penalty or request a
hearing by the date specified will result in a final determination of liability
and may result in the suspension of driving privileges for the registered owner
of the vehicle;
   K.   A statement that the recorded images are evidence of a violation of a
red light signal;
   L.   A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the fine or
challenging the charge in court, by mail or by administrative hearing;
   M.   A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested; and
   N.   A website address, accessible through the internet, where the person
may view the recorded images of the violation. (Ord. 3387, 8-15-2011)
9-8-5: HEARING:
The registered owner to whom a notice of violation was issued may request a
hearing by the respond by date on the notice of violation (within twenty one
days from the date of issuance), to challenge the evidence or set forth an
applicable defense. The notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the
facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a
violation of section
9-8-2 of this chapter. The notice of violation shall be prima facie evidence of
a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in
section
9-8-3 of this chapter.
The owner's failure to appear at the hearing will result in a finding of
liability. In the event of a failure to appear, a "findings, decision and
order" letter will be sent to the owner. The owner's failure to pay the amount
by the date specified in that letter will result in a final determination.
(Ord. 3387, 8-15-2011)
9-8-6: NONRESIDENTS:
Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle is not a resident of
the village but seeks to contest the merits of the alleged violation, such
person may contest the charges using the same available defenses as stated
above, but rather than attend an administrative hearing, the nonresident
registered owner may submit any and all documentary evidence to the traffic
compliance administrator by the respond by date on the notice of violation
(within twenty one days from the date of issuance), together with a written
statement reflecting that they are a nonresident of the village. The traffic
compliance administrator shall forward all timely submitted materials to the
hearing officer for review and determination. (Ord. 3387, 8-15-2011)
9-8-7: FINAL DETERMINATION:
A final determination of violation liability shall occur following failure to
pay the fine, a failure to request a hearing by the respond by date, after a
hearing officer's determination of violation liability and the exhaustion of or
failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures provided by this code.
Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in
the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer's
determination shall become final upon a failure to pay the amount owed on date
provided in the "findings, decision and order" letter. Appeal may be made to
the circuit court of Cook County on any final determination as provided for by
the Illinois administrative review act. (Ord. 3387, 8-15-2011)
9-8-8: NOTICE OF DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
If the registered owner fails to pay or contest the notice of violation within
twenty one days, a notice of determination of liability will be sent to the
registered owner indicating that a fine in the amount of one hundred dollars is
due to the village. The notice will also state that the owner may petition the
village to set aside the determination of liability before it becomes final. If
the owner does not pay the one hundred dollars as specified in the notice or
petition the village to set aside the determination, within twenty one days, a
notice of final determination will be sent to the owner indicating that the
owner has exhausted all challenge options and the one hundred dollar fine is a
debt due and owing to the village and must be paid within fourteen days. The
owner will also be notified that the failure to pay the one hundred dollar fine
within fourteen days will result in a late fee of one hundred dollars added to
the original fine. (Ord. 3387, 8-15-2011)
9-8-9: NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION:
A "notice of final determination" shall be sent following the final
determination of automated traffic law violation liability and the conclusion
of judicial review. The notice of final determination shall include the
following information:
   A.   A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the
village.
   B.   A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the village
within fourteen days may result in a petition to the circuit court of Cook
County to have the unpaid fine rendered as a judgment or may result in the
suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or
penalties for five or more violations under this chapter. (Ord. 3387, 8-15-
2011)
9-8-10: PETITIONS TO SET ASIDE DETERMINATION:
A "petition to set aside determination" of an automated traffic law violation
must be filed with or mailed to the traffic control administrator within
fourteen days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination of
liability. The grounds for the petition are limited to:
   A.   The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date
the violation notice was issued;
   B.   The person having already paid the fine for the violation in question;
or
   C.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of liability,
the hearing officer shall review the petition to determine if cause has been
shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been shown, the village
shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner must
appear to present his case. The village shall notify the petitioner of the
hearing officer's decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within
fourteen days of the village's receipt. (Ord. 3387, 8-15-2011)
9-8-11: NOTICE OF IMPENDING DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
A "notice of impending driver's license suspension" shall be sent to the person
liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five or more
violations of this chapter. The notice of impending driver's license suspension
shall state the following information:
   A.   The failure to pay the fine owing within forty five days of the
notice's date will result in the village notifying the secretary of state that
the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under section
6-306.5 of the Illinois vehicle code;
   B.   A statement that the person may obtain a copy of the original ticket
imposing a fine by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the village
along with a request for the copy.
The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first
class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary of
state or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the
last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database.
(Ord. 3387, 8-15-2011)
9-8-12: DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
The traffic compliance administrator, by certified report, may request that the
secretary of state suspend the driving privileges of an owner of a registered
vehicle who has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing as a result of
five automated traffic violations. The report shall be certified and contain
the following:
   A.   The name, last known address as recorded with the secretary of state,
as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease, or as
recorded in a United States post office approved database if any notice sent
under this chapter is returned as undeliverable, and driver's license number of
the person who failed to pay the fine or penalty and the registration number of
any vehicle known to be registered to such person in a state;
   B.   The name of the municipality making the report pursuant to this
section; and
   C.   A statement that a notice of impending driver's license suspension has
been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with the
secretary of state or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited
vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this chapter is
returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a United States
post office approved database; the date on which such notice was sent; and
address to which such notice was sent.
The traffic compliance administrator shall notify the secretary of state
whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously
recorded fine or penalty or whenever the municipality determines that the
original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also
be given upon request and at no additional charge to the person named therein.
Any person receiving notice from the secretary of state that their driving
privileges may be suspended at the end of a specified period may challenge the
accuracy of the certified report prepared by the traffic compliance
administrator. The person shall, within seven days after having received notice
from the secretary of state, request an opportunity to speak with the traffic
compliance administrator to challenge the accuracy of the certified report. If
the traffic compliance administrator determines that the original report was in
error due to the fact that the person challenging the report was not the owner
or lessee of the vehicle or that the person has already paid their fine for the
five or more automated traffic violations, the traffic compliance administrator
shall immediately notify the secretary of state of such error in a subsequent
certified report. (Ord. 3387, 8-15-2011)
9-8-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating section
 9-8-2 of this chapter shall be fined one hundred dollars for each offense.
Failure to pay the original fine within fourteen days of the issuance of the
notice of final determination shall result in an additional one hundred dollar
late payment fine. (Ord. 3387, 8-15-2011)
TITLE 10
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-1: TITLE:
This document shall be known, referred to, and recited as THE RIVER FOREST
ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
CHAPTER 2
PURPOSE
SECTION:
10-2-1: Purpose of Title
10-2-2: R1 District, Purpose
10-2-3: R2 District, Purpose
10-2-4: R3 District, Purpose
10-2-5: R4 District, Purpose
10-2-6: C1 District, Purpose
10-2-7: C2 District, Purpose
10-2-8: C3 District, Purpose
10-2-9:   ORIC District, Purpose
10-2-10: PRI District, Purpose
10-2-1: PURPOSE OF TITLE:
This Zoning Title is adopted to promote the public safety, health, convenience,
comfort, preservation of property values, and general welfare of the Village.
More specifically, the Zoning Code is intended to:
   A.   Implement, to the extent possible, the goals and objectives of the
current River Forest Comprehensive Plan as amended from time to time;
   B.   Act as an effective regulatory guide to land use decisions by Village
officials and staff;
   C.   Establish clear procedures for review of development proposals, at a
level which reflects the probable impact of the development on the Village;
   D.   Support development and redevelopment of land uses that are appropriate
for individual parcels within the context of long- term community goals;
   E.   Regulate the location of land uses to ensure convenient access to
complimentary public and private facilities, amenities, and resources;
   F.   Facilitate the long-term development of functionally distinct, focused
commercial areas to meet the varying retail, service, and institutional needs
of Village residents, while conserving land in other areas of the Village for
other uses;
   G.   Allow land uses which will support the Village's primary role as an
exceptional residential community;
   H.   Establish the basis for development and preservation of an attractive
physical environment which enhances the image of the community;
   I.   Control the impact a development will have on the surrounding area by
regulating the bulk and height of buildings;
   J.   Control the use of exterior lighting and landscaping;
   K.   Support a variety of recreational and leisure opportunities for
residents and open spaces throughout the Village;
   L.   Promote traffic safety and efficiency through the regulation of site
design and land use intensity;
   M.   Ensure adequate natural light, clean air, privacy, and convenience of
access to property through a combination of regulatory controls and incentives;
   N.   Control the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters through the
use of site development standards to protect persons and property;
   O.   Provide for land uses which will contribute to a diverse yet
appropriate and sound economic base, thereby enabling the continuation of a
high standard of educational and municipal services without imposing undue tax
burdens;
   P.   Protect and enhance the property value of land and buildings by
encouraging a compatible mix of land uses;
   Q.   Provide for adequate off-street parking and loading provisions. (Ord.
2640, 5-23-95)
10-2-2: R1 DISTRICT, PURPOSE:
The R1 Wide Lot Single-family Residential District is intended to provide for
single-family detached housing on large lots within the Village and to preserve
the existing physical character of that area. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-2-3: R2 DISTRICT, PURPOSE:
The R2 Single-family Residential District is intended to provide for single-
family detached housing within the Village, and to preserve the existing
physical character of that area. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-2-4: R3 DISTRICT, PURPOSE:
The R3 Residential District is intended to provide for a mixture of attached
single-family residences (townhomes). (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-2-5: R4 DISTRICT, PURPOSE:
The R4 Multi-family Residential District is intended to provide for low density
multiple-family development. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-2-6: C1 DISTRICT, PURPOSE:
The C1 District is intended to provide for a combination of specialty retail
stores, office and service uses. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-2-7: C2 DISTRICT, PURPOSE:
The C2 District is intended to provide for a combination of retail, office,
service uses and multiple-family housing. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-2-8: C3 DISTRICT, PURPOSE:
The C3 District is intended to provide for a combination of specialty retail
stores, office, service uses and multi-family housing. This District creates a
central retail focus for the Village as a traditional community downtown. (Ord.
2640, 5-23-95)
10-2-9: ORIC DISTRICT, PURPOSE:
The ORIC Office/Research/Industrial/Commercial District is intended to provide
for a combination of light industry, research, commercial and office uses, in
an attractive environment which is consistent with River Forest's image and
character. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-2-10: PRI DISTRICT, PURPOSE:
The PRI Public Recreational and Institutional District is established to
accommodate public, semi-public, and private land uses and buildings of a
recreational, education, or institutional nature. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Definitions Of Words And Terms
10-3-1: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
   ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building the use of which is incidental to
the primary use of the main building.
   ACCESSORY USE: A subordinate or secondary use which is incidental to the
primary use conducted on a parcel of land or portion thereof.
   ALLEY: A public thoroughfare, not over twenty feet wide, which affords only
a secondary means of access to abutting property.
   APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms used as a single-family dwelling,
including bath and culinary accommodations located in a building in which there
are two or more such rooms or suites.
   APARTMENT HOUSE: See definition of dwelling, multiple-family.
   BASEMENT: That portion of a building or structure having more than one-half
of its height below lot grade.
   BEAUTY SHOP: An establishment where persons receive beauty treatments, and/
or purchase beauty products. These treatments primarily include one or more of
the following: 1) cutting, trimming, shampooing, weaving, coloring, waving, or
styling hair; 2) providing facials; 3) applying makeup (except permanent
makeup); and 4) providing nail care services, such as manicures, pedicures, and
nail extensions.
   BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals or other property, which is
permanently affixed to the ground.
   CANNABIS: As defined in the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410
ILCS 705/1, et seq.), as amended.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: A medical cannabis cultivation center,
medical cannabis dispensary, recreational cannabis craft grower, recreational
cannabis cultivation center, recreational cannabis dispensary, recreational
cannabis infuser, recreational cannabis processor and/or recreational cannabis
transporter.
   CELLULAR TELEPHONE ANTENNA: A single antenna or an array of antennas, other
than a small wireless facility, that is principally used for transmission and
reception of cellular telephone communications and that is mounted on: a) a
building or other structure, or b) a freestanding pole, mast or other structure
that is attached to the ground or mounted on the roof of a building.
   CELLULAR TELEPHONE ANTENNA EQUIPMENT: Radio and computer reception and
distribution apparatus that is accessory to the operation of a cellular
telephone antenna, other than a small wireless facility, and that is installed
inside an accessory or principal building.
   CHANGE IN USE: To alter the use of a building or parcel or tract of land, or
portion thereof, to a different use, whether or not such a change conforms with
the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
   CHILD DAYCARE CENTER: A childcare facility which regularly provides daycare
for less than fourteen hours per day in a facility other than a dwelling.
   CHILD DAYCARE HOME: A dwelling operated by the property owner to provide
child daycare services between the hours of five o'clock A.M. and nine o'clock
P.M. for no more than eight children provided that: a) any children of the
owner, either natural, foster or adopted, under the age of twelve shall be
included in determining the maximum number of children allowed in a child
daycare home; b) the facility is licensed by the Village and the State of
Illinois.
   COFFEE SHOP: A retail establishment whose principal business is the service
and sale of coffees, teas and a limited selection of food items incidental
thereto.
   COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY: An institution of higher education accredited by a
regional organization or authorized by the State to issue baccalaureate,
graduate or professional degrees.
   COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION: The start of any construction activity,
including demolition or excavation, in accordance with the approved plans.
   DEVELOPMENT: The construction or installation of new, or alteration of
existing, structures, streets, or utilities. Development shall also include
changes of use which involve an increase in the occupancy, off street parking
requirements, or demand on Village services or utilities. Development shall not
include the maintenance of existing structures, paved areas, or utilities, or
improvements to building mechanical systems.
   DISTRICT: A section or sections of the Village designated by boundaries
shown on the zoning map for which the regulations governing the use, height and
area of buildings and premises are uniform.
   DORMITORY: A building or portion thereof that contains living quarters for
students, staff, or members of an accredited college, university, boarding
school, theological school, hospital, religious order, or comparable
organization; provided that said building is owned or managed by said
organization (or agent of said organization) and which typically contains not
more than one cooking and common eating area.
   DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof which is designed or used
exclusively for residential purposes.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: Any building or group of affiliated buildings
containing two or more residential condominium units, apartments and/or single-
family attached dwelling units.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A dwelling joined to one or two other
dwellings by vertical party wall(s) and having physically unifying horizontal
architectural and structural elements aboveground with each dwelling having its
own independent entrance and exit(s) at grade level.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A detached building designed for or
occupied by not more than one family.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE: Any vehicle which stores electric energy in a rechargeable
battery pack to be used for propulsion and has a conductive plug or inductive
wireless connection for recharging the battery. The definition of Electric
Vehicle includes Battery Electric Vehicles which only use energy stored in
rechargeable battery packs onboard the vehicle to propel the vehicle, and Plug-
in Hybrid Electric Vehicles, which have both an electric motor and an internal
combustion engine and can be powered with either. The definition of Electric
Vehicle does not include Hybrid Electric Vehicles, which do not plug in and for
which the primary source of energy is derived from fuel that powers an engine.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE: Any “make ready” electrical
equipment necessary to delivery electrical power from a facility to Electric
Vehicle Supply Equipment. including panels with circuit breakers, switchboards,
transformers conduit, wiring, junction boxes conduit hangers and other
interconnections.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION: Any equipment designed to safety supply
and manage power into Plugin EVs. EV Charging Stations include hard-wired EV
Charging Stations and EV Charging Stations that plug in to standard wall
outlets and may also integrate communication metering, GPS and other features
that assist EV drivers and the host facility. The definition of Electric
Vehicle Charging Station includes any stations which provide Level 1 Charging,
Level 2 Charging, or Direct Current Fast Charging, as defined herein:
      Level 1 Charging: Electric Vehicle battery charging that uses 110-to-120-
volt Alternating Current supply power, with a power range from 0.88 kilowatts
(kW) to 1.92 kW.
      Level 2 Charging: Electric Vehicle battery charging that uses 208-to-240-
volt Alternating Current supply power, with a power range from 3.3 kW to 19.2
kW.
      Direct Current Fast Charging: Electric Vehicle battery charging that uses
Direct Current power to refuel Electric Vehicles at various amperage levels and
voltage levels with power outputs ranging between 25 kW and 175 kW.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT: Any conductors and electric vehicle
connectors attachment plugs and all other fittings devices, power outlets, or
apparatus installed specifically for the purpose of transferring energy between
the premises wiring and the electric vehicle.
   FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single
housekeeping unit, and related to each other by birth, marriage, adoption or a
foster care arrangement licensed by the State of Illinois, and including
domestic servants; with the following exceptions which shall also be deemed to
constitute a family: Two persons who are not related by birth, marriage,
adoption, or foster care arrangement living in a dwelling. This definition
shall not apply to those persons living in a "group home" as defined in this
chapter.
   FAST FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: Eating establishments whose principal business is
the preparation of food for immediate sale and consumption, generally served in
disposable containers and wrappers, where orders are placed and picked up by
patrons at the sales window(s), counter(s) or service area(s) for consumption
on or off the premises, and where seating is normally without full time waiter
service.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS (For Determining Floor Area Ratio): The sum of the gross
horizontal area of the several floors of a structure, measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating
two buildings. The gross floor area of a building shall include:
      A.   Elevator and mechanical shafts and stairwells;
      B.   Mechanical equipment spaces unless located on the roof, either open
or enclosed;
      C.   Attic space having average headroom of seven feet or more;
      D.   For structures that qualify as "new construction" under this section
permitted on or after April 28, 2008, one hundred percent of the floor area of
a basement, if four feet nine inches or more of the height of the basement
projects above grade as measured from grade to the top of the first finished
floor; for structures that do not qualify as "new construction" under this
section, permitted on or after April 28, 2008, including additions that do not
extend above the existing basement height above grade, the floor area of the
basement shall not be included in the gross floor area;
      E.   Interior balconies and mezzanines;
      F.   Enclosed porches;
      G.   For nonsingle-family detached residential districts, interior off
street parking and loading areas not required to satisfy this title; for
single-family detached residential districts, the gross floor area in excess of
five hundred square feet of a rear detached garage, the gross floor area in
excess of three hundred square feet of a rear attached garage, and the gross
floor area in excess of one hundred fifty square feet of any attached front or
side garage;
      H.   Permanent outdoor display areas;
      I.   Any residential, business, manufacturing, recreational, educational
or other uses available to the public that are permitted below grade.
   FLOOR AREA, NET (For Determining Off Street Parking And Loading
Requirements): The sum of the net horizontal floor area of the several floors
of a building measured from the interior faces of the exterior wall or from the
interior faces of walls separating two buildings.
      A.   The net floor area of a building shall include:
         1.   Basement area, when used for other than storage, service
facilities or mechanical equipment;
         2.   Penthouse area, excluding mechanical spaces;
         3.   Attic space having headroom of seven feet or more;
         4.   Interior balconies and mezzanines;
         5.   Enclosed porches;
         6.   Floor area devoted to building storage areas;
         7.   For retail or commercial uses the net floor area of a building
shall only include the sales or public floor area.
      B.   The net floor area of a building shall not include:
         1.   Floor space occupied by mechanical, telephone and electrical
equipment, including mechanical spaces;
         2.   Stairwells, escalators and elevator shafts;
         3.   Public restrooms;
         4.   Interior off street parking and loading.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The numerical value obtained by dividing the gross
floor area of a building or buildings on a single lot by the area of the lot.
   FRONTAGE: All the property abutting one side of a street, between two
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the
street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on
one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building primarily for the use of the
occupants of the lot on which such building is located.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or structure for the storage or parking of more
than four passenger motor vehicles or powered boats, or more than one
commercial motor vehicle. Public garages shall be classified according to their
specific use in one of the following groups:
      A.   Group 1: A public garage in which provision is made for the care or
storage of motor vehicles including the dispensing of gasoline, oil or similar
products.
      B.   Group 2: A public garage used exclusively for storage or parking of
passenger vehicles that will accommodate not more than nine passengers.
   GRADE: A datum or reference level determined as follows:
      A.   For buildings adjoining one street only, by the elevation of the
sidewalk at the center of that wall adjoining the street.
      B.   For buildings adjoining more than one street, by the average of the
elevations of the sidewalk at centers of all walls adjoining streets.
      C.   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, by the average
level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of
the building.
         1.   Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet
from a street line shall be considered as adjoining the street.
         2.   Where no sidewalk exists, the grade shall be established by the
village engineer.
   GROUP HOME: A specialized residential care home serving no more than six
unrelated persons with disabilities, including resident support staff, which is
licensed, certified or accredited by appropriate local, state or national
bodies. Group homes do not include a residence which serves persons as an
alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons whose primary
reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse, or persons whose primary
reason for placement is the treatment of a communicable disease.
   HALF STORY: A story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof where no more than
twenty five percent of the floor area of that floor is located under dormers or
other outward projections from the basic planes of the roof and has an exterior
perimeter knee wall not exceeding two feet in height to the bottom of the roof
rafter. Any level which exceeds these limits shall be considered a full story.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING: The vertical distance measured from the nearest public
sidewalk to the highest point of the building or structure or to the highest
point of any object attached to the building or structure, whichever is higher.
Attached objects include, but are not limited to, antennas of any kind.
   HOME OCCUPATIONS: An occupation carried on, in or from a dwelling unit (but
not an accessory building) by a member of the family residing therein, which is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
occupancy and does not change the character thereof; provided the following
requirements are met by such home occupation:
      A.   Except where a special use permit has been obtained, every home
occupation shall be conducted wholly within a dwelling unit;
      B.   Home occupations involving any outdoor activity shall require
additional review in the form of a special use permit and shall be subject to
all the standards and provisions provided in chapter 18 of this title;
      C.   No more than one person shall be employed other than a member of the
family residing in the dwelling unit;
      D.   No more than two clients or customers shall visit the premises at
the same time. In no case shall any client or customer visit the premises
between the hours of nine o'clock P.M. and seven o'clock A.M.;
      E.   There shall be no signs, activities, lighting or display that will
indicate from the exterior that the building is being used, in part, for any
purpose other than that of a residential dwelling;
      F.   No stock-in-trade or other commodity shall be kept, displayed, sold
or offered for sale upon the premises, except (1) that sales by electronic
means, which otherwise comply with this definition, are permitted, and (2) that
stock-in-trade and commodities may be kept upon the premises of a "home kitchen
operation" as defined in 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/3.6, as amended;
      G.   There shall be no commodities sold or services rendered that require
receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment by other than a
passenger motor vehicle or by parcel or letter carrier mail service using
vehicles typically employed in residential deliveries. No deliveries by semi-
tractor/trailer- trucks and related to the home occupation are permitted;
      H.   There shall be no noise, odor, dust, vibration, smoke, glare,
television or radio interference, fire hazard or any other hazard emanating
from the dwelling so as to create a nuisance;
      I.   No home occupation shall involve the use of noxious, toxic or
harmful materials, or on-site staging, displaying or assembling of any
commercial vehicles;
      J.   All home occupations shall require a business license which shall be
subject to annual renewal;
      K.   The use of any equipment or process which adversely effects the fire
rating of the dwelling or fire district is prohibited;
      L.   There shall be no separate entrance or any structural alteration
that specifically accommodates the occupation or changes the residential
character of the dwelling, provided, however, that reasonable means to
accommodate physically disabled clients or customers may be employed;
      M.   Any type of manufacturing process that is allowed in a commercial
district is prohibited;
      N.   Only one home occupation shall be conducted in any dwelling unit;
      O.   A special use permit shall be required for any home occupation
involving the handling or preparation of food, except that no special use
permit shall be required for a "home kitchen operation" as defined in 410
Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/3.6, as amended;
      P.   The care or treatment of animals, other than those owned by the
occupant, is prohibited;
      Q.   The home occupation shall be subject to unannounced inspections by
Village personnel provided, however, that probable cause exists to believe that
a violation of law has occurred;
      R.   The home occupation must be for the gain or support of a full- time
occupant of the dwelling unit;
      S.   The generation of refuse in excess of limits currently established
for residential dwellings is prohibited; and
      T.   Outdoor storage of any materials is prohibited.
   HOTEL: Every building in which two or more sleeping rooms are used or
maintained for the accommodation of guests for compensation.
   INHABITABLE:
      A.   A space designed for human occupancy having amenities or
improvements normally associated with human habitation. Examples of such
amenities or improvements shall include, but shall not be limited to: plumbing,
running water, bedroom or living room space or furniture, toilet(s), a kitchen
area or associated appliances.
      B.   Any space which is occupied by any person or persons continuously
shall be deemed "inhabitable" notwithstanding the lack of any amenities or
improvements normally associated with human habitation.
   LOT: Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings, together with such open spaces as are required under this zoning
title, and having its principal frontage upon a public street which has been
approved by the Village Board.
      Lot, Corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection of junction.
      Lot, Depth Of: The mean horizontal distance between the front and the
rear lot lines.
      Lot, Interior: A lot having frontage on one street.
      Lot Lines: The lines which determine the boundaries of a "lot" as defined
herein.
      Lot Of Record: A parcel of land recorded as a lot in a subdivision, which
subdivision has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook
County, Illinois, prior to the effective date of this zoning title.
      Lot, Through: A lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets.
   MASTER PLAN: A plan providing overall guidance for the implementation and
operation of a development over an extended period of time but in no event to
exceed ten years.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A "cultivation center" as defined in
the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1,
et seq.), as amended.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY: A "dispensary organization" as defined in the
Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1, et
seq.), as amended.
   MOTOR FUEL SERVICE STATION: A structure, or building on any lot or any
portion thereof, where a flammable liquid in excess of twenty gallons is
stored, dispensed or sold for supply to motor vehicles.
   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP: A wholly enclosed building or structure where the
business of repairing, maintaining, painting or refinishing of motor vehicles,
is carried on.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: The erection of any building or structure or any portion
thereof.
   NONCONFORMING USE: The use of a building or lot, or any portion thereof,
which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is
situated.
   PARKING LOT: Any premises or other place, other than a public garage or a
required parking lot, where two or more automobiles may be stored or parked and
where compensation is paid to the owner, manager or lessees of such premises
for the storing or parking of such vehicles.
   PARKING LOT (Required): Any land area, other than in an R1, R2 or R3
District, located on or adjacent to any lot or lots improved with multiple-
family dwellings, houses of worship, schools, libraries, public buildings,
business or industrial establishments or other buildings, used for the storage
of private passenger automobiles of the occupants of such dwellings or of the
persons participating in the activities of such houses of worship, schools,
libraries, public buildings, business or industrial establishments or other
buildings and where no separate charge is made to the persons so parking their
automobiles.
   PARKING SPACE: An open or enclosed paved, hard surfaced, area which meets
the dimensional standards shown in section
10-7-4 of this title, located upon private property behind the established
building line, accessible at all times by means of a driveway to a public
thoroughfare other than a public alley, except where such parking space in
conjunction with a single-family residence, in which case the alley may be
considered a public thoroughfare. A garage shall also be considered a parking
space provided it meets the minimum dimension requirements in section
10-7-4 of this title. Each required parking space shall be kept available at
all times for parking of one automobile. No required parking space shall be
rented, leased or used for any purpose other than that for which said space is
required.
   PERMANENT COSMETICS, MICROBLADING, MICROPIGMENTATION AND SIMILAR CARE
SERVICES: The practice of placing ink or other pigment into the skin or mucosa
by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture a person's skin
for the purpose of permanent cosmetic restoration or enhancement of the
epidermis for re-pigmentation. This category of services does not include other
forms of body art such as body piercing or the adornment of the body with
letters, images, drawings, or other illustrations. The use is also commonly
known as dermal implantation, microstroking, eyebrow embroidery, and long-time/
long lasting makeup.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A use or combination of uses which because of their
scope, location, or specific characteristics give rise to a need for a
comprehensive consideration of their impact and requires special approval by
the Village Board in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 18 of this title and which may be implemented pursuant to a master
plan.
   RECREATIONAL CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A "craft grower," as defined in the
Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1, et seq.), as amended.
   RECREATIONAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A "cultivation center," as defined
in the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.), as
amended.
   RECREATIONAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY: A "dispensary," as defined in the Illinois
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1, et seq.), as amended.
   RECREATIONAL CANNABIS INFUSER: An "infuser" as defined in the Illinois
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1, et seq.), as amended.
   RECREATIONAL CANNABIS PROCESSOR: A "processor," as defined in the Illinois
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1, et seq.), as amended.
   RECREATIONAL CANNABIS TRANSPORTER: A "transporter," as defined in the
Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1, et seq.), as amended.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its
own motor power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle as defined herein:
      Camping Trailer: A nonmotorized portable unit mounted on wheels and
constructed with collapsible partial side walls which fold for towing by
another vehicle designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping or travel use.
      Motor Home: A motorized vehicular unit primarily designed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
      Travel Trailer: A nonmotorized portable unit, mounted on wheels, of such
a size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn
by a motorized vehicle; primarily designed and constructed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use; and of a body width of
no more than eight feet and a body length of no more than thirty two feet when
factory equipped for the road.
      Truck Camper: A portable unit, designed to be loaded and unloaded onto,
or affixed to, the bed or chassis of a truck, constructed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL: A single room, dwelling, or portion thereof, located
within a structure offered for rent or rented for a period of less than thirty
consecutive days.
   SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or indirectly in, upon or about
a building, structure or piece of land and which directs attention to an
object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business. However a sign shall not include any temporary display of official
court or public office notices, nor shall it include the national, state or
municipal flags, emblem or insignia of a nation, political unit, school or
religious group. Each display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a
separate sign.
   SITE PLAN: A required drawing, prepared and approved in accordance with the
provisions of chapters
17,
18 and
19 of this title.
   SITE PLAN REVIEW: A process for the assessment of land development or
redevelopment proposals to ensure that they are considerate of and compatible
with the surrounding area and fulfill, both within and around the site, the
planning principles of safety, convenience, efficient use of land and design
consistent with the character of the Village in accordance with the provisions
of chapter 17 of this title. Site plan review is in addition to zoning review
and compliance.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: See definition in section
5-16-3 of this Code.
   SPECIAL USE: A use which may have a unique, special or unusual impact upon
the use or enjoyment of neighboring property which requires special approval by
the Village Board in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 18 of this title.
   STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the ceiling or the floor next above it.
   STREET: A public thoroughfare over twenty feet wide which affords the
principal means of access to abutting property.
   STREET LINE: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous street.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any
substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such repair
or replacement as may be required for the safety of the building.
   STRUCTURE: A combination of materials joined together to form a construction
that is safe and stable including, among others, buildings, stadiums, tents,
reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, water tanks and towers, trestles, sheds,
shelters, fences, display signs and satellite dish antennas. The term structure
shall be construed as if followed by the words, "or part thereof". The term
structure shall not include flagpoles, basketball standards or ornamental
pillars.
   USE: The primary function, or primary activity conducted on, a parcel or
tract of land, or portion thereof.
   YARD: An open space between a building and any lot line which is open to the
sky and unobstructed by any temporary uses or structures or by any permanent
structures except as permitted by subsection
 10-20-2A of this title.
      Yard, Front: A yard extending across the front of the lot between the
required side yard lines and measured between the front line of the lot and the
front line of the building as determined by the fascia board of said building
or any projection thereof other than uncovered steps, uncovered terraces or
uncovered open porches.
      Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between
the side lot lines and between the rear lot line and the rear of the building
or any projection other than uncovered steps, uncovered terraces or uncovered
open porches. On corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to
the street upon which the lot has its least dimensions. On both corner lots and
interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the
lot from the front yard.
      Yard, Side: A yard between the building and the sideline of the lot and
extending from the front lot line to the rear yard.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: This position shall be the responsibility of the
Village Administrator or his/her designee.
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995; amd. Ord. 2657, 11-13-1995; Ord. 2712, 1-27-1997; Ord.
2716, 2-24-1997; Ord. 2846, 9-27-1999; Ord. 2941, 10-22-2001; Ord. 3122, 8-8-
2005; Ord. 3235, 4-28-2008; Ord. 3270, 3-23-2009; Ord. 3586, 2-29-2016; Ord.
3710, 8-20-2018; Ord. 3788, 12-9-2019; Ord. 3799, 2-24-2020; Ord. 3814, 6-22-
2020; Ord. 3943, 10-28-2024)
CHAPTER 4
INTERPRETATION AND SEPARABILITY
SECTION:
10-4-1: Interpretation
10-4-2: Separability
10-4-1: INTERPRETATION:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Zoning Title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection
of the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
   A.   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Zoning Title upon
the: 1) use of land, buildings, or structures; 2) height of buildings or
structures; 3) floor area requirements; 4) lot area and width requirements; 5)
yard and other open space requirements; and 6) other provisions of this Zoning
Title are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this Zoning Title or of any other
law, Zoning Title, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are most restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements
shall govern.
   B.   This Zoning Title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant,
or other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of this Zoning
Title are more restrictive or impose higher standards of requirements than such
easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this
Zoning Title shall govern.
   C.   No building, structure, or use not lawfully existing at the time of the
adoption of this Zoning Title, shall become or be made lawful solely by reason
of the adoption of this Zoning Title, and to the extent that, and in any manner
that said unlawful building, structure, or use is in conflict with the
requirements of this Zoning Title, said building, structure, or use remains
unlawful hereunder. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-4-2: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Trustees of the
Village of River Forest that the several provisions of this Zoning Title are
separable, in accordance with the following:
   A.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of
this Zoning Title to be invalid, such judgement shall not effect any other
provision of this Zoning Title not specifically included in said judgment; and
   B.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this Zoning Title to a particular property,
building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said
provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically
included in said judgment. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
CHAPTER 5
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
10-5-1: Authority
10-5-2: Application Procedures
10-5-3: Application Requirements For Minor And Major Variations
10-5-4: Variations
10-5-5: Amendments
10-5-6: Appeals
10-5-7: Nonconformities
10-5-1: AUTHORITY:
The following village offices and bodies have responsibility for implementing
and administering this zoning title:
   A.   Zoning Administrator: The responsibilities of the zoning administrator
are to:
      1.   Perform the daily administration of this zoning title, which
includes the maintenance of all records;
      2.   Interpret the meaning and applicability of specific provisions of
this zoning title, in written form;
      3.   Forward applications for appeals of any final administrative
decisions or interpretations of this zoning title to the appropriate body named
in this zoning title;
      4.   Review and to grant or deny minor variations administratively, as
set forth in section
 10-5-5 of this chapter, and to forward any appeals from those decisions to the
appropriate body named in this zoning title;
      5.   Forward applications for major variations, as set forth in section
10-5-2 of this chapter, to the zoning board of appeals;
      6.   Receive and process applications for special uses and planned unit
developments; amendments to the comprehensive plan; amendments to this zoning
title; and applications which require site plan review as set forth in this
zoning title;
      7.   Keep, as public record, documentation of any interpretation of this
zoning title that may be rendered by the zoning board of appeals.
   B.   Zoning Board Of Appeals: The responsibilities of the zoning board of
appeals with regards to this zoning title are to:
      1.   Hear and make recommendations to the board of trustees regarding
variations from this zoning title, as set forth in section
10-5-4 of this chapter;
      2.   Review, hold hearings, make findings of fact and offer its
recommendations to the board of trustees on applications for special use
permits as set forth in section
10-18-4 of this zoning title;
      3.   Hear, make findings of fact and decide appeals from decisions of the
zoning administrator regarding minor variations, as set forth in section
10-5-6 of this chapter;
      4.   Hear, make findings of fact and decide appeals from any
interpretation or administrative decision made by the zoning administrator in
the administration or enforcement of this zoning title as set forth in section
10-5-6 of this chapter;
      5.   Initiate, review, hold hearings, and recommend to the board of
trustees amendments to this zoning title and zoning map as set forth in section
10-5-5 of this chapter;
      6.   Interpretation of district boundaries.
   C.   Development Review Board: The responsibilities of the development
review board with regards to this zoning title are to:
      1.   Review, hold hearings, make findings of fact and offer its
recommendations to the board of trustees on applications for planned
developments and amendments to approved planned developments as set forth in
subsection
10-19-5B of this zoning title;
      2.   Conduct preliminary and final site plan review of all land
development applications subject to such review, for those cases specified in
chapter 17 of this zoning title.
   D.   Board Of Trustees: The board of trustees shall have the jurisdiction
and authority under this zoning title to approve, approve with modifications or
conditions, or deny applications for special uses, planned developments, major
variations, amendments to zoning classifications of properties and amendments
to this zoning title. The board of trustees shall have the authority to refer
applications back to the initial reviewing body for additional review and to
hear appeals to site plan reviews. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
   E.   Limited Moratorium: Through and including May 10, 2005, or until such
time as the village board completes action on proposed amendments to the
residential housing regulations in the zoning code, whichever comes first, no
single-family home shall be demolished nor shall construction of any such home
be commenced. This moratorium shall not affect any project whose completed
demolition or building permit application was submitted prior to January 24,
2005. (Ord. 3101, 3-14-2005)
10-5-2: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Initiation Of Application: All applications for minor and major
variations, and appeals shall be filed with the zoning administrator.
   B.   Determination Of Completeness: Within ten working days after receipt of
an application, the zoning administrator shall determine whether the
application is complete for purposes of initiating review.
      1.   If the zoning administrator determines that the application is
complete for the review process to continue he or she shall notify the
applicant in writing that the application has been accepted for filing.
      2.   If the zoning administrator determines that the application is not
complete, he or she shall send to the applicant a notice specifying the
deficiencies of the application, including any additional information which
must be supplied, and that no further action need be taken by the village on
the application until the deficiencies are corrected.
   C.   Time Limits On Processing: Applications requiring public hearing will
be processed within ten working days after the zoning administrator receives
and verifies that the application is complete and a public hearing will be
scheduled to occur within forty days after verification.
   D.   Concurrent Applications: Where a proposed use or development requires
more than one approval pursuant to this Zoning Title, approval of permitted and
special uses shall be a precondition to approval of variations and site plan
review. Applications for all such approvals may be filed at the same time and
processed together; however, no application shall be approved unless all
applications that are a precondition to its approval have first been approved.
   E.   Withdrawal and Refiling of Applications: An applicant may withdraw an
application at any time prior to the first public hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals without prejudicing the applicant's right to refile at a later
date.
   F.   Fees: Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the
applicable non-refundable fee, as established by the Board of Trustees from
time to time. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-5-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR MINOR AND MAJOR VARIATIONS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   A complete copy of the application shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for processing. The written application form, bound together with
supplementary exhibits shall contain at least the following information:
         a.   The name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
         b.   If the applicant is not the owner of the property in question: 1)
the name, address, and phone number of the owner, 2) the interest of the
applicant in the subject property, 3) proof of consent by the owner to the
filing of the application, and 4) any beneficiaries of the owner or developer.
         c.   The date of the application.
         d.   Identification of the property in question by street address. If
there is no street address, the applicant must provide a description of the
location of the property in relation to surrounding streets and properties.
         e.   A short, written description of the nature of the proposed
variation, development or redevelopment, and the proposed use(s).
         f.   A plat of survey of the property which includes the location and
dimensions of all existing or planned easements, land subject to covenant,
rights of way, scale and north arrow.
      2.   In addition, the applicant shall submit drawings which graphically
explain the site's present conditions and how they would be affected if the
proposed variance were granted. Information should include, but not be limited
to, the proposed structure's relation to the property line, nearby trees, and
other existing structures on both the applicant's and the neighbor's
properties. Information on the proposed structure's height, type of
construction and depth of eaves should be provided. All drawings should be
dimensioned and roughly to scale. A copy of the plat of survey with this
information noted on it would be sufficient.
   B.   Application Requirements for Major Variations: In addition to the
requirements identified in subsection A, the following additional information
shall also be provided on the drawings accompanying an application for a major
variation (ten copies of any and all material are required):
      1.   The height in stories and feet, gross floor area, lot coverage
(footprint area of the proposed structures in relation to the area of the site,
expressed as a percentage), and floor area ratio of all existing or proposed
buildings located on the lot where the development is to take place.
      2.   If the development is a multiple-family residential development, the
number of one-, two-, three-, or four-bedroom dwelling units proposed for
construction.
      3.   Dimensions of the development site, indicated along the property
line. Distances to all buildings, structures, and freestanding signs, on
adjoining properties.
      4.   The location, of freestanding signs on the site.
      5.   Identification of vehicular areas including parking areas, loading
areas, and circulation areas, and showing the layout and size of parking
spaces, aisles and direction of travel on or in lanes, aisles, or driveways.
      6.   Legal documentation establishing homeowners associations or other
legal entities responsible for control over required common areas and
facilities.
      7.   A list of the names and addresses of all those to whom notice of a
public hearing must be sent.
   C.   Application Requirements for Site Plan Review, Special Use Permits and
Planned Developments: Are set forth in Chapters
17,
18 and
19 of this Title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-5-4: VARIATIONS:
   A.   Minor and Major Variations: Two forms of variations to the requirements
of the Zoning Title may be considered:
      1.   Minor Variations: May be granted for insignificant departures from
the regulations of the Zoning Title, which would result in no discernible
affects on other properties and improvements in the vicinity of the subject
property.
      2.   Major Variations: May be granted for a departure from the
regulations of the Zoning Title that merit review in hearing and require
approval as stated in subsection E. A major variation may be granted only when
it is shown by the applicant that a minor variation or lesser form of relief
would not alleviate the alleged hardship.
   B.   Minor Variations Provisions:
      1.   Up to a five percent reduction in the front or rear yard required by
this Zoning Title, where the variation is the only variation required for the
structure or use.
      2.   The use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited solely
because of insufficient area or width of the lot or lots, if the respective
area or width of the lot or lots is not less than ninety five percent of the
required area and width. The percentage set forth in this subsection is not to
be reduced by any other percentage for minimum lot width, depth or area set
forth in this Zoning Title.
      3.   A reduction of the applicable off-street parking or loading
facilities required by not more than one parking space or loading space.
      4.   An increase of the maximum floor area of any use by not more than
two percent beyond the limitations of the applicable regulations.
      5.   An increase of the maximum building height by not more than five
percent beyond the limitations of the applicable regulations.
   C.   Major Variation Provisions:
      1.   Any reduction in the front, side or rear yard required by this
Zoning Title which is not dealt with in subsection B above.
      2.   A reduction of the applicable off-street parking or loading
facilities, where proposed use and other practical uses have been shown not to
necessitate the number of parking spaces required by this Zoning Title.
      3.   An increase in the maximum distance that required parking spaces are
permitted to be located from the use served.
      4.   The use of the same off-street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two or more uses, provided the substantial use of such
facility by each use does not take place at approximately the same hours of the
same days of the week.
      5.   An extension in the period of time that a nonconforming use may
continue or remain.
      6.   Any zoning requirements which are not covered under minor variations
in this Section.
   D.   Procedures for Minor Variations:
      1.   Upon acceptance of a completed application for a minor variation,
the Zoning Administrator shall cause a notice of the requested variance to be
sent to all owners of property within two hundred fifty feet of the subject
property. Such notice shall indicate the nature and location of the requested
minor variation and shall invite written comment regarding the merits or
potential impact of the variation to be given to the Zoning Administrator
within fifteen days of the date of the notice.
      2.   If, after fifteen days, the Zoning Administrator, after considering
the application and the written comments, if any, shall:
         a.   Make a finding that the requested minor variation does not pose a
threat to health, safety, welfare or enjoyment on the subject site or on other
property within the Village, and is appropriate to the reasonable use of the
property and surrounding properties; and shall issue the minor variation as
requested.
         b.   Make a finding that the requested minor variation poses a threat
to health, safety, welfare or reasonable enjoyment on the subject site or on
the property within the Village, or is not appropriate to the reasonable use of
the property or surrounding properties; and shall deny the minor variation as
requested.
      3.   If the Zoning Administrator denies a minor variation, the applicant
may appeal such decision as set forth in Section
10-5-6 of this Chapter.
   E.   Procedures for Major Variations:
      1.   Upon acceptance of a completed application for a major variation,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing thereon at such time
and place in the Village as it shall determine. Notice of such public hearing,
indicating the requested variance, shall be published at least fifteen days and
not more than thirty days in advance of such hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village. Said notice shall be sent to all owners of property
within two hundred fifty feet of the subject property.
      2.   No major variation shall be made by the Board of Trustees without a
hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals, nor without a written report or
recommendation thereof having been made by the Zoning Board of Appeals to the
Board of Trustees, and every such report shall be accompanied by findings of
facts specifying the reasons for the recommendation.
      3.   Upon the recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Board of
Trustees, without further public hearing, may adopt or deny any major variation
or may refer the report back to the Zoning Board of Appeals for further
consideration. Any such variation which fails to receive the approval of four
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be passed except by the
favorable vote of two-thirds of the Board of Trustees. In making any such
variation, the Board of Trustees shall be governed by the same considerations,
restrictions and standards as apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      4.   Advance written notice of the first meeting of the Village Board
where a major variation application will be considered shall be provided by
regular mail to the owners of record of the property which is the subject of
the application (if different from the applicant), and the owners of all
property within two hundred fifty feet of the subject property, not less than
seven days prior to the date of the first Village Board meeting. This
requirement is enacted to assure the most complete public notice possible for
the proposed major variation, it is not required by State law. Accordingly, any
failure to comply with this subsection shall not invalidate, impair or
otherwise affect any major variation subsequently granted following such
meeting.
   F.   Standards for Major Variations: A major variation shall be recommended
by the Zoning Board of Appeals only if it makes findings, based upon the
evidence presented to it, that each of the following standards has been met:
      1.   The physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the
specific property involved will bring a specific hardship upon the owner as
distinguished from an inconvenience if the strict letter of the regulations
were to be carried out;
      2.   The aforesaid unique physical condition did not result from any
action of any person having an interest in the property, but was created by
natural forces or was the result of governmental action, other than the
adoption of this Zoning Title, for which no compensation was paid;
      3.   The conditions upon which the petition for variation is based may
not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification;
      4.   The purpose of the variation is not based predominantly upon a
desire for economic gain;
      5.   The granting of the variation shall not be detrimental to the public
welfare or unduly injurious to the enjoyment, use, or development value of
other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is
located; or,
      6.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of fire, or
otherwise endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood;
      7.   That the granting of the variation would not unduly tax public
utilities and facilities in the area;
      8.   That there is no means other than the requested variation by which
the alleged hardship or difficulty can be avoided or remedied to a degree
sufficient to permit a reasonable use of the subject property.
   G.   Conditions on Variations: The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose
specific conditions, which relate to the purposes and objectives of this Zoning
Title, upon the premises benefitted by a variation. Such conditions shall be
expressly set forth in the ordinance granting the variation. Violation of any
such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this Zoning Title and
shall constitute grounds for revocation of the variation.
   H.   A Variation is Not a Zoning Amendment: Nothing herein contained shall
be construed to give or grant to the Zoning Board of Appeals the power or
authority to alter or change the Zoning Title, such power and authority being
reserved to the Board of Trustees; however, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
make recommendations to the Board of Trustees with respect to any alteration or
change of this Zoning Title in such specific cases as may properly come before
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   I.   Status of Variation Granted: Subject to an extension of time not to
exceed sixty days granted by the Village Administrator, no order of the Board
of Trustees permitting a variation from the provisions of this Zoning Title
shall be valid for a period longer than nine months, unless such use or
structure is initiated within such period; provided, however, that where such
use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such
order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for erection or
alteration is obtained within such period of nine months and such erection or
alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms
of such permit.
      1.   A variation shall be deemed to authorize only the particular
construction or development which was applied for. A variation shall
automatically become null and void if such construction or development is
removed and not replaced within nine months following such removal.
   J.   Filing Fees: There shall be charged a filing fee, as may be adjusted
from time to time by the Village Board, for each application for a change of
any property from one use district to another use district or for each
application for allowance of variation from the provisions of this Zoning Title
as applicable to any property. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-5-5: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Board of Trustees may Amend: This Zoning Title may be amended from time
to time by the Board of Trustees, however, no amendment changing the
regulations imposed or the districts created or the zoning classifications of
properties shall be made without a public hearing.
   B.   Hearing Procedures:
      1.   The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby designated to hold and conduct
all public hearings on amendments to this Zoning Title changing the regulations
it imposes or the districts it creates. Such proposed amendments may be
initiated by the Board of Trustees, by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by the
Plan Commission. Any one or more owners of real estate in the Village may also
initiate an amendment by a written petition which is signed by such owner or
owners, and which specifies the amendment so petitioned for.
      2.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, in the case of such proposed
amendment, hold a public hearing thereon at such time and place in the Village
as it shall determine. Notice of such public hearing, indicating the amendments
proposed to be made in regulations or in the district boundary lines and the
time and place of such hearings, shall be published at least fifteen days and
not more than thirty days in advance of such hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village. All interested persons shall be given an
opportunity to present evidence and be heard at such hearing on the subject of
the proposed amendment. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time. Within
a reasonable time after the final adjournment of such public hearing, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall report thereon in writing to the Board of
Trustees, giving its findings of fact and its conclusions and recommendations
with respect to the proposed amendment.
   C.   Two-Thirds Vote Required If Protest Filed: If a written protest against
any such proposed amendment, which is signed by the owners of twenty percent of
the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent of the
frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners
of twenty percent of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be
altered, is filed with the zoning administrator before the adoption of such
amendment, the proposed amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable
vote of two- thirds of trustees then holding office.
   D.   Amendments To Planned Developments: Any modifications to an approved
planned development permit or any addition to or expansion of an existing
planned development permit shall require review and approval by the development
review board under the provisions of section
10-19-8 of this zoning title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-5-6: APPEALS:
   A.   Zoning Board Of Appeals, Jurisdiction: The zoning board of appeals
shall hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the zoning administrator. The zoning board of appeals may
reverse or affirm or may amend the determination made by the zoning
administrator which is being appealed, to the extent the zoning board of
appeals deems appropriate.
   B.   Initiation Of Appeal: An appeal may be taken to the zoning board of
appeals within forty five days of the action complained of by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department or board of the village affected by a
decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within such
time as shall be prescribed by the zoning board of appeals by general rule, by
filing with the zoning administrator and with the zoning board of appeals a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. Zoning administrator
shall transmit to the zoning board of appeals all of the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   C.   Votes Necessary: The concurring vote of four members of the zoning
board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of the zoning administrator or to decide in favor of the
applicant any matter upon which it is authorized by this zoning title to render
decisions or to recommend any variation to the village board.
   D.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator
certifies to the zoning board of appeals, after the notice of appeal has been
filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would,
in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event, the
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which
may be granted by the zoning board of appeals or by a court of record on
application, on notice to the zoning administrator and on due cause shown.
   E.   Notice And Hearings: The zoning board of appeals shall select a
reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal, give due notice to the
parties and shall decide the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may
appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent
or attorney. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-5-7: NONCONFORMITIES:
   A.   Nonconforming Buildings And Structures:
      1.   Continued Use Of Nonconforming Buildings: The lawful use of a
building existing at the time of the effective date hereof may be continued,
except as provided in subsection C of this section, although such use does not
conform with the provisions hereof. This provision shall also apply to
nonconforming uses in districts hereafter changed.
      2.   Restoration Of Buildings Damaged By Fire, Explosion Or Act Of God:
No building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public
enemy, to the extent of fifty percent or more of its value at the time of the
damage shall be restored except in conformity with the regulations in this
zoning title. However, said building may be restored or constructed to its
original height prior to said occurrence. The burden of proving what the height
of a building was prior to the damage rests solely on the person invoking this
provision.
      3.   Use Of Buildings Or Premises Discontinued Or Suspended: In the event
that a nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued or
suspended for a period of one year or more, the use of the same shall
thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
(Ord. 3105, 3-28-2005)
   B.   Enlargements And Alterations To Nonconforming Uses And Buildings: A
nonconforming use or building shall not be enlarged or altered; however, in an
R1 and R2 district, an enlargement or alteration may be permitted by the zoning
administrator, provided the actual extension or enlargement itself conforms to
all the provisions of this zoning title (in the event the existing building is
nonconforming, the maximum allowable height shall be the existing height of the
building or the R1 and R2 district height limitation, whichever is greater).
The replacement in kind of a porch, addition, or any other appurtenances to the
main building which is nonconforming, shall be permitted provided it does not
increase the nonconformance of the building. The replacement of an accessory
building shall conform to all the provisions of this zoning title. (Ord. 2733,
8-11-1997)
   C.   Removal Or Conversion Of Nonconforming Buildings: Except as provided in
chapter 20 of this zoning title, all nonconforming commercial or industrial
buildings or uses within any district shall be removed or converted, and the
building thereafter devoted to a use permitted in the district, on or before
May 6, 2002.
   D.   Validation Of Former Nonconforming Uses: No nonconforming structure
that was erected, converted or structurally altered in violation of the
provisions of any prior zoning title shall be validated by the adoption of the
regulations contained in this zoning title, and such violations or any
violation of this zoning title may be ordered removed or corrected by the
proper officials at any time. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
CHAPTER 6
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Establishment of Districts
10-6-2: Zoning District Boundaries, Map
10-6-3: Interpretation of District Boundaries
10-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of businesses and
industries, and the location of buildings designed for specified uses; to
regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or
altered; to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to
regulate and determine the area of yards, courts and other open spaces within
and surrounding such buildings, the village is hereby divided into nine classes
of districts. The use, height and area regulations shall be uniform in each
class of districts, and said districts shall be:
   C1 Commercial District
   C2 Commercial District
   C3 Central Commercial District
   ORIC Office/Research/Industrial/Commercial District
   PRI Public, Recreational and Institutional District
   R1 Wide Lot Single-Family Residential District
   R2 Single-Family (Detached) Residential District
   R3 Single-Family (Attached) Residential District
   R4 Multi-Family Residential District
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-6-2: ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES, MAP:
   A.   The boundaries of the districts mentioned in Section
10-6-1 are shown upon a map hereby made a part of this Zoning Title, which map
is designated as the "Zoning District Map". The Zoning District Map and all the
notations, references and other matters shown thereon shall be as much a part
of this Zoning Title and have the same force and effect as if the notations,
references and other information set forth thereon where all fully set forth or
described herein, which Zoning District Map is properly attested, and is on
file in the office of the Village Administrator. To the extent that the Zoning
District Map conflicts with the text contained in this Zoning Code, however,
the text shall prevail.
   B.   The boundaries of the River Forest Historic District have been overlaid
on the Zoning District Map solely to recognize the significance the District
holds for the Village and is for informational purposes only. There are no
regulations in this Title which exclusively affect those properties located
within the Historic District boundaries. The significance of the River Forest
Historic District (entered in the National Register of Historic Places on
August 26, 1977) lies primarily in the Village’s architecture, especially in
those buildings embodying the revolutions in design developed in the late
Nineteenth and early Twentieth Centuries by Frank Lloyd Wright and his
contemporaries.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2390.png]
 
10-6-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the Zoning District Map, as hereinabove described, the
following rules shall apply:
   A.   The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise
shown, and when the designations on the said Zoning District Map indicate that
the various districts are approximately bounded by street or alley lines, said
street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
   B.   Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where the
property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be lot lines, and where the
designations on the Zoning District Map indicate that the various districts are
approximately bounded by lot lines, said lot lines shall be construed to be the
boundaries of such district, unless said boundaries are otherwise indicated on
the Zoning District Map.
   C.   Where the district boundaries are not shown by streets or alleys, or
lot or block lines, the district boundaries shall be determined solely by the
dimensions shown on the Zoning District Map.
   D.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make the final determination on any
question of district boundaries. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
CHAPTER 7
REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
SECTION:
10-7-1: Reserved for Landscaping and Buffer Regulations
10-7-2: Reserved for Sign Regulations
10-7-3: Reserved for Lighting Regulations
10-7-4: Off-Street Parking Dimension Regulations
10-7-5: Cannabis Business Establishments
10-7-6: Solar Energy Collection Systems Standards
10-7-7:    Electric Vehicle Charging Station Standards
10-7-1: RESERVED FOR LANDSCAPING AND BUFFER REGULATIONS:
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-7-2: RESERVED FOR SIGN REGULATIONS:
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-7-3: RESERVED FOR LIGHTING REGULATIONS:
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-7-4: OFF-STREET PARKING DIMENSION REGULATIONS:
   A.   All parking spaces and aisles shall have the minimum dimensions, as set
forth in Table 10-7-4.1 and Figure 10-7-4.2, set out at the end of this
Section, provided that the maximum number of spaces designed for compact cars
shall not exceed ten percent of the total number of required spaces, except
that in an enclosed parking facility the maximum number of compact car spaces
shall not exceed twenty percent of the total number of required spaces.
   Table 10-7-4.1. Parking Dimensions
Parking Angle And Projected Vehicle  Stall Widths  Aisle Widths  Module Widths
Length
Parking Angle And    Stall          Aisle    Module Widths
Projected Vehicle    Widths         Widths
Length
    Sw  WP        AW      Wl     W2 W3     W4
                                            (VPw+AW) (AW+2VPw) (VPw+VPl+AW) (AW+2VPl)
                Large-Car Design Vehicle (77" by 215")                  
90°VPw =  18.42'   8.5' 8.5'     25'     43.42'   61.84'    61.84'       61.84'
   VPl =  18.42'                                                    
75°VPw =  19.45'   8.5' 8.8'     20.25'  39.7'    59.15'    58.32'       57.49'
   VPl =  18.62'                                                    
60°VPw =  19.16'   8.5' 9.82'    16'     35.16'   54.32'    52.71'       51.1'
   VPl =  17.55'                                                    
45°VPw =  17.21'   8.5' 12.02'   13.5'   30.71'   47.92'    45.65'       43.38'
   VPl =  14.94'                                                    
                 Compact-Car Design Vehicle (66° by 175°)              
90°VPw =  15.08'   7.5' 7.5'     22.27'  37.35'   52.43'    52.43'       52.43'
   VPl =  15.08'                                                    
75°VPw =  15.99'   7.5' 7.76'    20.14'  36.13'   52.12'    51.41'       50.7'
   VPl =  15.28'                                                    
60°VPw =  15.38'   7.5' 8.66'    13.9'   29.28'   44.66'    43.28'       41.9'
   VPl =  14.00'                                                    
45°VPw =  14.20'   7.5' 10.61'   10'     24.2'    38.4'     36.46'       34.52'
   VPl =  12.26'                                                    
 
Figure 10-7-4.2. Definitions of Terms
                                                                                                           
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2392.png]
 
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-7-5: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Cannabis Consumption Prohibited: Consumption of cannabis, in any form,
is prohibited on the premises of cannabis business establishments.
   B.   Compliance Required:
      1.   Cannabis business establishments, their "principal officers," as
defined and referred to in the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410
ILCS 705/1, et seq.), as amended, and the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1, et seq.), as amended, their agents and
their employees shall strictly comply with all laws, regulations, ordinances
and directives of the state and the village, including, but not limited to,
licensing requirements, registration requirements, operations requirements,
zoning approvals, special use conditions and zoning requirements, including lot
size, building height, lot coverage, setbacks, stormwater management, public
utilities and parking.
      2.   No cannabis business establishment may operate in the village
without first receiving all the approvals required for the operation of the
cannabis business establishment, including, but not limited to, from the
village, the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation and
the Illinois Department of Agriculture. Proof of receipt of all required
approvals must be provided to the village administrator prior to operation of a
cannabis business establishment.
   C.   Distance Requirements: Cannabis business establishments shall comply
wit all distance requirements, both in state law and the following:
      1.   A medical cannabis dispensary and a recreational cannabis dispensary
shall not be located within one hundred feet of a pre-existing public or
private preschool, elementary or secondary school, child daycare center, park
or church, measured from lot line to lot line.
      2.   A recreational cannabis dispensary shall not be located within one
thousand five hundred feet of a pre-existing medical cannabis dispensary or
recreational cannabis dispensary, measured from lot line to lot line.
      3.   A medical cannabis cultivation center shall not be located within
two thousand five hundred feet of a pre-existing public or private preschool,
elementary or secondary school, child day care center, day care home, group day
care home, part day child care facility, park, church or an area zoned for
residential use, measured from lot line to lot line.
   D.   Hours Of Business: Unless different hours of business are included in a
special use permit or planned development for a cannabis business
establishment, a cannabis business establishment may only be operated between
the hours of ten o'clock A.M. and seven o'clock P.M.
   E.   Required Reports: A cannabis business establishment shall provide the
village administrator with any notices of violation, orders and correspondence
related to alleged or proven violations by the cannabis business establishment,
its principal officers, its agents or its employees sent by the Illinois
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation or the Illinois Department
of Agriculture. A cannabis business establishment shall provide the village
administrator with the materials within two business days of the cannabis
business establishment's receipt of the materials. (Ord. 3788, 12-9-2019)
10-7-6: SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS STANDARDS:
   A.   Ground Mounted Solar Energy Collection System:
      1.   Ground mounted solar energy collection systems shall be permitted in
the rear yard only.
      2.   The maximum height of ground mounted solar energy collection systems
shall be five feet in height, measured from the grade at the base of the
support structure to the highest edge of the system.
      3.   Minimum clearance between the lowest point of the system and the
surface on which the system is mounted is twelve inches.
      4.   All parts of the freestanding system shall be set back ten feet from
the side and rear lot lines and shall not be located in a public utility
easement.
      5.   Any necessary battery, battery storage, or generator equipment
accessory to the ground mounted solar energy collection system and its standard
operation shall be permitted subject to meeting all applicable standards of
Village of River Forest's codes and ordinances.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2903.png]
 
   B.   Roof Mounted Solar Energy Collection System:
      1.   Roof mounted solar energy collection systems may be located on any
roof face of principal or accessory buildings. Systems should be flush mounted
when possible.
      2.   Systems on residential structures shall not extend beyond twelve
inches parallel to the roof surface of a pitched roof or flat roof.
      3.    Systems on nonresidential structures shall not extend beyond
thirty-six inches parallel to the roof surface of a pitched roof or flat roof.
      4.    Systems on all structures shall not extend above the highest peak
of a pitched roof. Height is measured from the roof surface on which the system
is mounted to the highest edge of the system.
      5.   All materials used for racking, mounts, mounting clamps, and
flashings shall be of a color consistent with the color of the roof surface to
minimize visibility.
   C.   Any necessary battery, battery storage, or generator equipment
accessory to the roof mounted solar energy collection system and its standard
operation shall be permitted subject to meeting all applicable standards of
Village of River Forest's codes and ordinances.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2901.png]
 
(Ord. 3870, 9-12-2022)
10-7-7: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Parking:
      1.   In all zoning districts, electric vehicle charging stations,
associated equipment, and make-ready parking spaces may be counted toward
satisfying minimum off-street parking space requirements.
      2.   Any off-street parking spaces designated for electric vehicle
charging shall comply with all relevant regulations as established in Section
10-7-4.
   B.   Electric Vehicle Charging in the Public Right of Way:
      1.   Electric vehicle charging stations and associated charging
infrastructure and supply equipment may only be installed in the Public Right
of Way along the parkway or sidewalk immediately adjacent to striped on-street
parking spaces located in districts C1, C2, C3, or ORIC as to not interfere
with the lanes of traffic.
      2.   The installation of any electric vehicle charging stations and
associated charging infrastructure and supply equipment shall comply with all
relevant regulations as established in Chapter
5-14.
      3.   The electric charging station and associated supply equipment may
not block the public right-of-way for pedestrians where minimal unobstructed
walkable sidewalks exist or be located in a place that obstructs or interferes
with a driver’s view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic in and
around the right-of-way.
      4.   Any electric vehicle utilizing an electric vehicle charging station
within the public right of way shall comply with all relevant parking
regulations established in Chapters 9-2 and 9-3.
   C.   Appearance:
      1.   In districts R1, R2, R3, and R4, electric charging stations and
associated supply equipment shall, whenever possible, be located so as not to
be visible from any public ways.
      2.   Electric vehicle charging stations shall be protected by bollards,
structures, or non-mountable curbs if located directly in a publicly accessible
parking lot.
      3.   Electric vehicle supply equipment shall be mounted or include
retractable cords so as to not impede pedestrian travel or create a trip
hazard.
      4.   Adequate lighting shall be provided to any electric vehicle charging
station which is publicly accessible during nighttime hours.
      5.   Any signage appearing on electric vehicle charging stations and
electric vehicle supply equipment shall comply with all relevant regulations as
established in
Chapter 4-5.
      6.   The installation of any electric vehicle charging stations and
associated supply equipment shall consider design elements that can be
integrated into the architectural concept. Whenever possible, electric vehicle
charging stations and associated supply equipment materials shall be compatible
with buildings, their scale shall fit the style of the host site, colors shall
be in harmony with buildings, and surroundings shall be attractive and
consistent with the surrounding area’s aesthetic values. Standards and criteria
should be considered guidelines, and flexibility should be allowed when
alternatives can better achieve objectives.
      D.   The installation of electric vehicle charging stations and
associated charging infrastructure and supply equipment and the standard
operation thereof shall be permitted subject to meeting all applicable
standards of Village of River Forest’s codes and ordinances.
(Ord. 3943, 10-28-2024)
CHAPTER 8
R1 WIDE LOT SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8-1: Permitted Uses
10-8-2: Special Uses
10-8-3: Units Per Acre
10-8-4: Lot Area And Size
10-8-5: Lot Coverage And Floor Area Ratio
10-8-6: Height Regulations
10-8-7: Setback Regulations
10-8-8: Off Street Parking
10-8-1: PERMITTED USES:
In an R1 district, no building or use shall be permitted, except for the
following:
Accessory building(s) or structures including one private detached garage.
Child daycare homes.
"Home occupations" as defined in this zoning title.
Planned developments, in accordance with
chapter 19 of this title.
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-8-2: SPECIAL USES:
In an R1 district, special uses may be allowed by the zoning board of appeals
in accordance with
 chapter 18 of this title, as follows:
Group homes.
Public utility services.
Special uses for this district as indicated on the land use chart in
chapter 21 of this title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-8-3: UNITS PER ACRE:
In an R1 district, no more than two and eight-tenths residential units per acre
may be erected. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-8-4: LOT AREA AND SIZE:
In an R1 district, no building may be erected or altered on a lot recorded
after the effective date hereof which is less than fifteen thousand five
hundred square feet in area and eighty five feet wide throughout its depth;
provided, however, that the limitation as to lot area and lot width imposed by
this section shall not prohibit the erection of a single-family detached
dwelling on a lot shown as such on a recorded plat in the recorder's office of
Cook County, Illinois, on November 26, 1967, and containing an area of not less
than eight thousand seven hundred twelve square feet, and having a width of not
less than fifty feet; and provided further, that the setback regulations herein
are complied with. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-8-5: LOT COVERAGE AND FLOOR AREA RATIO:
In the R1 district, no building with its accessory buildings or structures
shall occupy (cover) more than thirty percent of a lot and the maximum floor
area ratio shall not exceed 0.4 for lots less than twenty thousand square feet
in area and 0.35 for lots twenty thousand square feet or greater (the resulting
maximum gross floor area for lots twenty thousand square feet or greater shall
not be less than eight thousand square feet). An accessory building may occupy
not more than thirty percent of a rear yard. (Ord. 3235, 4-28-2008)
10-8-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In the R1 district, a building erected or structurally altered after the
effective date hereof shall not exceed thirty five feet in height and shall not
exceed two and one-half stories for a lot with a width less than one hundred
feet. A building erected or structurally altered after the effective date
hereof shall not exceed forty feet in height and shall not exceed two and one-
half stories for a lot with a width of one hundred feet or greater.
   A.   Accessory Buildings: An accessory building or structure erected or
structurally altered shall not exceed eighteen feet in height or one and one-
half stories, whichever is less, and an accessory building shall not include an
inhabitable second floor.
   B.   Exceptions: Any building or accessory building erected or structurally
altered prior to the effective date hereof which is damaged by fire, explosion
or act of God may be restored or reconstructed to its height prior to said
occurrence. The burden of proving what the height of a building was prior to
the damage rests solely on the person invoking this provision. (Ord. 3105, 3-
28-2005)
10-8-7: SETBACK REGULATIONS:
In an R1 district, buildings shall be set back from every lot line to provide
an open yard in accordance with the following regulations. Every yard shall be
unobstructed from ground level to sky except as allowed in subsection
10-20-2A of this title.
   A.   Front Yard: The required front yard setback shall be calculated as the
average of the existing front yard setbacks as measured from the front lot line
to the principal structure along the same side of the street and on the same
block. The shortest and longest setbacks along the same side of the same block
shall be eliminated in the making of the computation.
      1.   Through Lots: Shall provide the required front yard on both streets.
      2.   Corner Lots: Shall have its required front yard on the lot's primary
street; such street being the street which has the greatest distance between
the two cross streets forming the block frontage. On the secondary street the
front yard shall be a minimum of thirteen feet for a fifty foot wide lot,
however the secondary street's front yard shall be increased by two feet for
each five foot increase in lot width (or portion thereof) to a maximum
secondary front yard depth of twenty five feet, and provided further that no
accessory building on a corner lot shall project beyond that front yard line
established for each street.
      3.   Front Porches: All front porches built or modified after the
effective date of this section shall comply with the following standards:
         a.   Maximum Encroachment Into Setbacks: A front porch shall not
extend into a front yard more than eleven feet for a building having a front
yard deeper than fifty feet. Where the front yard is fifty feet or less in
depth, such front porch shall not extend into the front yard more than ten feet
or twenty percent of the depth of the front yard, whichever is less.
         b.   Size Of Porch: A front porch that encroaches into a front yard
shall have a minimum surface deck area of fifty square feet. The total area of
any encroachment of the porch into a front yard shall not exceed three hundred
square feet. In the case of a porch intended to wrap around to the side of a
residence (including a porch that would encroach into the required setback of a
secondary front yard), the side portion of the porch shall not exceed one
hundred twenty five square feet and shall conform to all other requirements of
this section.
         c.   Depth Of Porch: The minimum depth of the porch shall not be less
than five feet and the maximum depth of the porch shall not exceed twelve and
one-half feet.
         d.   Enclosure Prohibited: Other than by a roof, the front porch shall
be open and shall not be enclosed by any materials, including, without
limitation, glass or screens.
         e.   Railings: A railing not exceeding forty two inches in height
measured from the floor of the porch may be provided on the periphery of the
front porch.
         f.   Noninhabitable Space: A front porch shall not have any deck,
flooring, or inhabitable space above the first floor level.
         g.   Modification Of Existing Porches: An existing front porch that
encroaches into a front yard or a secondary front yard may be modified in
compliance with the standards in this section.
         h.   Previously Enclosed Porches: Dwelling units with existing porches
that have previously been enclosed and which encroach into a front yard or a
secondary front yard shall not be eligible for porches permitted by this
subsection.
         i.   Front Porch Shall Not Affect The Average Allowable Setback: Front
porches shall not be included in calculating the average front yard setback.
   B.   Rear Yard: A rear yard shall have a depth of not less than fifteen
percent of the depth of the lot or twenty six feet two inches, whichever is
greater. Provided, however, that accessory buildings may be constructed within
the rear yard but no closer than three feet from any lot line.
   C.   Side Yards:
      1.   Requirements: The required minimum side yard setback shall be ten
percent of the lot width or five feet, whichever is greater, and the minimum
required combined side yard setback shall be twenty five percent of the lot
width, or ten feet, whichever is greater as measured to the exterior wall of
the structure. (Ord. 3460, 10-8-2012)
      2.   Exceptions:
         a.   Eaves: The eaves of a structure shall be required to maintain a
minimum three foot side yard setback. The eave of an addition, where the eave
of the existing structure does not meet this standard, may be constructed with
a side yard equal to the existing nonconforming side yard of that eave. (Ord.
3743, 4-22-2019)
         b.   Additions: An addition to an existing structure that does not
meet this standard must maintain either a three foot side yard or a side yard
that is the same width as the current side yard, whichever is wider. A
nonconforming wall built along a nonconforming side yard may be extended an
additional twenty feet as of right into the nonconforming side yard, and the
height of a wall that maintains a nonconforming side yard setback may not be
increased.
         c.   Accessory Structures: An accessory structure may be constructed
with a side yard of no less than three feet, provided that the entire accessory
structure is within the rear thirty percent of the subject lot (as measured
from the front property line to the rear property line). The eaves of a
detached accessory structure shall be permitted to encroach a maximum of one
foot into a required yard setback.
         d.   Standards: The standards set forth in this section shall be
applied separately to each side yard of an existing or proposed structure or
addition.
   D.   Attached Front Garage Projection: Attached front garages can project a
maximum of twelve feet in front of the primary front plane elevation (as
illustrated below) on lots with a width of sixty feet or less.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2394.png]
 
(Ord. 3460, 10-8-2012)
10-8-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
In an R1 District, no building may be erected unless there shall be provided
two enclosed parking spaces for passenger automobiles which are not in any of
the required open yards unless such enclosure is a detached garage, which may
occupy no more than thirty percent of the rear yard.
   A.   Driveways: All driveways and places where vehicles stand shall be paved
with concrete, asphalt or paving bricks.
   B.   Other Vehicles: No outdoor parking or storage of a recreational
vehicle, boat or any trailer is permitted in a front or side yard, however, a
recreational vehicle or boat may be parked in a paved portion of a rear yard
provided such area is a minimum of five feet from the rear and side lot lines
and twenty feet from the rear of the primary building, provided further, that
no such vehicle(s) shall be visible from the street.
      1.   A recreational vehicle may not be parked on a driveway between the
hours of one o'clock A.M. and six o'clock A.M. and then only for the remaining
nineteen hours of one day, for the purpose of loading and unloading the
vehicle.
      2.   At no time shall a parked or stored recreational vehicle, boat or
trailer be occupied or used for habitation.
      3.   Any recreational vehicle, boat or any trailer which is parked in the
rear yard of a corner lot shall be screened so as not to be visible from the
street.
      4.   No truck or commercial vehicle shall be parked on a lot except in an
enclosed garage, unless temporarily parked for the purpose of a delivery or
service. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
CHAPTER 9
R2 SINGLE-FAMILY (DETACHED) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-9-1: Permitted Uses
10-9-2: Special Uses
10-9-3: Units Per Acre
10-9-4: Lot Area And Size
10-9-5: Lot Coverage And Floor Area Ratio
10-9-6: Height Regulations
10-9-7: Setback Regulations
10-9-8: Off Street Parking
10-9-1: PERMITTED USES:
In an R2 district, no building or use shall be permitted, except for the
following:
   A.   Any use permitted in the R1 district.
   B.   Accessory building(s) or structures permitted in the R1 district. (Ord.
2640, 5-23-1995)
10-9-2: SPECIAL USES:
In an R2 district, special uses may be allowed by the zoning board of appeals
in accordance with chapter 18 of this title, as follows:
   A.   Any special use permitted in the R1 district. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-9-3: UNITS PER ACRE:
In an R2 district, no more than five residential units per acre may be erected.
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-9-4: LOT AREA AND SIZE:
In an R2 district, no building may be erected or altered on a lot which does
not comply with the following regulations:
   A.   Lot Area: Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the
minimum lot area shall be eight thousand seven hundred twelve square feet.
   B.   Lot Width: Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the
minimum lot width shall be no less than the average width of all lots of record
zoned R2 which are within the same block, consisting of both sides of the
street and measured by the closest intersecting street on each side; provided,
however, that each said resulting lot shall have a width of not less than fifty
feet and no lot shall be required to be greater than seventy feet in width, and
that corner houses shall be deemed to front on their respective north/south
streets.
   C.   Exception To Lot Area And Lot Width Requirements: The limitations set
forth in subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to or prohibit the
restoration, reconstruction, or replacement of an existing single-family
detached dwelling or an existing accessory structure on a single lot or lot of
record which does not comply with the lot area or lot width requirements in
subsections A and B of this section. Where an unimproved lot meets the fifty
foot lot width minimum and required lot area, that lot shall be considered
buildable, provided recognizing said lot as buildable does not create a
nonconforming condition on an adjacent lot. Additionally, there shall be no
limit on the length of time a vacant lot or lot of record can remain vacant and
still be considered buildable, if the vacant lot is the result of the
demolition of an existing dwelling. The burden of proving that a dwelling
existed on the nonconforming lot rests solely on the person invoking this
provision. The exceptions stated in this subsection shall not be construed so
as to apply to any other regulations stated elsewhere in this code. (Ord. 3122,
8-8-2005)
10-9-5: LOT COVERAGE AND FLOOR AREA RATIO:
Lot coverage and floor area ratio regulations of the R1 district contained in
section
 10-8-5 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-9-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The height regulations of the R1 district contained in section
10-8-6 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-9-7: SETBACK REGULATIONS:
The setback regulations of the R1 district contained in section
10-8-7 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-9-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
The off street parking regulations of the R1 district contained in section
10-8-8 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
CHAPTER 10
R3 SINGLE-FAMILY (ATTACHED) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-10-1: Permitted Uses
10-10-2: Special Uses
10-10-3: Minimum Land Area
10-10-4: Lot Area And Size
10-10-5: Lot Coverage And Floor Area Ratio
10-10-6: Height Regulations
10-10-7: Setback Regulations
10-10-8: Off Street Parking
10-10-1: PERMITTED USES:
In an R3 district, no building or use shall be permitted, except for the
following:
   A.   Single-family attached dwellings.
   B.   Single-family detached dwellings.
   C.   Private garage(s) required for the building(s).
   D.   Accessory structures or buildings to service the primary building(s).
   E.   "Home occupations" as defined in this zoning title.
   F.   Planned developments, in accordance with chapter 19 of this zoning
title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-10-2: SPECIAL USES:
In an R3 district, special uses may be allowed by the zoning board of appeals
in accordance with
chapter 18 of this title, as follows:
   A.   Special uses for this district as indicated on the land use chart in
chapter 21 of this title.
   B.   Public utility services. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-10-3: MINIMUM LAND AREA:
In an R3 district, no less than two thousand eight hundred square feet of land
area shall be provided for every residential unit. (Ord. 2941, 10-22-2001)
10-10-4: LOT AREA AND SIZE:
In an R3 district, no building may be erected or altered to achieve the
permitted density of this district on a lot recorded after the effective date
hereof which is less than seventeen thousand four hundred twenty four square
feet and one hundred feet wide throughout its depth. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-10-5: LOT COVERAGE AND FLOOR AREA RATIO:
In an R3 district, no building with its accessory buildings or structures shall
occupy (cover) more than forty percent of an interior lot and fifty percent of
a corner lot and the maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.8, provided
that:
   A.   The gross living area for each dwelling is not less than two thousand
square feet.
   B.   Each dwelling shall have at least two bedrooms.
   C.   An accessory building may occupy not more than thirty percent of a
required rear yard. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-10-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In an R3 district, no building shall be erected or structurally altered to
exceed thirty feet or be more than three floors in height. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-
1995)
10-10-7: SETBACK REGULATIONS:
In an R3 district, buildings shall be set back from every lot line to provide
an open yard in accordance with the following regulations. Every yard shall be
unobstructed from ground level to sky, except as allowed in subsection
10-20-2A of this zoning title.
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard shall have a depth of not less than forty feet
except where such front yard faces an R1 or R2 district, then the front yard
regulations of the R1 district shall apply.
      1.   Through Lots: Shall provide the required front yard on both streets.
      2.   Corner Lots: Shall have a minimum front yard depth of twenty five
feet on the secondary street.
      3.   Corner Lot Abutting Rear Lot Line: If the rear lot line of a corner
lot abuts a rear lot line in the R1 district, the front yard along the common
secondary street shall be at least equal to the depth of the front yard of the
adjoining R1 lot's building.
   B.   Rear Yard: A rear yard shall have a depth of not less than fifteen
percent of the depth of the lot or twenty six feet, two inches, whichever is
greater. The area of the rear yard, shall not be any less than fifteen percent
of the area of the lot.
   C.   Side Yards: Side yards having a width not less than three feet on each
side of all buildings shall be provided. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-10-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
In an R3 district, no building may be erected or structurally altered unless
there shall be provided on the same lot, off street parking as follows:
   A.   Two enclosed parking spaces for passenger automobiles for each dwelling
unit which are not in any of the required open yards unless such enclosure is a
detached garage, which may occupy no more than forty percent of the rear yard.
   B.   For each dwelling unit, one guest parking space shall be provided which
may be on the dwelling unit's private driveway.
   C.   All driveways and places where vehicles stand shall be paved with
concrete, asphalt or paving bricks.
   D.   No outdoor parking or storage of recreational vehicles, trucks, boats
or trailers is permitted. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
CHAPTER 11
R4 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-11-1: Permitted Uses
10-11-2: Special Uses
10-11-3: Minimum Land Area
10-11-4: Lot Area And Size
10-11-5: Lot Coverage And Floor Area Ratio
10-11-6: Height Regulations
10-11-7: Setback Regulations
10-11-8: Off Street Parking
10-11-9: Off Street Loading
10-11-1: PERMITTED USES:
In an R4 district, no building or use shall be permitted, except for the
following:
   A.   Multi-family dwellings.
   B.   Any residential use permitted in the R3 district.
   C.   Private garages required for the building(s).
   D.   Accessory structures or buildings to service the primary building(s).
   E.   Planned developments, in accordance with chapter 19 of this zoning
title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-11-2: SPECIAL USES:
In an R4 district, special uses may be allowed by the zoning board of appeals
in accordance with
chapter 18 of this zoning title, as follows:
   A.   Special uses for this district as indicated on the land use chart in
chapter 21 of this zoning title.
   B.   Public utility services. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-11-3: MINIMUM LAND AREA:
In an R4 district, no less than two thousand eight hundred square feet of land
area shall be provided for every residential unit. (Ord. 2941, 10-22-2001)
10-11-4: LOT AREA AND SIZE:
In an R4 district, no building may be erected or altered to achieve the
permitted density of this district on a lot recorded after the effective date
hereof which is less than twenty six thousand one hundred thirty six square
feet and one hundred fifty feet wide throughout its depth. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-
1995)
10-11-5: LOT COVERAGE AND FLOOR AREA RATIO:
In an R4 district, no building with its accessory buildings or structures shall
occupy (cover) more than sixty percent of an interior lot and seventy percent
of a corner lot and the maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.5, provided
that:
   A.   The average gross living area for all units constructed is not less
than one thousand eight hundred square feet.
   B.   Every unit shall have at least one bedroom.
   C.   An accessory building may occupy not more than thirty percent of a
required rear yard. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-11-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In an R4 district, no building shall be erected or structurally altered to
exceed forty five feet or be more than five floors in height. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-
1995)
10-11-7: SETBACK REGULATIONS:
In an R4 district, buildings shall be set back from every lot line to provide
an open yard in accordance with the following regulations. Every yard shall be
unobstructed from ground level to sky, except as allowed in subsection
10-20-2A of this zoning title.
   A.   Front Yard: A front yard shall have a depth of not less than twenty
feet provided however, that where twenty percent of the buildings on the block
are built with an average front yard having a variation of not more than ten
feet closer to the lot line, such new building erected or structurally altered
may project to the average front yard line so established. Shall provide the
required front yard on both streets.
      1.   Corner Lots: Shall have a minimum front yard depth of twenty five
feet on the secondary street.
      2.   Corner Lot Abutting Rear Lot Line: If the rear lot line of a corner
lot abuts a rear lot line in the R1 or R2 district, the front yard along the
common secondary street shall be at least equal to the depth of the front yard
of the adjoining R1 or R2 lot's building.
   B.   Rear Yard: A rear yard shall have a depth of not less than fifteen
percent of the depth of the lot, but not less than twenty five feet. The area
of the rear yard, shall not be any less than fifteen percent of the area of the
lot.
   C.   Side Yards: Side yards having a width not less than three feet on each
side of all buildings shall be provided. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-11-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
In an R4 district, no building may be erected or structurally altered unless
there shall be provided on the same lot, off street parking as follows:
   A.   One Bedroom Dwelling Units: Two parking spaces for each unit.
   B.   Two Bedroom Dwelling Units: Two parking spaces for each unit.
   C.   Three Or More Bedroom Dwelling Units: Two and one-half parking spaces
for each unit.
   D.   Five Dwelling Units: For each five dwelling units, or fraction thereof,
one designated guest parking space shall be provided in addition to the above
requirements.
   E.   Enclosed Spaces: A minimum of seventy five percent of all required
parking spaces shall be enclosed.
   F.   Front Or Side Yards: No parking spaces shall be in the required front
or side yards.
   G.   Paving: All driveways and places where vehicles stand shall be paved
with concrete, asphalt or paving bricks.
   H.   Outdoor Parking: No outdoor parking or storage of recreational
vehicles, trucks, boats or trailers is permitted. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-11-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
In an R4 district, there shall be provided loading spaces for trucks or similar
vehicles in accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   One loading space shall be provided for each thirty dwelling units,
which shall not be located within the buildings required front or side yards.
   B.   Each loading space shall be at least ten feet wide by twenty five feet
long and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet.
   C.   Each loading space shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or paving
bricks and shall not be used for storage or to satisfy the parking requirements
of this zoning title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
CHAPTER 12
C1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-12-1: Permitted Uses
10-12-2: Special Uses
10-12-3: Minimum Land Area
10-12-4: Lot Area And Size
10-12-5: Lot Coverage And Floor Area Ratio
10-12-6: Height Regulations
10-12-7: Setback Regulations
10-12-8: Off Street Parking
10-12-9: Off Street Loading
10-12-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the C1 district, no building, parcel or premises shall be used except for
the uses indicated on the land use chart in
chapter 21 of this zoning title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-12-2: SPECIAL USES:
In the C1 district, a special use permit may be granted by the zoning board of
appeals in accordance with chapter 18 of this title. Such special uses are
limited to those indicated as special uses on the land use chart in
chapter 21 of this zoning title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-12-3: MINIMUM LAND AREA:
In the C1 district, no less than two thousand eight hundred square feet of land
area shall be provided for every residential unit. (Ord. 2941, 10-22-2001)
10-12-4: LOT AREA AND SIZE:
In the C1 district, no building shall be erected on any lot and no lot shall be
altered to be less than twenty five feet wide (measured parallel to the street
on which it fronts) throughout its depth. Further, no lot shall contain less
than three thousand two hundred seventy five square feet. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-
1995)
10-12-5: LOT COVERAGE AND FLOOR AREA RATIO:
In the C1 district, any building and its accessory building erected or altered
after the effective date hereof may occupy one hundred percent of the lot on
which it is built. The maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed 2.75. (Ord.
2640, 5-23-1995)
10-12-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In the C1 district, no building shall be erected or structurally altered to
exceed fifty feet. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-12-7: SETBACK REGULATIONS:
In the C1 district, buildings shall be set back from every lot line to provide
an open yard in accordance with the following regulations. Every yard shall be
unobstructed from ground level to sky except as allowed in subsection
10-20-2A of this zoning title.
   A.   Front Yard: If the rear lot line of a corner lot abuts a rear lot line
in the R1 or R2 district, the yard along the common secondary street shall be
at least equal to the depth of the yard of the adjoining R1 or R2 lot's
building.
   B.   Rear Yard: Where the rear of a lot in the C1 district abuts a lot or
lots in the R1, R2 and R3 district without an alley or other public way
intervening, no structure shall be erected on the rear twenty feet of such C1
district lot.
   C.   Side Yard: Where a lot adjoins the side of a lot in an R1, R2, R3 or R4
district, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet. In all other
cases, a side yard for a business building shall not be required. (Ord. 2640,
5-23-1995)
10-12-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
   In the C1 district, no building shall be erected or structurally altered
unless the following off street parking is provided:
   A.   Off street parking regulations of the R1, R2, R3 and R4 districts shall
apply to the respective uses in the C1 district.
   B.   One parking space for each two employees of any business occupying said
building in addition to the parking spaces required hereinafter.
   C.   Restaurant or undertaking establishments, one parking space for each
one hundred square feet of public floor area.
   D.   Food market with floor area of one thousand square feet or more, one
parking space for each three hundred square feet of public floor area.
   E.   Retail store, shop, office or service establishment, other than those
herein specified, one parking space for each four hundred square feet of public
floor area.
   F.   Motor fuel service station, two parking spaces for each service bay. No
more than eight vehicles per service bay may be stored on the property at any
one time.
   G.   Any business or commercial uses not specified above:
      1.   Where no vehicles are used in connection with said business, one
parking space for each four hundred square feet of floor area.
      2.   Where vehicles are used in connection with said business, the
parking spaces specified in subsection G1 of this section, and in addition, one
parking space for each vehicle used by the establishment engaged in said
business.
   H.   Whenever a building is erected for more than one of the uses
hereinbefore specified in this section, the parking spaces to be provided shall
be the sum of the parking spaces required for each of such uses.
   I.   All parking spaces required herein shall be provided upon the same lot
or parcel of ground as is occupied by a building, or on a lot or parcel
contiguous thereto, or within three hundred feet from said building.
   J.   All driveways and places where vehicles stand shall be paved with
concrete, asphalt or paving bricks.
   K.   Any new construction providing : parking spaces to serve nonresidential
uses shall include the installation of electric vehicle charging infrastructure
to support the future installation of electric vehicle supply equipment for the
lesser of 20% of all parking spaces or 6 total parking spaces.
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995; amd. Ord. 3943, 10-28-32024)
10-12-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
In the C1 district, no building shall be erected or structurally altered unless
off street loading facilities are provided as follows:
   A.   For business or commercial uses from ten thousand square feet to one
hundred thousand square feet, one loading space shall be provided and one
additional loading space for each one hundred thousand square feet exceeding
one hundred thousand square feet or portion thereof.
   B.   For retail uses from five thousand square feet to fifty thousand square
feet, one loading space shall be provided and one additional loading space
shall be provided for each twenty five thousand square feet or portion thereof.
   C.   Each loading space shall be at least ten feet wide by twenty five feet
long and shall have a vertical clearance of fourteen feet.
   D.   Each loading space shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or paving
bricks and shall not be used for storage or to satisfy the parking requirements
of this zoning title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
CHAPTER 13
C2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-13-1: Permitted Uses
10-13-2: Special Uses
10-13-3: Minimum Land Area
10-13-4: Lot Area And Size
10-13-5: Lot Coverage And Floor Area Ratio
10-13-6: Height Regulations
10-13-7: Setback Regulations
10-13-8: Off Street Parking
10-13-9: Off Street Loading
10-13-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the C2 district, no building, parcel or premises shall be used except for
the uses indicated on the land use chart in
chapter 21 of this zoning title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-13-2: SPECIAL USES:
In the C2 district, a special use permit may be granted by the zoning board of
appeals in accordance with chapter 18 of this title. Such special uses are
limited to those indicated as special uses on the land use chart in
chapter 21 of this zoning title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-13-3: MINIMUM LAND AREA:
In the C2 district, no less than two thousand eight hundred square feet of land
area shall be provided for every residential unit. (Ord. 2941, 10-22-2001)
10-13-4: LOT AREA AND SIZE:
In the C2 district, no building shall be erected on any lot and no lot shall be
altered to be less than twenty five feet wide (measured parallel to the street
on which it fronts) throughout its depth. Further, no lot shall contain less
than three thousand two hundred seventy five square feet. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-
1995)
10-13-5: LOT COVERAGE AND FLOOR AREA RATIO:
In the C2 district, any building and its accessory building erected or altered
after the effective date hereof may occupy one hundred percent of the lot on
which it is built. The maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed 2.75. (Ord.
2640, 5-23-1995)
10-13-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In the C2 district, no building shall be erected or structurally altered to
exceed thirty feet. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-13-7: SETBACK REGULATIONS:
In the C2 district, buildings shall be set back from every lot line to provide
an open yard in accordance with the following regulations. Every yard shall be
unobstructed from ground level to sky except as allowed in subsection
10-20-2A of this zoning title.
   A.   Front Yard: The front yard regulations shall be the same as those of
the C1 district.
   B.   Rear Yard: The rear yard regulations shall be the same as those of the
C1 district.
   C.   Side Yard: The side yard regulations shall be the same as those of the
C1 district. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-13-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
The off street parking regulations shall be the same as those of the C1
district. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-13-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
The off street loading regulations shall be the same as those of the C1
district. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
CHAPTER 14
C3 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-14-1: Permitted Uses
10-14-2: Special Uses
10-14-3: Minimum Land Area
10-14-4: Lot Area And Size
10-14-5: Lot Coverage And Floor Area Ratio
10-14-6: Height Regulations
10-14-7: Setback Regulations
10-14-8: Off Street Parking
10-14-9: Off Street Loading
10-14-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the C3 district, no building, parcel or premises shall be used except for
the uses indicated on the land use chart in
chapter 21 of this zoning title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-14-2: SPECIAL USES:
In the C3 district, a special use permit may be granted by the zoning board of
appeals in accordance with
chapter 18 of this title. Such special uses are limited to those indicated on
the land use chart in chapter 21 of this zoning title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-14-3: MINIMUM LAND AREA:
In the C3 district, no less than two thousand eight hundred square feet of land
area shall be provided for every residential unit. (Ord. 2941, 10-22-2001)
10-14-4: LOT AREA AND SIZE:
In the C3 district, no building shall be erected on any lot less than twenty
five feet wide (measured parallel to the street on which it fronts) throughout
its depth. Further, no lot shall contain less than three thousand two hundred
seventy five square feet. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-14-5: LOT COVERAGE AND FLOOR AREA RATIO:
In the C3 district, any building and it's accessory building erected or altered
after the effective date hereof may occupy one hundred percent of the lot on
which it is built. The maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed 2.5. (Ord.
2640, 5-23-1995)
10-14-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In the C3 district, no building shall be erected or structurally altered to
exceed fifty feet. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-14-7: SETBACK REGULATIONS:
In the C3 district, buildings shall be set back from every lot line to provide
an open yard in accordance with the following regulations. Every yard shall be
unobstructed from ground level to sky except as allowed in subsection
10-20-2A of this zoning title.
   A.   Front Yard: The front yard regulations shall be the same as those of
the C1 district.
   B.   Rear Yard: The rear yard regulations shall be the same as those of the
C1 district.
   C.   Side Yard: The side yard regulations shall be the same as those of the
C1 district. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-14-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
The off street parking regulations shall be the same as those of the C1
district, except that service retail establishments, located in an area bounded
by Lathrop Avenue, Lake Street, Park Avenue and a line one-half block south of
and parallel to Lake Street, shall not be required to provide any off street
parking. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-14-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
The off street loading regulations shall be the same as those of the C1
district. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
CHAPTER 15
ORIC OFFICE/RESEARCH/INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-15-1: Permitted Uses
10-15-2: Special Uses
10-15-3: Units Per Acre
10-15-4: Lot Area and Size
10-15-5: Lot Coverage and Floor Area Ratio
10-15-6: Height Regulations
10-15-7: Setback Regulations
10-15-8: Off-Street Parking
10-15-9: Off-Street Loading
10-15-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the ORIC District, no building, parcel or use shall be permitted except for
the uses indicated on the land use chart in
Chapter 21 of this Zoning Title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-15-2: SPECIAL USES:
In the ORIC District, a special use permit may be granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals in accordance with
Chapter 18 of this Zoning Title. Such special uses are limited to those
indicated on the land use chart in
Chapter 21 of this Zoning Title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-15-3: UNITS PER ACRE:
In an ORIC District, no residential units may be erected unless approved under
a planned development permit in accordance with
Chapter 19 of this Zoning Title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-15-4: LOT AREA AND SIZE:
In the ORIC District, no building shall be erected on any lot less than fifty
feet wide (measured parallel to the street on which it fronts) throughout its
depth. Further, no lot shall contain less than ten thousand square feet. (Ord.
2640, 5-23-95)
10-15-5: LOT COVERAGE AND FLOOR AREA RATIO:
In the ORIC District, any building and its accessory building erected or
altered after the effective date hereof may occupy one hundred percent of the
lot on which it is built. The maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed 2.0.
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-15-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In the ORIC District, no building shall be erected or structurally altered to
exceed fifty feet. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-15-7: SETBACK REGULATIONS:
In the ORIC District, buildings shall be set back from a lot line to provide an
open yard only if the property adjoins an R1, R2, R3 or R4 District in the same
block, in which case each yard that adjoins a residential district shall
conform to the regulations of the respective adjoining residential district.
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-15-8: OFF-STREET PARKING:
In the ORIC District, no building shall be erected or structurally altered
unless the following off-street parking is provided:
   A.   The off-street parking regulations of the R4 and C1 Districts shall
apply to the respective uses in the ORIC District.
   B.   Warehouse, one parking space for each two thousand square feet of floor
area.
   C.   Assembly/plant operation, one parking space for each one thousand
square feet.
   D.   All driveways and places where vehicles stand shall be paved with
concrete, asphalt or paving bricks. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-15-9: OFF-STREET LOADING:
In the ORIC District, no building shall be erected or structurally altered
unless off-street loading facilities are provided as follows:
   A.   One loading space shall be provided for each business, retail,
commercial, or industrial use regardless of size.
   B.   For business or commercial uses exceeding one hundred thousand square
feet, one additional loading space shall be provided for each one hundred
thousand square feet exceeding one hundred thousand square feet.
   C.   For retail uses exceeding fifty thousand square feet, one additional
loading space shall be provided for each twenty five thousand square feet.
   D.   For warehouse uses one loading space shall be provided for each twenty
five thousand square feet, in addition, one loading space shall be provided for
each fifteen thousand square feet exceeding twenty five thousand square feet.
   E.   Each loading space shall be at least ten feet wide by twenty five feet
long and shall have a vertical clearance of fourteen feet.
   F.   Each loading space shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or paving
bricks and shall not be used for storage or to satisfy the parking requirements
of this Zoning Title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
CHAPTER 16
PRI PUBLIC, RECREATIONAL AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-16-1: Permitted Uses
10-16-2: Special Uses
10-16-3: Special Development Regulation
10-16-4: Units Per Acre
10-16-5: Lot Area And Size
10-16-6: Lot Coverage And Floor Area Ratio
10-16-7: Height Regulations
10-16-8: Setback Regulations
10-16-9: Off Street Parking
10-16-10: Off Street Loading
10-16-1: PERMITTED USES:
In a PRI district, no building, parcel or use shall be permitted, except for
the following:
   Accessory uses.
   Commissaries for dispensing incidental merchandise, for students and
faculty.
   Dwelling units and lodging rooms, owned and operated by the institution, for
housing students and faculty.
   Rectories, parsonages and parish houses.
   Other accessory structures, customarily incidental to the principal use, for
mechanical equipment, storage of equipment and vehicles, and athletic fields
and stands.
   Civic or community centers.
   Colleges or universities.
   Convents, monasteries and seminaries.
   Electrical distribution centers and substations.
   Fire station(s).
   Houses of worship.
   Library.
   Membership organizations, related to recreational facilities and accessory
buildings.
   Municipal offices and buildings including water filtration plants, pumping
stations and reservoirs.
   Parks, forest preserves, related recreational facilities, administrative
offices and storage buildings.
   Police station(s).
   Schools, public and private, elementary, junior high and high schools.
   Village owned buildings or property.
Prior to the construction of any new building or addition to an existing
building on village owned property, the zoning administrator shall provide
advanced written notice of the village board meeting where such new
construction will be considered. The purpose of said notice will be to allow
any interested persons the opportunity to voice their opinions regarding the
project being proposed. Said notice shall be sent to all the owners of property
within five hundred feet of the subject property at least fifteen days and not
more than thirty days in advance of the village board meeting. Failure to
provide or receive notice shall not invalidate any subsequent action taken by
the village board of trustees.
The development of village owned buildings or property shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995; amd. Ord. 2657, 11-13-
1995; Ord. 3245, 6-23-2008)
10-16-2: SPECIAL USES:
In the PRI district, special uses may be allowed by the zoning board of appeals
in accordance with
chapter 18 of this title, as follows:
   A.   Special uses for this district as indicated on the land use chart in
chapter 21 of this title.
   B.   Cellular telephone antennas and accessory apparatus no higher than one
hundred twenty feet. (Ord. 3245, 6-23-2008)
10-16-3: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATION:
   A.   No new construction, expansion of any building or the addition of any
parcel(s) or change of use shall be permitted in a PRI district, except as
approved as a planned development under
chapter 19 of this title.
   B.   Overall scaled plan(s) of existing parcel(s) and development within all
PRI districts shall be submitted to the zoning administrator by the property
owner within twelve months of the effective date hereof. Plan(s) shall indicate
the location, bulk, height, use and areas of all building(s), accessory
structures, roadways, etc. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995; amd. Ord. 3245, 6-23-2008)
10-16-4: UNITS PER ACRE:
In a PRI district no residential units, other than those accessory uses
contained in section
10-16-1 of this chapter, may be erected unless approved under a planned
development permit in accordance with
chapter 19 of this title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995; amd. Ord. 3245, 6-23-2008)
10-16-5: LOT AREA AND SIZE:
In a PRI district, no building may be erected or altered on any parcel after
the effective date hereof which is less than twenty five thousand square feet
and one hundred twenty five feet wide throughout its depth. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-
1995; amd. Ord. 3245, 6-23-2008)
10-16-6: LOT COVERAGE AND FLOOR AREA RATIO:
In a PRI district, no building(s) with its accessory buildings or structures
shall occupy (cover) more than fifty percent of the parcel and the maximum
floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995; amd. Ord. 3245,
6-23-2008)
10-16-7: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In a PRI district, no building shall be erected or structurally altered to
exceed forty feet in height except that the maximum height of a building may be
increased one additional foot, up to a maximum of fifteen additional feet, for
every five feet by which the setback of the building exceeds twenty five feet
from the nearest residential zoning district. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995; amd. Ord.
3245, 6-23-2008)
10-16-8: SETBACK REGULATIONS:
In a PRI district, buildings shall be set back from every lot line to provide
an open yard in accordance with the following regulations. Every yard shall be
unobstructed from ground level to sky except as allowed in subsection
10-20-2A of this title.
   A.   Front Yard: Thirty five feet, except fifty feet when facing an R1, R2
or R3 residential district. A building on a lot which has frontage on two or
more streets shall provide the required front yard on all streets.
   B.   Side And Rear Yards: Twenty five feet.
   C.   Lot Without Structures: On any lot occupied by a use without
structures, the minimum front, side and rear yards requirements that would
otherwise be required for such lot shall be provided and maintained. (Ord.
2640, 5-23-1995; amd. Ord. 3245, 6-23-2008)
10-16-9: OFF STREET PARKING:
In a PRI district, no building may be erected or structurally altered unless
there shall be provided on the same lot, off street parking as follows:
   A.   Elementary Schools: One for each two employees, one for each fifteen
students or one for each classroom, whichever is greater.
   B.   Secondary Schools: One for each five students or one for each three
persons of auditorium design capacity, whichever is greater, plus one for each
two employees.
   C.   Colleges And Universities: One for each two students, plus one for each
two employees.
   D.   Libraries: One for each two hundred fifty square feet of public area,
plus one for each two employees.
   E.   Public Parks: None for the first two acres, plus five for each
additional acre, one for each five persons of design capacity of any structure
or facility in the park.
   F.   Membership Organizations: One for each two hundred fifty square feet of
net floor area or one for each four persons of design capacity, whichever is
greater.
   G.   Municipal Buildings: One for each two hundred fifty square feet of net
floor area or one for each three persons of design capacity, whichever is
greater.
   H.   Off Street Parking: No off street parking spaces shall be allowed in
the required front yard(s) or in any yard adjoining a residential district.
   I.   Paving: All driveways and places where vehicles stand shall be paved
with concrete, asphalt or paving bricks. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995; amd. Ord. 3245,
6-23-2008)
10-16-10: OFF STREET LOADING:
In a PRI district, there shall be provided off street loading spaces for trucks
or similar vehicles in accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   One loading space for each twenty five thousand square feet of floor
area in excess of the first twenty five thousand square feet of gross floor
area exclusive of any residential or church/temple worship space.
   B.   One loading space for each seventy five dormitory residential dwelling
units.
   C.   Off street loading spaces shall not be located within the required
front or side yards or any yard adjoining a residential district.
   D.   Each loading space shall be at least ten feet wide by twenty five feet
long and shall have a vertical clearance of fourteen feet.
   E.   Each loading space shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or paving
bricks and shall not be used for storage or to satisfy the parking requirements
of this title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995; amd. Ord. 3245, 6-23-2008)
CHAPTER 17
SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION:
10-17-1: Intent And Purpose
10-17-2: General Provisions
10-17-3: Standards For Review
10-17-4: Procedures
10-17-5: Application Requirements
10-17-6: Effect Of Approval Or Denial
10-17-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Site plan review is a process for the assessment of land development or
redevelopment proposals to ensure that they are considerate of and compatible
with the surrounding area and fulfill, both within and around the site, the
planning principles of safety, convenience, efficient use of land and design
consistent with the character of the Village. Site plan review is in addition
to zoning review and compliance. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
   B.   The development of Village owned buildings or property shall be exempt
from the requirements of this Section. (Ord. 2657, 11-13-1995)
10-17-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Any project which meets all the applicable requirements of this Zoning
Title and is greater than ten thousand square feet of land area or five
thousand square feet or more of gross floor area located in the R3, R4, C1, C2,
C3, ORIC or PRI Districts shall only be permitted when it is approved in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.
   B.   Each site plan review shall be presented and judged on its own merits.
It shall not be sufficient to base justification for approval upon an already
existing project.
   C.   The development of any parcel or tract of land which has been submitted
to the Village as a planned development pursuant to Chapter 19 of this Zoning
Title shall not be subject to the approval process of this Section.
   D.   Site plan review approval must be obtained in accordance with the
provisions of this Section if both of the following conditions exist:
      1.   The proposed project involves a parcel of land held in common
ownership with a contiguous parcel which obtained site plan review approval
within three years prior to the date of this application; and
      2.   The parcel proposed for development, when combined with the
contiguous parcel that is held in common ownership with the subject parcel,
equals or exceeds the general provisions contained in subsection A of this
Section. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-17-3: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW:
An application for site plan review approval shall be granted by the
Development Review Board only if it finds that the applicant has demonstrated
that at a minimum the proposed project complies with the following standards:
   A.   The proposed project is consistent with the goals and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan;
   B.   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the project will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, morals, or
general welfare of the residents of the Village;
   C.   The proposed project will not diminish the use or enjoyment nor impede
the development of other property in the vicinity for those uses or combination
of uses which are permitted by the Zoning Title of the Village;
   D.   The proposed project will not diminish property values in the vicinity;
   E.   Adequate measures already exist or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress to the proposed project in a manner that minimizes traffic congestion in
the public streets;
   F.   The proposed project will be consistent with the character of the
Village;
   G.   The project will not materially affect a known historical or cultural
resource;
   H.   The design of the project considers its relationship to the surrounding
area and minimizes adverse effects, including visual impacts of the proposed
project on adjacent property;
   I.   The design of the proposed project promotes a safe and comfortable
pedestrian environment; and
   J.   The project has included adequate consideration consistent with these
standards for buffers, landscaping, fencing, lighting, signage, building
materials, public open space, and other improvements to be associated with the
proposed project. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-17-4: PROCEDURES:
The following steps are provided to assure the orderly review of every site
plan review application in a timely and equitable manner:
   A.   Prefiling Review And Transmittal Of Application:
      1.   Conference:
         a.   A prospective applicant, prior to submitting a formal application
for a site plan review, shall meet for a prefiling conference(s) with the
Zoning Administrator, the Director of Public Works and any other Village
official designated by the Village Administrator. The purpose of the conference
(s) is to help the applicant understand the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning
Title, the standards by which the application will be evaluated, and the
application requirements.
         b.   After reviewing the site plan review process, the applicant may
request a prefiling conference with the Village staff to discuss a request for
waiver of any application requirement which in the applicant's judgment should
not apply to the proposed project. Such request shall be made in writing prior
to the submission of the formal application documents.
         c.   All requests for waiver shall be reviewed within ten working days
by the Zoning Administrator and a final determination regarding the waiver
shall be given to the prospective applicant within five working days.
      2.   Site Plan Review Application: Following the completion of the
prefiling conference(s), the applicant shall file the application for a site
plan review. The Zoning Administrator may deliver copies of an application to
other appropriate Village departments for review and comment.
      3.   Application Review: The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether
the application is complete for purposes of initiating the site plan review. If
the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete, he
shall notify the applicant in writing of any deficiencies and shall take no
further steps to process the application until the deficiencies are remedied.
      4.   Development Review Board: A copy of the complete application and a
written report incorporating the comments of Village staff and other agencies
regarding the compliance of the proposed development with the requirements and
standards of this Section shall be delivered to the Development Review Board.
      5.   Determination Not Binding: Neither the Zoning Administrator's
determination that an application is complete nor any comment made by the
Zoning Administrator at a prefiling conference or as part of the review process
shall be intended or construed as a formal or informal recommendation for the
approval of a site plan review for the proposed project, or component part
thereof, nor shall be intended or construed as a binding decision of the
Village, the Development Review Board or any staff member.
   B.   Review and Action by the Development Review Board:
      1.   Upon receiving the written report from the Zoning Administrator, the
Development Review Board shall review and act upon the site plan review at its
next regular meeting.
      2.   The Development Review Board shall review the application, the
standards and requirements established by this Zoning Title, the written report
of the Zoning Administrator, and any oral and written comments received by the
Development Review Board. Within thirty days following the regular meeting, the
Development Review Board shall make specific findings addressing each of the
standards set forth in Section
10-17-3 and shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the site plan
review.
   C.   Appeal to the Board of Trustees:
      1.   An applicant whose project did not receive site plan review Approval
or received approval with conditions with which the applicant is not satisfied
may, by written notice received by the Zoning Administrator within twenty days
of the Development Review Board's determination, appeal the decision of the
Development Review Board to the Board of Trustees. Upon receipt of the notice
of appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the complete application file
along with the findings of the Development Review Board to the Board of
Trustees.
      2.   Within sixty days of the filing of the notice of appeal, the Board
of Trustees may deny the appeal, may refer the application to the Development
Review Board for further review, may postpone further consideration pending the
submittal of additional information including any application requirement
previously waived, or may approve the site plan review with or without
conditions.
      3.   Any action taken by the Board of Trustees pursuant to subsection C1
above shall require the concurrence of a majority of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
10-17-5: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   An application for a site plan review may only be filed by one who has
an ownership interest, or the agents thereof, or any contract purchaser, or
anyone holding an option to purchase the parcel of land on which the project is
to be located, or any unit of government which either owns the parcel or
proposes to acquire the parcel by purchase, gift, or condemnation.
   B.   Applications for a site plan review shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator in such form and accompanied by such information, with sufficient
copies, as shall be established from time to time by the Zoning Administrator.
Every application shall contain at a minimum the following information and
related data:
      1.   The names and addresses of the owner of the subject property, the
applicant and all persons having an ownership or beneficial interest in the
subject property and proposed project.
      2.   A statement from the owner, if not the applicant, approving the
filing of the application by the particular applicant.
      3.   A survey, legal description and street address of the subject
property.
      4.   A statement indicating compliance of the proposed project to the
Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Title.
      5.   A scaled site plan showing the existing contiguous land uses,
natural topographic features, zoning districts and public thoroughfares.
      6.   A scaled site plan of the proposed project showing the lot area,
required yards and setbacks, contour lines, common space and the location,
bulk, and lot area coverage and heights of buildings and structures, number of
parking spaces and loading areas.
      7.   Schematic drawings illustrating the design and character of the
building elevations, types of construction, and floor plans of all proposed
buildings and structures. The drawings shall also include a schedule showing
the number, type, and floor area of all uses or combination of uses, and the
floor area, of the entire project.
      8.   A landscaping plan showing the location, size, character and
composition of vegetation and other material.
      9.   The substance of covenants, easements, and other restrictions
existing and any to be imposed on the use of land, including common open space,
and buildings or structures.
      10.   A schedule of development showing the approximate date for
beginning and completion of each stage of construction of the project. (Ord.
2640, 5-23-95)
10-17-6: EFFECT OF APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
   A.   Approval of the site plan review in accordance with this Section
authorizes the applicant to proceed with any necessary applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy, and other permits which the
Village may require for the proposed development. The Zoning Administrator
shall review applications for these permits for compliance with the terms of
the site plan review approval. No permit shall be issued for the project which
does not comply with the site plan review as approved.
   B.   An approval of a site plan review shall be null and void if the
recipient does not file an application for a building permit for the proposed
project within nine months after the date of the approval of the site plan
review.
   C.   An application for a site plan review which has not been approved in
accordance with this Section shall not be considered by the Village if it is
resubmitted in substantially the same form and/or content within two years of
the date of such denial.
      1.   The Zoning Administrator shall review the revised application for a
site plan review and determine if the application is or is not substantially
the same. An applicant has the right to request a review before the Development
Review Board to appeal the determination of the Zoning Administrator, provided
a petition for appeal is filed in writing with the Zoning Administrator within
ten days of the decision.
      2.   The Development Review Board shall affirm or reverse the
determination of the Administrator regarding whether the new application is in
substantially the same form within thirty days of receipt of a petition for
appeal.
      3.   If it is determined that the new application is not substantially in
the same form, then the applicant is entitled to submit an application and have
it reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 2640, 5-
23-95)
CHAPTER 18
SPECIAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
10-18-1: Intent And Purpose
10-18-2: General Provisions
10-18-3: Standards For Review
10-18-4: Procedures
10-18-5: Application Requirements
10-18-6: Effect Of Approval Or Denial
10-18-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   The development and execution of this Zoning Title is based upon the
division of the Village into districts, within which the uses of land,
structures, and buildings as well as the massing and location of structures and
buildings in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized,
however, that there are certain types of uses which because of their specific
characteristics, or the services which they provide cannot be permitted in a
particular district without consideration of the impact of such use upon the
neighboring land, and of the public need for such particular use at a
particular location.
   B.   The Board of Trustees, in accordance with the procedures and standards
set forth in this Section, may grant special use permits.
   C.   Special use permits will be limited to those uses currently permitted
in the underlying zoning district as indicated on the land use chart in Chapter
21 of this Zoning Title. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-18-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   The special uses allowed in the land use chart in Chapter 21 of this
Zoning Title shall be authorized in the districts hereinafter indicated subject
to the provisions of this Section. When a use is not specifically listed in
Section
10-21-2 of this Zoning Title or cannot reasonably be included in any category
shown on the land use chart it shall be considered a special use subject to the
provisions of this Chapter. All other applicable provisions of this Zoning
Title, including those of the district in which the proposed special use is to
be located, shall apply, except as expressly modified by the terms of the
special use permit in order to comply with the standards set forth in this
Section. (Ord. 2758, 3-23-1998)
   B.   The development of any parcel or tract of land which has been submitted
to the Village as a planned development pursuant to Chapter 19 of this Zoning
Title shall not be subject to the approval process of this Section.
   C.   Each special use should be presented and judged on its own merits. It
shall not be sufficient to base justification for approval upon an already
existing special use.
   D.   The burden of providing evidence and persuasion that any special use
permit is necessary and desirable shall in every case rest with the applicant.
(Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-18-3: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW:
An application for a special use permit shall be granted by the Board of
Trustees only if it finds that the applicant has demonstrated that at a minimum
the proposed use complies with the following standards:
   A.   The proposed use is consistent with the goals and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan;
   B.   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use or combination
of uses will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
comfort, morals, or general welfare of the residents of the Village;
   C.   The proposed use will not diminish the use or enjoyment of other
property in the vicinity for those uses or combination of uses which are
permitted by this Zoning Title;
   D.   The establishment of the proposed use will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of surrounding properties for uses or
combination of uses otherwise permitted in the zoning district;
   E.   The proposed use will not diminish property values in the vicinity;
   F.   Adequate measures already exist or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress to the proposed use in a manner that minimizes traffic congestion in the
public streets;
   G.   The proposed use will be consistent with the character of the Village;
   H.   The proposed use will not materially affect a known historical or
cultural resource;
   I.   The design of the proposed use considers its relationship to the
surrounding area and minimizes adverse effects, including visual impacts of the
proposed use on adjacent property;
   J.   The design of the proposed use promotes a safe and comfortable
pedestrian environment;
   K.   The proposed use has included adequate consideration consistent with
these standards for buffers, landscaping, fencing, lighting, building
materials, public open space, and other improvements associated with the
proposed use; and
   L.   The off-site impacts of the proposed use such as vehicular traffic,
noise, hours of operation, etc., have been shown to be compatible with the
surrounding area. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-18-4: PROCEDURES:
The following steps are provided to assure the orderly review of every special
use permit application in a timely and equitable manner:
   A.   Prefiling Review And Transmittal Of Application:
      1.   Conference:
         a.   A prospective applicant, prior to submitting a formal application
for a special use permit, shall meet for a prefiling conference(s) with the
Zoning Administrator, the Director of Public Works and any other Village
official designated by the Village Administrator. The purpose of the conference
(s) is to help the applicant understand the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning
Title, the standards by which the application will be evaluated, and the
application requirements.
         b.   After reviewing the special use permit process, the applicant may
request a prefiling conference with the Village staff to discuss a request for
waiver of any application requirement which in the applicant's judgment should
not apply to the proposed special use. Such request shall be made in writing
prior to the submission of the formal application documents.
         c.   All requests for waiver shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Administrator and a final determination regarding the waiver shall be given in
writing to the prospective applicant within ten working days.
         d.   The applicant, prior to submitting a formal application for a
special use permit, may be required to schedule a meeting to discuss the
proposed development and its impact on area residents. If such a meeting is
required, the applicant shall send a written notice of the meeting to all
property owners within five hundred feet of the proposed development. Such
notice shall be mailed not less than fifteen days prior to the date of the
meeting. A copy of the notice and mailing list shall be provided to the Zoning
Administrator. A written summary of comments made at the meeting shall be
maintained and submitted by the applicant with the application.
      2.   Zoning Board of Appeals: The Zoning Administrator shall confer with
the Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals on all applications. Upon the
determination of both the Administrator and the Chairman, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may be asked to participate in the prefiling conference(s).
      3.   Filing of Application: Following the completion of the prefiling
conference(s), the applicant shall file the application for a special use
permit. The Zoning Administrator may deliver copies of the application to other
appropriate Village departments for review and comment.
      4.   Deficiencies: The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the
application is complete. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is not complete, he shall notify the applicant in writing of any
deficiencies and shall take no further steps to process the application until
the deficiencies are remedied.
      5.   Report on Compliance: A copy of the complete application and a
written report prepared by the Zoning Administrator incorporating the comments
of Village staff and other agencies regarding the compliance of the proposed
development with the requirements and standards of this Section shall be
delivered to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      6.   Determination Not Binding: Neither the Zoning Administrator's
determination that an application is complete nor any comment made by the
Zoning Administrator, staff or the Zoning Board of Appeals at a prefiling
conference or as part of the review process shall be intended or construed as a
formal or informal recommendation for the approval of a special use permit for
the proposed development, or component part thereof, nor shall be intended or
construed as a binding decision of the Village, the Zoning Board of Appeals or
any staff member.
   B.   Review and Action by the Zoning Board of Appeals:
      1.   Upon receiving the report from the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed special
use. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided and the public hearing
shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Title,
State law and rules of procedure adopted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      2.   Notice of the required public hearing shall be published by the
Village not more than thirty nor less than fifteen days before the scheduled
hearing in a newspaper published in the Village or if there is none, then in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village and shall contain the following
information:
         a.   The number designation of the application;
         b.   The date and time of the public hearing;
         c.   The location of the public hearing; and
         d.   The general location of the property, the legal description of
the property and its street address, if applicable, and a short description of
the proposed project and purpose of the public hearing.
      3.   Notice of the required public hearing shall also be provided by the
Village by posting a sign or signs on the property no less than seven days
prior to the public hearing. The sign shall be weatherproof and contain such
information as is required in subsection B2 above. Failure to post such sign(s)
and/or the removal or knocking down (by the Village or others) of the sign
after posting but before the hearing shall not invalidate, impair, or otherwise
affect any special use permit subsequently granted following such public
hearing.
      4.   Notice of the required public hearing shall also be provided by the
Village by regular mail to the owners of record of the property which is the
subject of the application (if different than the applicant), and the owners of
all property within five hundred feet of the subject property as shown on the
written list provided by the applicant pursuant to the requirements of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code (such
notice should be sent to the owners as recorded in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds or the Registrar of Zoning Ordinances of Cook County and as they
appear from the authentic tax records of Cook County, as shown on the list
prepared by the applicant as required in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-
7 of the Illinois Municipal Code). The applicant shall be required to submit to
the Village a search by a reputable zoning ordinance company or other evidence
satisfactory to the Village indicating the identity of all such owners required
to receive notice, and an affidavit certifying that the applicant has complied
with the requirements of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-7 of the
Illinois Municipal Code. Such notice shall contain the information as is
required in subsection B2 of this Section and shall be mailed not more than
thirty nor less than fifteen days prior to the date of the public hearing. The
notice shall also include the name and address of the applicant for the special
use permit. The applicant shall also provide for the service of a separate
notice which the applicant is required to serve under 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-13-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code. The applicant shall be
required to comply with all conditions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
13-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code, except that the statutory area requirement
of two hundred fifty feet is hereby replaced with a Village requirement of five
hundred feet.
      5.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the application, the
standards and requirements established by this Zoning Title, the report of the
Zoning Administrator, and any oral and written comments received by the Zoning
Board of Appeals before or at the public hearing. Within thirty days following
the close of the public hearing and at a regular meeting, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall make specific findings addressing each of the standards set forth
in Section
10-18-3 of this Chapter and transmit such findings, together with a
recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval to the
Board of Trustees.
   C.   Review And Action By The Board Of Trustees:
      1.   Within sixty days of receipt of the report and recommendation of the
Zoning Board of Appeals, and without further public hearing, the Board of
Trustees may deny the application, may refer the application to the Zoning
Board of Appeals for further review, may postpone further consideration pending
the submittal of additional information including any application requirement
previously waived or may approve the special use permit. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
      2.   Any action taken by the Board of Trustees pursuant to subsection C1
of this Section shall require the concurrence of a majority of all Trustees and
the Village President then holding office, however, if the application fails to
receive the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the zoning ordinance shall
not be approved except by a favorable majority vote of all Trustees then
holding office. (Ord. 2733, 8-11-1997)
      3.   In approving a special use permit, the Board of Trustees may attach
such conditions to the approval as it deems necessary to have the proposed use
or combination of uses meet the standards set forth in Section
10-18-3 of this Chapter and to prevent or minimize adverse effects on other
property in the immediate vicinity. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to: limitations on size, bulk and location; requirements for
landscaping, signage, outdoor lighting, provisions for adequate ingress and
egress; hours of operation; and such other conditions as the Village Board may
deem to be in furtherance of the objectives of this Section.
      4.   Advance written notice of the first meeting of the Village Board
where a special use permit application will be considered shall be provided by
regular mail to the owners of record of the property which is the subject of
the application (if different from the applicant), and the owners of all
property within five hundred feet of the subject property, not less than ten
days prior to the date of the first Village Board meeting. This requirement is
enacted to assure the most complete public notice possible for the proposed
application for a special use permit, it is not required by State law.
Accordingly, any failure to comply with this subsection shall not invalidate,
impair or otherwise affect any special use permit subsequently granted
following such meetings. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-18-5: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   An application for a special use permit may only be filed by one who
has an ownership interest, or the agents thereof, or any contract purchaser or
anyone holding an option to purchase the parcel of land on which the use is to
be located, or any unit of government which either owns the parcel or proposes
to acquire the parcel by purchase, gift, or condemnation.
   B.   Applications for a special use permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator in such form and accompanied by such information, with sufficient
copies, as shall be established from time to time by the Zoning Administrator.
Every application shall contain at a minimum the following information and
related data:
      1.   The names and addresses of the owner of the subject property, the
applicant and all persons having an ownership or beneficial interest in the
subject property and proposed project.
      2.   A statement from the owner, if not the applicant, approving the
filing of the application by the particular applicant.
      3.   A survey, legal description and street address of the subject
property.
      4.   A statement showing compliance of the proposed project to the
Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Title; and evidence of the proposed project's
compliance in specific detail with each of the standards and objectives of this
Section.
      5.   A scaled site plan showing the existing contiguous land uses, zoning
districts and public thoroughfares.
      6.   A scaled site plan of the proposed project showing the lot area,
required yards and setbacks, contour lines, common space and the location,
bulk, and lot area coverage and heights of buildings and structures, number of
parking spaces and loading areas.
      7.   Schematic drawings illustrating the design and character of the
building elevations, types of construction, and floor plans of all proposed
buildings and structures. The drawings shall also include a schedule showing
the number, type, and floor area of all uses and the floor area of the entire
project.
      8.   A landscaping plan showing the location, size, character and
composition of vegetation and other material.
      9.   The substance of covenants, easements, and other restrictions
existing and any to be imposed on the use of land, including common open space,
and buildings or structures.
      10.   A schedule of development showing the approximate date for
beginning and completion of each stage of construction of the project.
   C.   The applicant may submit a written request for waiver of any
application requirement in accordance with subsection
10-18-4A1b and c. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final
regarding the approval or denial of the request. However, the Zoning Board of
Appeals' decision regarding the request for a waiver of an application
requirement does not preclude the Village Board from requesting that same
information or any additional information it deems applicable for its review of
the application.
   D.   Every application must be accompanied by a fee in such amount as
established from time to time by the Village Board to defray the costs of
providing notice and contracting with independent professionals to review
applications as required by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Village Board.
Additional materials may be required during the review of a proposed special
use permit if determined necessary by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the
Village Board. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-18-6: EFFECT OF APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
   A.   Approval of the special use permit by the Board of Trustees in
accordance with this Section, authorizes the applicant to proceed with any
necessary applications for building permits, certificates of occupancy, and
other permits which the Village may require for the proposed project. The
Zoning Administrator shall review applications for these permits for compliance
with the terms of the special use permit granted by the Board of Trustees. No
permit shall be issued for the project which does not comply with the terms of
the special use permit.
   B.   An approval of a special use permit by the Board of Trustees shall be
null and void if the recipient does not file an application for a building
permit for the proposed project within nine months after the date of the
approval of the special use permit.
   C.   An approval of a special use permit by the Board of Trustees shall be
null and void if construction has not commenced within fifteen months and is
not completed within thirty three months after the date of adoption of the
ordinance approving the special use permit.
   D.   An extension of the time requirements stated in subsections B and C of
this Section may be granted by the Board of Trustees for good cause shown by
the applicant, provided a written request is filed with the Village at least
four weeks prior to the respective deadline.
   E.   A special use permit shall be null and void if the use for which the
approval was granted ceases for a period of one year.
   F.   No application for a special use permit which was previously denied by
the Board of Trustees shall be reconsidered by the Zoning Board of Appeals or
the Board of Trustees if it is resubmitted in substantially the same form and/
or content within two years of the date of such prior denial.
      1.   The Zoning Administrator shall review the revised application for a
special use permit and determine if the application is or is not substantially
the same. An applicant has the right to request a hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals to appeal the determination of the Zoning Administrator,
provided a petition for appeal is filed in writing with the Zoning
Administrator within ten days of the decision.
      2.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall affirm or reverse the
determination of the Administrator regarding whether the new application is in
substantially the same form within thirty days of receipt of a petition for
appeal.
      3.   If it is determined that the new application is not substantially in
the same form, then the applicant is entitled to submit an application and have
it reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section
10-18-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
CHAPTER 19
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
10-19-1: Intent And Purpose
10-19-2: General Provisions
10-19-3: Standards For Review
10-19-4: Site Development Allowances
10-19-5: Procedures
10-19-6: Application Requirements
10-19-7: Effect Of Approval Or Denial
10-19-8: Amendments And Alterations To Approved Planned Development Permits
10-19-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   One of the principal objectives of this zoning title is to provide for
a compatible arrangement of uses of land and buildings which is consistent with
the requirements and welfare of the village. To accomplish this objective most
uses are classified as permitted or special uses in one or more of the
districts established by this zoning title. It is recognized, however, that
there are certain uses, whether or not designated as permitted or special,
which because of their scope, location or specific characteristics give rise to
a need for a more comprehensive consideration of their impact both with regard
to the neighboring land and the village in general. Such uses as fall within
the provisions of this section shall only be permitted if authorized as a
planned development.
   B.   The board of trustees, in accordance with the procedures and standards
set forth in this section, may grant planned development permits authorizing
the establishment of planned developments.
   C.   Planned developments may include uses or combinations of uses currently
permitted in the underlying zoning district and those uses which are currently
prohibited or special uses provided for elsewhere in this zoning title.
However, an applicant may petition for consideration of a use or combination of
uses not specifically allowed in the underlying zoning district provided that
the village board finds that the conditions, procedures and standards of this
section are met and provided further that such use or combination of uses is
clearly shown to be beneficial to the village and surrounding neighborhood.
   D.   It is the purpose of planned developments to enable the granting of
certain allowances or modifications from the basic provisions of this zoning
title to achieve attractive and timely development in furtherance of the
village's objectives and proposed land uses as stated in the comprehensive plan
and policy resolutions of the village board.
   E.   Through the flexibility of the planned development process, the village
seeks to achieve the following specific objectives:
      1.   Creation of a more desirable environment than would be possible
through strict application of other village land use regulations.
      2.   Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related
physical facilities resulting in better design and development, including
aesthetic amenities.
      3.   Combination and coordination of the character, the form, and the
relationship of structures to one another.
      4.   Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such
as natural topography, vegetation, and geologic features.
      5.   Provision for the preservation and beneficial use of open space, or
an increase in the amount of open space over that which would result from the
application of conventional zoning regulations.
      6.   Encouragement of land uses or combination of uses that maintain the
existing character and property values of the village, and promote the public
health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of its residents.
      7.   Promotion of long term planning pursuant to a master plan which will
allow harmonious and compatible land uses or combination of uses with
surrounding areas.
   F.   The development of village owned buildings or property shall be exempt
from the requirements of this section. (Ord. 3587, 2-29-2016)
10-19-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   No development of twenty thousand square feet or more of land area or
gross floor area and no multi-family housing of any size shall be permitted
unless approved as a planned development in accordance with this chapter.
Provided, however, that: 1) this chapter shall not apply to the construction,
reconstruction or remodeling of one single- family detached dwelling unless the
proposed project is submitted pursuant to subsection B of this section, and 2)
this chapter shall not apply to the reconstruction or restoration of any
existing structure which is damaged to the extent of less than fifty percent of
its value unless the proposed project is submitted pursuant to subsection B of
this section.
The reconstruction or restoration of any existing multi- family housing which
is damaged to the extent of fifty percent or more of its value shall be
governed by this chapter and not subsection
10-5-7A2 of this title.
   B.   The development of any parcel or tract of land in any zoning district,
irrespective of size, may be submitted to the village for consideration as a
planned development.
   C.   Approval of a planned development permit must be obtained in accordance
with the provisions of this section if both of the following conditions exist:
      1.   The proposed development involves a parcel of land held in common
ownership with a contiguous parcel which obtained approval as a planned
development within three years prior to the date of this application; and
      2.   The parcel proposed for development, when combined with the
contiguous parcel that is held in common ownership with the subject parcel,
equals or exceeds the general provisions contained in subsection A or B of this
section.
   D.   Each planned development should be presented and judged on its own
merits. It shall not be sufficient to base justification for approval of a
development upon an already existing planned development except to the extent
such development has been approved as part of a master plan.
   E.   The burden of providing evidence and persuasion that any planned
development permit is necessary and desirable shall in every case rest with the
applicant.
   F.   Buildings and uses or combination of uses within a planned development
shall be limited solely to those approved as part of this title granting a
planned development permit provided, however, that any buildings and uses or
combination of uses in compliance with the master plan approved as part of this
title granting a planned development permit may be approved by the Development
Review Board and the Village Board of Trustees.
   G.   Any applicant shall be subject to a penalty of up to seven hundred
fifty dollars per day to be assessed against the applicant and recorded as a
lien against the applicant's property in the Village for failure to comply with
any condition, contingency or master plan submitted by the applicant or imposed
by the Village to comply with this chapter. (Ord. 3587, 2-29-2016)
10-19-3: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW:
An application for approval as a planned development shall be granted by the
Board of Trustees only if it finds that the applicant has demonstrated that at
a minimum the proposed use or combination of uses complies with the following
standards:
   A.   The proposed use or combination of uses is consistent with the goals
and policies of the comprehensive plan;
   B.   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use or combination
of uses will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
comfort, morals, or general welfare of the residents of the Village;
   C.   The proposed use or combination of uses will not diminish the use or
enjoyment of other property in the vicinity for those uses or combination of
uses which are permitted by this title;
   D.   The establishment of the proposed use or combination of uses will not
impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding
properties for uses or combination of uses otherwise permitted in the zoning
district;
   E.   The proposed use or combination of uses will not diminish property
values in the vicinity;
   F.   Adequate utilities, road access, drainage, police and fire service and
other necessary facilities already exist or will be provided to serve the
proposed use or combination of uses;
   G.   Adequate measures already exist or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress to the proposed use or combination of uses in a manner that minimizes
traffic congestion in the public streets;
   H.   The proposed use or combination of uses will be consistent with the
character of the Village;
   I.   Development of the proposed use or combination of uses will not
materially affect a known historical or cultural resource;
   J.   The design of the proposed use or combination of uses considers the
relationship of the proposed use or combination of uses to the surrounding area
and minimizes adverse effects, including visual impacts of the proposed use or
combination of uses on adjacent property; (Ord. 3587, 2-29-2016)
   K.   The design of the proposed use or combination of uses promotes a safe
and comfortable environment for pedestrians and individuals with disabilities;
(Ord. 3741, 4-22-2019)
   L.   The applicant has the financial and technical capacity to complete the
proposed use or combination of uses and has made adequate provisions to
guarantee the development of any buffers, landscaping, public open space, and
other improvements associated with the proposed use or combination of uses;
   M.   The proposed use or combination of uses is economically viable and does
not pose a current or potential burden upon the services, tax base, or other
economic factors that affect the financial operations of the Village, except to
the extent that such burden is balanced by the benefit derived by the Village
from the proposed use; and
   N.   The proposed use or combination of uses will meet the objectives and
other requirements set forth in this chapter.
   O.   Except as provided in subsection
10-19-4B of this chapter, no planned development containing multi-family
housing shall be approved unless the following standards are met:
      1.   At least 2.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit are provided for. This
requirement may be met by a contract, easement or other device providing
permanent rights to off site parking; and
      2.   No less than two thousand eight hundred square feet of land area
shall be provided for each residential unit. A parking area which meets the
requirements of subsection O1 of this section may be used in meeting this
requirement; and
      3.   One of the following criteria is met:
         a.   If the underlying zoning district is C1, C2 or C3, the proposed
development provides for space devoted exclusively to retail sales;
         b.   The total number of parking spaces on the site is increased from
that existing at the time of the application.
      4.   The requirements of this subsection O may be met using more than one
site within the village and as part of a master plan submitted by the applicant
with the application. (Ord. 3587, 2-29-2016)
10-19-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT ALLOWANCES:
   A.   Site development allowances, i.e., alterations or variations from the
underlying zoning provisions set forth outside this chapter may be approved
provided the applicant specifically identifies each such site development
allowance and demonstrates how each such site development allowance would be
compatible with surrounding development and is in furtherance of the stated
objectives of this section.
   B.   A waiver may be granted for any of the requirements set forth in
subsection
10-19-3O of this chapter for any planned development containing multi-family
housing which replaces an existing structure on the same site containing multi-
family housing or submitted by the applicant as part of a master plan. (Ord.
3587, 2-29-2016)
10-19-5: PROCEDURES:
The following steps are provided to assure the orderly review of every planned
development application in a timely and equitable manner:
   A.   Prefiling Review And Transmittal Of Application:
      1.   Conference:
         a.   A prospective applicant, prior to submitting a formal application
for a planned development, shall meet for a prefiling conference(s) with the
zoning administrator and any other village official designated by the village
administrator. The purpose of the conference(s) is to help the applicant
understand the planned development process, comprehensive plan, the zoning
title, the site development allowances, the standards by which the application
will be evaluated, and the application requirements.
         b.   After the initial prefiling conference, the prospective applicant
shall introduce their project to the village board of trustees. The village
board may provide feedback to the applicant and shall refer the application to
the village's economic development commission in accordance with the village's
policy of economic development commission duties pertaining to development.
         c.   After reviewing the planned development process, the applicant
may request a meeting with the village staff and the development review board
to discuss a request for waiver of any application requirement which in the
applicant's judgment should not apply to the proposed development. Such request
shall be made in writing prior to the submission of the formal application
documents.
         d.   All requests for waiver shall be reviewed and acted upon by the
development review board. A final determination regarding the waiver shall be
given to the prospective applicant within five working days following the
completion of the development review board's deliberation and decision.
         e.   The applicant, prior to submitting a formal application for a
planned development, may be required to schedule a meeting to discuss the
proposed development and its impact on area residents. If such a meeting is
required, the applicant shall send a written notice of the meeting to all
property owners within five hundred feet of the proposed development. Such
notice shall be mailed not less than fifteen days prior to the date of the
meeting. A copy of the notice and mailing list shall be provided to the zoning
administrator. A written summary of comments made at the meeting shall be
maintained and submitted by the applicant with the application.
      2.   Development Review Board: The zoning administrator shall confer with
the chairman of the development review board on all applications. Upon the
determination of both the zoning administrator and the chairman, the
development review board may conduct its own prefiling conference(s).
      3.   Filing Of Application: Following the completion of the prefiling
conference(s), the applicant shall file an application for a planned
development in accordance with section
10-19-6 of this chapter. The zoning administrator may deliver copies of the
application to other appropriate village departments for review and comment.
      4.   Deficiencies: The zoning administrator shall determine whether the
application is complete. If the zoning administrator determines that the
application is not complete, he shall notify the applicant in writing of any
deficiencies and shall take no further steps to process the application until
the deficiencies are remedied.
      5.   Report On Compliance: A copy of the complete application and a
written report incorporating the comments of village staff and other agencies
regarding the compliance of the proposed development with the requirements and
standards of this section shall be delivered to the development review board
prior to the public hearing.
      6.   Determination Not Binding: Neither the zoning administrator's
determination that an application is complete nor any comment made by the
zoning administrator, staff or the development review board at a prefiling
conference or as part of the review process shall be intended or construed as a
formal or informal recommendation for the approval of a planned development
permit for the proposed development, or component part thereof, nor shall be
intended or construed as a binding decision of the village, the development
review board or any staff member.
   B.   Review And Action By The Development Review Board:
      1.   Upon receiving the report from the zoning administrator, the
development review board shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed
planned development. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided and the
public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this
section, state law and rules of procedure adopted by the development review
board, which rules shall not be inconsistent with this section and state law.
      2.   Notice of the required public hearing shall be published by the
village fifteen to thirty days before the scheduled hearing in a newspaper
published in the village or if there is none, then in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village and shall contain the following information:
         a.   The identification number designation of the application;
         b.   The date and time of the public hearing;
         c.   The location of the public hearing; and
         d.   The general location of the property, the legal description of
the property and its street address, if applicable, and a short description of
the proposed development and purpose of the public hearing.
      3.   Notice of the required public hearing shall also be provided by the
village by posting a sign or signs on the property no less than fifteen days
before the public hearing. The sign shall be weatherproof and contain the
following information:
         a.   The date and time of the public hearing;
         b.   The location of the public hearing;
         c.   The general location of the property including street address, if
applicable; and
         d.   A short description of the proposed development and purpose of
the public hearing.
The removal or knocking down (by the village or others) of the sign after
posting but before the hearing shall not invalidate, impair, or otherwise
affect any planned development permit subsequently granted following such
public hearing.
      4.   Notice of the public hearing and the application shall be posted to
the village's website at least fifteen days before the public hearing.
The removal or unavailability of such notice on the village's website prior to
the start of the public hearing, shall not invalidate, impair, or otherwise
affect any planned development permit subsequently granted following such
public hearing.
      5.   Notice of the required public hearing shall also be provided by the
applicant by regular mail to the owners of record of the property which is the
subject of the application (if different than the applicant), and the owners of
all property within five hundred feet of the subject property as shown on the
written list provided by the applicant pursuant to the requirements of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-7 of the Illinois municipal code (such
notice should be sent to the owners as recorded in the office of the recorder
of deeds or the registrar of zoning ordinances of Cook County and as they
appear from the authentic tax records of Cook County, as shown on the list
prepared by the applicant as required in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-
7 of the Illinois municipal code). The applicant shall be required to submit to
the village a search by a reputable zoning ordinance company or other evidence
satisfactory to the village indicating the identity of all such owners required
to receive notice, and an affidavit certifying that the applicant has complied
with the requirements of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-7 of the
Illinois municipal code. Such notice shall contain the information as is
required in subsection B2 of this section and shall be mailed not more than
thirty nor less than fifteen days prior to the date of the public hearing. The
notice shall also include the name and address of the applicant for the planned
development. The applicant shall provide the zoning administrator with proof of
mailing of the mailed notice required herein before the public hearing starts.
      6.   The development review board shall review the application, the
standards and requirements established by this section, the report of the
zoning administrator, and any oral and written comments received by the
development review board before or at the public hearing. Within forty five
days following the close of the public hearing, the development review board
shall make specific written findings addressing each of the standards set forth
in section
10-19-3 of this chapter and transmit such findings, together with a
recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval to the
board of trustees.
   C.   Review And Action By The Board Of Trustees:
      1.   The applicant shall, at its own cost, give advance written notice of
the first meeting of the village board where the planned development
application will be considered by regular mail to the owners of record of the
property which is the subject of the application (if different from the
applicant), and the owners of all property within five hundred feet of the
subject property, not less than seven days prior to the date of the first
village board meeting. This requirement is enacted to assure the most complete
public notice possible for the proposed application for a planned development,
it is not required by state law. Accordingly, any failure to comply with this
subsection shall not invalidate, impair or otherwise affect any planned
development permit subsequently granted following such meetings. The applicant
shall provide the zoning administrator with proof of mailing of the mailed
notice required herein, which proof shall be provided prior to the start of the
first meeting of the village board where the planned development application
will be considered.
      2.   Within seven to sixty days after receiving the receipt of the report
and recommendation of the development review board, and without further public
hearing, the board of trustees may deny the application, may refer the
application to the development review board for further review, may postpone
further consideration pending the submittal of additional information including
any application requirement previously waived by the development review board
or may adopt a zoning ordinance approving the planned development permit.
      3.   Any action taken by the board of trustees pursuant to subsection C2
of this section shall require the concurrence of a majority of all the trustees
of the village then holding office, including the village president; however,
if the planned development fails to receive the approval of the development
review board, the ordinance shall not be approved except by a favorable
majority vote of all trustees then holding office.
      4.   In approving a planned development permit, the board of trustees may
attach such conditions to the approval as it deems necessary, or modify
conditions imposed by the development review board, to have the proposed use or
combination of uses meet the standards set forth in section
10-19-3 of this chapter and to prevent or minimize adverse effects on other
property in the immediate vicinity. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to: limitations on size, bulk and location; requirements for
landscaping, stormwater management, signage, outdoor lighting, provisions for
adequate ingress and egress; hours of operation; and such other conditions as
the village board may deem to be in furtherance of the objectives of this
section. (Ord. 3587, 2-29-2016)
10-19-6: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   An application for a planned development may only be filed by one who
has an ownership interest, or the agents thereof; or any contract purchaser or
anyone holding an option to purchase the parcel of land on which the use or
combination of uses is to be located; or any unit of government which either
owns the parcel or which is not the owner of the parcel but proposes to acquire
the parcel by purchase, gift, or condemnation; or any developer or development
team which has entered into a redevelopment agreement with the unit of local
government seeking to acquire the parcel.
   B.   Applications for a planned development shall be filed with the zoning
administrator in such form and accompanied by such information, with sufficient
copies, as shall be established from time to time by the village. Every
application shall contain at a minimum the following information and related
data:
      1.   The names and addresses of the owner of the subject property, the
applicant and all persons having an ownership or beneficial interest in the
subject property and proposed development.
      2.   A statement from the owner, if not the applicant, approving the
filing of the application by the particular applicant.
      3.   A survey, legal description and street address of the subject
property.
      4.   A statement indicating compliance of the proposed development to the
comprehensive plan; and evidence of the proposed project's compliance in
specific detail with each of the standards and objectives of this section.
      5.   A scaled site plan showing the existing contiguous land uses,
natural topographic features, zoning districts, public thoroughfares,
transportation and utilities.
      6.   A scaled site plan of the proposed development showing lot area, the
required yards and setbacks, contour lines, common space and the location,
bulk, and lot area coverage and heights of buildings and structures, number of
parking spaces and loading areas.
      7.   Schematic drawings illustrating the design and character of the
building elevations, types of construction, and floor plans of all proposed
buildings and structures. The drawings shall also include a schedule showing
the number, type, and floor area of all uses or combination of uses, and the
floor area of the entire development.
      8.   A landscaping plan showing the location, size, character and
composition of vegetation and other material.
      9.   The substance of covenants, easements, and other restrictions
existing and any to be imposed on the use of land, including common open space,
and buildings or structures.
      10.   A schedule of development showing the approximate date for
beginning and completion of each stage of construction of development.
      11.   A statement acknowledging the responsibility of the applicant to
record a certified copy of the zoning ordinance granting the planned
development permit with the Cook County recorder of deeds' office and to
provide evidence of said recording to the village within thirty days of passage
in the event the proposed planned development is approved by the village board.
      12.   A professional traffic study acceptable to the village showing the
proposed traffic circulation pattern within and in the vicinity of the area of
the development, including the location and description of public improvements
to be installed, including any streets and access easements.
      13.   A professional economic analysis acceptable to the village,
including the following:
         a.   The financial capability of the applicant to complete the
proposed development;
         b.   Evidence of the project's economic viability; and
         c.   An analysis summarizing the economic impact the proposed
development will have upon the village.
      14.   Copies of all environmental impact studies as required by law.
      15.   An analysis reporting the anticipated demand on all village
services.
      16.   A plan showing off site utility improvements required to service
the planned development, and a report showing the cost allocations for those
improvements.
      17.   A site drainage plan for the developed tract.
      18.   A list of the site development allowances sought.
      19.   A written summary of residents' comments pertaining to the proposed
application. This summary shall serve as the official record of the meeting
that the applicant shall be required to hold with all property owners within
five hundred feet of the proposed development. This meeting shall be held prior
to the submission of the application for a planned development. The applicant
is further required to provide evidence that a notice of this meeting was sent
by regular mail to all affected property owners at least fifteen days before
the required meeting date.
   C.   The applicant may submit a written request for waiver of any
application requirement in accordance with subsections
10-19-5A1c and A1d of this chapter. The decision of the development review
board shall be final regarding the approval or denial of the request. However,
the development review board's decision regarding the request for a waiver of
an application requirement does not preclude the village board from requesting
that same information or any additional information it deems applicable for its
review of the planned development application.
   D.   Every application must be accompanied by a fee in such amount as
established from time to time by the village board to defray the costs of
providing notice and contracting with independent professionals to review
applications as required. Such professional costs may include, but are not
limited to, engineering, legal fees, traffic analyses, environmental impact
studies, land use design or other similarly related professional studies.
Additional materials may be required during the review of a proposed planned
development if determined necessary by the development review board or the
village board. (Ord. 3587, 2-29-2016)
10-19-7: EFFECT OF APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
   A.   Approval of the planned development permit by the board of trustees
authorizes the applicant to proceed with any necessary applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy, and other permits which the
village may require for the proposed development. The zoning administrator
shall review applications for these permits for compliance with the terms of
the planned development permit granted by the board of trustees. No permit
shall be issued for development which does not comply with the terms of the
planned development permit.
   B.   The village board shall direct the zoning administrator to revise the
official zoning map to reflect the existence and boundaries of each planned
development permit granted.
   C.   An approval of a planned development permit by the board of trustees
shall be null and void if the recipient does not file an application for a
building permit for the proposed development within nine months after the date
of adoption of the zoning ordinance approving the development permit.
   D.   An approval of a planned development permit by the board of trustees
shall be null and void if construction has not commenced within fifteen months
and is not completed within thirty three months after the date of adoption of
the zoning ordinance approving the planned development permit.
   E.   An approval of a planned development permit with a phasing plan shall
be null and void if construction has not commenced or is not completed in
accordance with the terms of that phasing plan.
   F.   An approval of a planned development permit with a master plan shall be
null and void if construction has not commenced or is not completed in
accordance with the terms and conditions contained in the master plan.
   G.   An extension of the time requirements stated in subsections C, D, and E
of this section may be granted by the board of trustees for good cause shown by
the applicant, provided a written request is filed with the village at least
four weeks prior to the respective deadline.
   H.   A planned development permit shall be null and void if the use or
combination of uses for which the approval was granted ceases for a period of
one year.
   I.   No application for a planned development which was previously denied by
the board of trustees shall be considered by the development review board or
the board of trustees if it is resubmitted in substantially the same form and/
or content within two years of the date of such prior denial.
      1.   The zoning administrator shall review the application for a planned
development and determine if the application is or is not substantially the
same. An applicant has the right to request a hearing before the village board
to appeal the determination of the zoning administrator, provided a petition
for appeal is filed in writing to the zoning administrator within ten days of
the decision.
      2.   The board shall affirm or reverse the determination of the
administrator regarding whether the new application is in substantially the
same form within thirty days of receipt of a petition for appeal.
      3.   If it is determined that the new application is not substantially in
the same form, then the applicant is entitled to submit an application and have
it reviewed in accordance with the provisions of section
10-19-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 3587, 2-29-2016)
10-19-8: AMENDMENTS AND ALTERATIONS TO APPROVED PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, any modifications
to a project operating under an approved planned development permit or any
addition to or expansion of a project operating under an existing planned
development permit shall require separate review and approval under the
provisions of this section.
   B.   A minor change is any change in the site plan or design details of a
project operating under an approved planned development permit which is
consistent with the standards and conditions applying to the project and which
does not alter the concept or intent of the project.
A change is not minor if it, with regard to the approvals granted in the
planned development permit:
      1.   Increases the density;
      2.   Increases the height of buildings, unless the proposed height change
is less than or equal to the lesser of: a) the height permitted in the
property's zoning district regulations in effect as of the date the planned
development permit is approved, or b) the height permitted in the property's
zoning district regulations in effect as of the date the minor amendment is
requested;
      3.   Increases the footprint of a building;
      4.   Modifies the proportion of housing types;
      5.   Reduces the number of parking spaces;
      6.   Creates a greater demand or burden on village services or alters the
alignment of roads;
      7.   Increases the amount of stormwater conveyed to the village's
stormwater sewer system; or
      8.   Amends final governing agreements, provisions or covenants, or
provides any other change inconsistent with any standard or condition imposed
by the board of trustees in approving the planned development permit.
A minor change may be approved by the zoning administrator without obtaining
separate approval by the board of trustees. In addition, the village board may,
after reviewing the request for a minor change made by the village staff or the
applicant, direct the village administrator to process the minor change
administratively. A minor change that would constitute a variation under the
zoning title may only be approved at the direction of the village board. Any
minor change approved by the zoning administrator shall be reported to the
village board. (Ord. 3587, 2-29-2016)
CHAPTER 20
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
SECTION:
10-20-1: Height
10-20-2: Area
10-20-1: HEIGHT:
The requirements in the height regulations in all foregoing sections of this
title shall be subject to the following exceptions and regulations:
   A.   Public, semi-public or public service buildings, houses of worship, or
schools may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty feet; provided that if
such building is adjacent to a residential district it shall be set back from
each such property line at least one foot for each foot of additional building
height above the limit for that district, in addition to other requirements of
this title.
   B.   Chimneys, elevator penthouse, penthouses, stacks, ornamental towers and
spires, flagpoles, wireless towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances, and
small wireless facilities and wireless support structures as defined and
regulated by
title 5, chapter 16, "Small Wireless Facilities", of this Code, may be erected
to a height in accordance with the Village Code or applicable laws. (Ord. 3710,
8-20-2018)
10-20-2: AREA:
The requirements in the area regulations in all foregoing sections of this
title shall be subject to the following exceptions and regulations:
   A.   Every part of a required yard shall be open from the ground to the sky
unobstructed, except for:
      1.   The projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, gutters,
downspouts, and ornamental features not exceeding four inches; and,
      2.   The projection of bay windows and balconies into front and rear
yards not exceeding eighteen inches.
   B.   The ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into front and rear
yards not exceeding twelve inches may be permitted, provided written permission
is first obtained from the Director of Public Works.
   C.   No yard, court or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall again be
used as a yard, court or other space for another building.
   D.   Any building lawfully erected prior to May 6, 1922, which does not
conform to the height and area regulations hereof shall not be altered if said
alteration constitutes a violation of any of that districts height or area
regulations. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
CHAPTER 21
LAND USE CHART
SECTION:
10-21-1: Land Use Chart
10-21-2: Annual Review
10-21-3: Appendix A
10-21-1: LAND USE CHART:
The land use chart contained in appendix A, set out in section
10-21-3 of this chapter indicates what the permitted, prohibited and special
uses and planned developments required are in each of the zoning districts
established by this zoning title. When a use is not specifically listed as a
prohibited, permitted, special or planned development use in the land use chart
in section
10-21-3, such use is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995; amd. Ord. 3270,
3-23-2009; Ord. 3788, 12-9-2019)
10-21-2: ANNUAL REVIEW:
An annual review of land use chart contained in appendix A of this chapter
shall be conducted no later than January 1 of every year. (Ord. 2873,
10-21-3: APPENDIX A:
APPENDIX A - LAND USE CHART - PDF
     D I S T R I C T S
                                                                          ORIC        PRI Public/
LAND R1 And R2   R3 Medium   R4 High     C1         C2         C3 Central Office/     Private
USES Low Density Density     Density     Commercial Commercial Commercial Research/   Recreational
     Residential Residential Residential                                  Industrial/ Institutional
                                                                          Commercial
                  D I S T R I C T S
                                                                                       ORIC        PRI Public/
                  R1 And R2   R3 Medium   R4 High     C1         C2         C3 Central Office/     Private
LAND USES         Low Density Density     Density     Commercial Commercial Commercial Research/   Recreational
                  Residential Residential Residential                                  Industrial/ Institutional
                                                                                       Commercial
RESIDENTIAL                                                                                  
Dormitories       N           N           N           N          N          N          N           S
Group homes       S           S           N           N          N          N          N           N
Halfway houses    N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
Home occupations  P           P           P           N          P          P          N           N
Multiple-family   N           N           PD          N          PD         PD         N           N
dwellings
Multiple-family
dwellings above
first floor of    N           N           N           N          PD         PD         PD          N
permitted
commercial or
office uses
Nursing homes and
skilled care      N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
facilities
Rooming and       N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
boarding houses
Short term rental N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
Single-family
dwelling -        N           PD          PD          N          N          N          N           N
attached
Single-family
dwelling -        P           P           P           N          N          N          N           N
detached
Transitional      N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
housing
RETAIL TRADE                                                                                 
Adult bookstore/
adult             N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
entertainment
Art dealers       N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Automotive parts, N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
accessories
Boat sales and    N           N           N           P          P          N          S           N
service
Book, periodical  N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
and music stores
Camera and
photographic      N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
supply stores
Casket sales      N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Cellular phone    N           N           N           N          N          N          N           S
antennas
Clothing stores   N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Computer and      N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
software stores
Dry cleaning,
with off premises N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
cleaning
Dry cleaning,
with on premises  N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
cleaning
Electronics and   N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
appliance stores
Florists          N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Furniture and
home furnishing   N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
stores
Gift, novelty,
and souvenir      N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
shops
Gun shops         N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
Hardware stores   N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Hobby, toy, and   N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
game stores
Jewelry stores    N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Luggage and
leather goods     N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
stores
Lumber and other
building          N           N           N           S          S          N          S           N
materials
Medical cannabis  N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
dispensary
Miscellaneous     N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
retail stores
Motor fuel        N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
service station
Motor fuel
service station   N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
with minimarts
Motor vehicle     N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
body shops
Motor vehicle     N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
sales and rental
Motor vehicles
repair and
maintenance, not  N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
including
bodywork
Musical
instrument and    N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
supply stores
News dealers and
newsstands        N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
(indoors)
News dealers and
newsstands        N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
(outdoors)
Optical goods     N           N           N           P          P          P          S           N
stores
Paint, glass and  N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
wallpaper stores
Parking
facilities -
enclosed, not     N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
accessory to use
on same lot
Parking
facilities -
outdoor, not
accessory to use
on same lot, for
noncommercial
vehicles only
(exception made   N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
for commercial
vehicles
temporarily
parked in the
course of
providing
deliveries or
services)
Pawnshops         N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
Pet and pet       N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
supplies stores
Prerecorded tape,
CD and record     N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
stores
Recreational
cannabis          N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
dispensary
Rental stores
(with outdoor     N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
storage)
Retail nurseries  N           N           N           S          S          S          P           N
and garden stores
Retail -          N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
temporary
Sewing,
needlework and    N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
piece goods
Shoe stores       N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Sporting goods    N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
stores
Stationery stores N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Tobacco stores    N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
Used merchandise  N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
stores
Wholesale sales
and distribution,
no outside        N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
storage or
display
Wholesale sales
with storage of   N           N           N           N          N          N          S           N
materials
outdoors
ACCOMMODATIONS                                                                               
AND FOOD SERVICES
Bars, taverns and N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
cocktail lounges
Coffee shops      N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Convenience food  N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
marts
Dinner theaters   N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
Fast food         N           N           N           S          S          N          S           N
establishment
Hotels            N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
Nursing homes and
skilled care      N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
facilities
Restaurant -      N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
drive-through
Restaurants
operating outside N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
the hours of 7:00
A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
Restaurants, sit
down, greater     N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
than 5,000 square
feet
Restaurants, sit
down, less than   N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
5,000 square feet
Specialty food    N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
stores
FINANCIAL,
INSURANCE AND                                                                                
REAL ESTATE
Commodity
contract brokers, N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
dealers
Financial
institutions with N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
drive-up window
Financial
institutions      N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
without drive- up
window
Insurance agents,
brokers and       N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
service
Investment        N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
advisors
Real estate
agents and        N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
managers
Security brokers  N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
and dealers
SERVICES                                                                                     
Accounting,
auditing and      N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
bookkeeping
Adult daycare     N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
facilities
Advertising       N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
agencies
Architectural,
engineering and   N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
related services
Auto
repossession/     N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
recovery
Barbershops       N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Beauty shops      N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Business and      N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
technical schools
Business          N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
consulting
Business
operations
involving the     N           N           N           S          S          S          N           N
storage of
hazardous
materials
Business
operations
involving the     N           N           N           S          S          S          N           N
storage of
vehicles for more
than 24 hours
Car wash          N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
Commercial art
and graphic       N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
design
Computer and data
processing        N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
services
Currency
exchange, payday  N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
loan store, check
cashing services
Direct mail
advertising       N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
services
Electrical repair
shops (small      N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
consumer
appliances)
Employment        N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
agencies
Extermination and
pest control      N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
services
Funeral homes     N           N           N           P          P          N          S           N
Labor             N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
organizations
Landscaping       N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
services
Legal services    N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Limousine service N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
Massage parlors   N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
Massage therapy   N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
establishment
Medical equipment N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
rental
Medical or dental
offices, labs and
outpatient        N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
surgical
facilities
Pet care (except
veterinary)       N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
services
Photocopying and
duplicating       N           N           N           P          P          S          S           N
services
Photographic      N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
studios, portrait
Political         N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
organizations
Private
instructional     N           N           N           P          P          P          P           S
facilities
Private mailing   N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
service
Professional      N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
organizations
Public postal     N           N           N           N          N          N          P           N
service
Rail terminals -  N           N           N           N          N          N          N           P
commuter
Recycling centers N           N           N           N          N          N          S           P
- drop off
Reupholsters and  N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
furniture repair
Secretarial and   N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
court reporting
Shoe repair and   N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
shoeshine parlors
Tanning salons    N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Tattoo parlor     N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
Telemarketing     N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
bureaus
Towing operations N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
(sole purpose)
Travel agents     N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
Veterinary
hospitals or      N           N           N           S          S          N          S           N
clinics for small
animals
Videotape and     N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
disk rental
Watch, clock,     N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
jewelry repair
INDUSTRIAL                                                                                   
Canning and
bottling          N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
facilities
Cellular phone    N           N           N           N          N          N          N           S
antennas
Electrical
distribution
centers and       S           S           S           S          S          S          S           P
utility
substations
Manufacturing
labs, testing     N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
facilities
Manufacturing,
processing,
assembly and
packaging of      N           N           N           N          N          N          S           N
biological and
botanical
products, except
manure
Manufacturing,
processing,
assembly and
packaging of
merchandise from
prepared          N           N           N           N          N          N          S           N
materials, and
pharmaceuticals,
toiletries and
plastics,
chemicals and
food products
Medical cannabis
cultivation       N           N           N           S          S          S          S           N
center
Metal fabrication N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
facilities
Newspaper offices
and distribution  N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
services
Recreational
cannabis craft    N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
grower
Recreational
cannabis          N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
cultivation
center
Recreational      N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
cannabis infuser
Recreational
cannabis          N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
processor
Recreational
cannabis          N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
transporter
Vehicle and
equipment storage
yards - outdoor,  N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
not accessory to
use on same lot
ENTERTAINMENT AND                                                                            
RECREATION
Billiard/pool     N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
halls
Fitness and
recreational
sports centers -
less than 10,000  N           N           N           P          P          P          P           P
square feet in
floor and land
area
Fitness and
recreational
sports centers -
10,000 square     N           N           N           S          S          N          S           S
feet or more in
floor and land
area
Martial arts      N           N           N           P          P          P          S           N
facilities
Off track betting N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
facilities
Swimming pools -  P           P           P           N          N          N          N           N
private
Swimming pools -  N           N           N           N          N          N          N           P
public
Tennis, racquet
and paddle ball   S           S           S           N          N          N          N           N
courts - private
Theaters for
movie and drama - N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
commercial
Video game        N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
arcades
INSTITUTIONAL                                                                                
Colleges and      N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
universities
Convents,
monasteries and   N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
seminaries
Hospitals and     N           N           N           N          N          N          N           N
clinics
Houses of worship N           N           N           N          N          N          N           P
Libraries         N           N           N           N          N          N          N           P
Membership
organizations,
related to
recreational      N           N           N           S          S          S          S           S
facilities and
accessory
buildings
Municipal
buildings,        N           N           N           N          N          N          N           P
structures and
grounds
Museums,
historical sites  N           N           N           S          S          S          S           P
and like
institutions
Parks, forest
preserves,
related
recreational      N           N           N           N          N          N          N           P
facilities,
administrative
offices and
storage buildings
Schools, public
and private,
elementary,       N           N           N           N          N          N          N           P
junior high and
high schools
ACCESSORY USES
Child daycare     N           N           N           N          N          S          N           S
center
Child daycare     P           P           P           N          P          P          N           N
homes
Commissaries for
students and      N           N           N           N          N          N          N           P
faculty
Dormitories       N           N           N           N          N          N          N           P
Electric vehicle  P           P           P           P          E          P          P           P
charging
Garages, parking
facilities, and   P           P           P           P          P          P          P           P
similar off
street parking
Ground mounted
solar energy      S           S           S           S          S          S          S           S
collection
system2
Permanent
cosmetics,
microblading,
micropigmentation N           N           N           P          P          P          P           N
and similar care
services -
accessory to a
beauty shop
Rectories,
parsonages and    N           N           P           N          P          P          N           P
parish houses
Roof mounted
solar energy      P           P           P           P          P          P          P           P
collection
system2
Small wireless    S           S           S           P          S          S          S           S
facilities1
Other accessory
structures for
mechanical
equipment,
storage of        P           P           P           N          N          N          N           P
mechanical
equipment and
vehicles and
athletic fields
and stands
 
Note:
   1.    Small wireless facilities, as defined and regulated by title 5,
chapter 16, "Small Wireless Facilities", of this Code, are permitted uses in
all rights-of-way within the Village, and are allowed outside of the right-of-
way as specified in this table.
   2.   Ground mounted solar energy collection systems and roof mounted solar
energy collection systems shall be subject to the standards established in
section
10-7-6.
(Ord. 3270, 3-23-2009; amd. Ord. 3586, 2-29-2016; Ord. 3710, 8-20-2018; Ord.
3742, 4-22-2019; Ord. 3788, 12-9-2019; Ord. 3799, 2-24-2020; Ord. 3802, 3-30-
2020; Ord. 3870, 9-12-2022; Ord. 3919, 1-22-2024; Ord. 3943, 10-28-2024)
CHAPTER 22
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-22-1: Enforcement Authority
10-22-2: Violations And Penalties
10-22-1: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
This Zoning Title shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator who is hereby
empowered and whose duty is shall be to enforce this Zoning Title. (Ord. 2640,
5-23-1995)
10-22-2: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or
who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Zoning Title shall
be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each day that a violation is permitted to
exist. (Ord. 2838, 7-26-1999)
CHAPTER 23
PERMITS AND DOCUMENTS REQUIRED
SECTION:
10-23-1: Occupancy Permits Required
10-23-2: Plats
10-23-3: Subdivision Plats
10-23-4: Dedications Of School Lands Or Payments Of Fees In Lieu Thereof
10-23-1: OCCUPANCY PERMITS REQUIRED:
Subsequent to the effective date hereof, no change of use or occupancy of land,
nor any change of use or occupancy in an existing building shall be made, nor
shall any new building be occupied for any purpose until a certificate of
occupancy shall state that the new occupancy complies with all provisions of
this Zoning Title.
   A.   No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of, any
building shall be issued before the application has been made for a building
permit and no such building or premises shall be occupied until a certificate
of occupancy has been issued.
   B.   A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the
office of the Director of Public Works and copies shall be furnished on request
to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or in a building
affected by such certificate of occupancy.
   C.   A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all nonconforming uses
of land or buildings created by the passage of these regulations. Application
for such certificates of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be filed with
the Director of Public Works by the owner or lessee of the land or building
occupied by such nonconforming use within one year from the effective date
hereof. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to issue a
certificate of occupancy for such nonconforming use.
   D.   Any nonconforming use for which an occupancy permit has not been
obtained in conformity with the requirements of this Section shall be presumed
to be operating in violation of this Zoning Title and such use shall thereupon
be abated.
   E.   A fee shall be charged for each original certificate and for each copy,
as determined by the Village Board from time to time.
   F.   No public utility company shall furnish any new or additional meters to
any building or to the owner, occupant or occupants thereof until it has
received a written permit to do so from the Director of Public Works. This
subsection shall have no application to the mere exchange of meters for repair
or service, or to the furnishing of temporary service.
   G.   No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for buildings, parcels or
tracts of land in the R1, R2, R3, R4, C1, C2, C3, ORIC and PRI Districts until
the following information and accompanying data is submitted to the Village for
administrative review:
      1.   The names and addresses of the owner of the subject property, the
applicant and all persons having an ownership interest in the subject property.
      2.   A survey, legal description, and street address of the subject
property.
      3.   A written description explaining the nature of the proposed
occupancy and use.
      4.   A scaled site plan showing the contiguous land uses, natural
features, zoning, public thoroughfares, transportation, and utilities.
      5.   A scaled site plan showing common space, and the location, bulk, and
lot area coverage of building(s) and structure(s), parking and loading areas.
      6.   A schedule showing the number, type, and floor area of any business
uses, and the floor area, lot area, and lot coverage.
      7.   The substance of covenants, easements, and other restrictions
existing and to be imposed on the use of the land, including common open space,
and buildings and structures.
      8.   A schedule of development showing the approximate date for beginning
and completion of each stage of construction. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-23-2: PLATS:
Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat in
duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the size of the building to be erected, its location upon the lot, and
such other information, including off-street parking, as may be necessary to
provide for the enforcement of this Zoning Title. A complete record of such
applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the Director of Public
Works. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
10-23-3: SUBDIVISION PLATS:
   A.   All persons subdividing any piece of land, block, lot or sublot, or any
part thereof, in the Village shall make a map or plat thereof, and before
recording the same in the Recorder's office of the County, as provided by law,
shall submit the same, with three additional copies thereof, to the President
and Board for their approval or rejection, as they may deem proper provided
that said plat shall comply to all applicable zoning requirements unless a
variation to said requirements has been granted by the Village. If approved,
such approval shall be certified thereon, and signed by the Village President
and attested by the Village Clerk; and no such map or plat shall be valid or
entitled to be recorded until it shall have been approved as aforesaid.
   B.   The duplicate of such map or plat as provided in subsection A of this
Section shall be kept on file by the Village Clerk for the use and benefit of
the Village. No such map or plat shall be approved as aforesaid until the same
shall have been properly certified by a surveyor and acknowledged by the owner,
as provided by the laws of the State. (Ord. 2733, 8-11-1997)
   C.   From and after October 11, 1994, no subdivision of any piece of land,
block, lot or sublot, or any part thereof, in the Village shall be approved by
the President and Board unless each resulting lot is equal to or greater in
width than the average width of all lots within the same block, consisting of
both sides of the street and measured by the closest intersecting street on
each side; provided further, however, that each said resulting lot shall have a
width of not less than fifty feet and that corner houses shall be deemed to
front on their respective north/south streets.
   D.   Where two or more lots are combined for the construction of one single-
family dwelling, said lots will be construed as one lot for purposes of
calculating the average width of lots within the same block. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-
1995)
10-23-4: DEDICATIONS OF SCHOOL LANDS OR PAYMENTS OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF:
As a condition of approval of a certificate of occupancy for the use of a new
residential structure or a residential structure or structures that replace an
existing structure, or as a condition of approval of a final plat of
development, a final plat of subdivision, or a final plat of or special use
permit for a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be
required to dedicate land for school purposes to serve the immediate and future
needs of the residents and children of the development, or make a cash
contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at
the option of the Village, in accordance with the criteria and formula that
follow. For the purposes of this Section, "school" and "school district" shall
refer only to public elementary school districts.
   A.   Criteria For School Land Dedication:
      1.   Requirements And Population Ratio: The ultimate population density
of a proposed development, subdivision or planned unit development shall bear
directly upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The
land dedication requirement shall be determined in accordance with the data for
the estimated number of children entering school per type of dwelling found in
the latest edition of the table prepared by Associated Municipal Consultants,
Inc., which table is reproduced as a density formula in subsection C of this
Section.
School classifications and size of school sites within the Village shall be
determined in accordance with the following criteria based upon
"Recommendations for Elementary and High School Spaces", published by the
Illinois State Board of Education, Springfield, Illinois:
 
School Classification Maximum Number Of Students Minimum Number Of
By Grades                                        Acres Of Land
Elementary            600                        11
Junior high           900                        29
 
      2.   Location: The Comprehensive Plan of the Village, the comprehensive
school plan or facility utilization plan of the school district and the
standards adopted by the school district shall be considered in locating school
sites. The location of dedicated school sites shall be determined with the
input of the school district involved. A central location which will serve
equally the entire development is most desirable. Additional guidelines which
shall be considered in locating sites include, but are not limited to, size of
the subdivisions, proximity of the site to other schools and Municipal
services, topography and shape of the site, accessibility of the site, safety
and other environmental and use conditions.
   B.   Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of School Land: Where the
subdivision or development is small and the resulting school site is, in the
opinion of the Village, after consultation with the school district, too small
to be practical or when the available land, in the opinion of the Village,
after consultation with the school district, is inappropriate for school
purposes, the Village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash
contribution in lieu of the land dedication required. The cash contributions in
lieu of school land dedication shall be paid to and held in trust by the school
district in which the development is located, solely for the acquisition of
land for school sites and/or the types of improvements of school land, as set
forth in subsection B2 of this Section which will be available to serve the
immediate or future needs of the residents of that development, subdivision or
planned unit development or for the improvement of other existing local school
land which already serves such needs. The Village shall have the right to
request and receive from the affected school district's annual audit reports
and any other information the Village may need from time to time to ensure
compliance with this Chapter. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of
school land dedication is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within
ten years from the date of receipt, the school district holding the funds shall
refund such contribution to the owners of record of all lots, except lots
dedicated pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, in the development,
subdivision, or planned unit development for which such contribution was made.
The refund shall be paid to the persons who are the owners of record on the day
which is the tenth anniversary of the receipt of such contribution. The amount
of the refund due to each lot owner shall be equal to the amount of the
original contribution, together with such interest as may have been earned
thereon, divided by the total number of lots in the development, subdivision or
planned unit development (excluding only those lots which were dedicated
pursuant to this Chapter) for which such contribution was made.
      1.   Acquisition Using Cash In Lieu Of School Land Donations:
         a.   The term "acquisition" as used in this Chapter shall mean "the
acquiring of land by purchase, condemnation or such other means as may be
appropriate".
         b.   The acquired land shall be used for the construction of new
facilities or shall support the types of improvements as set forth in
subsection B2 of this Section.
      2.   Improvement Using Cash In Lieu Of School Land Donations: Where
existing school lands will serve the needs of the development, the cash
contribution in lieu of land dedication shall be used for the following types
of physical improvements: expansion of existing school facilities, including
remodeling to allow the accommodation of additional students in the facility,
additions to existing facilities, additions to school grounds and environment,
purchase or lease of prefabricated units and costs of a capital nature related
to any of the foregoing.
      3.   Fair Market Value: The cash contribution in lieu of improved land
shall be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the
development. It has been determined that the present fair market value of such
improved land in and surrounding the Village is four hundred twenty nine
thousand one hundred dollars per acre and such figure shall be used in making
any calculation herein unless the subdivider, developer, or the school district
involved files a written objection thereto. In the event of any such objection,
the objecting party shall, at its cost, submit an appraisal by a Member of
Appraisal Institute (MAI) showing the fair market value of the land in the
development or other evidence thereof and final determination of said fair
market value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the Village Board
based upon such information submitted by the subdivider, developer, or school
district involved and from other sources which may be submitted to the Village
Board by others. Any developer, subdivider or school district involved shall
have a reasonable opportunity to dispute any appraisal submitted under this
Section and to submit a contrary appraisal before the Village Board makes a
final decision as to any adjustment to the fair market value, except that the
Village in conjunction with the school district involved may from time to time
submit amendments to this provision to provide for different fair market values
for parcels that are deemed by the school district involved and the Village to
be of greater or lesser value.
      4.   Adjustment Of Fair Market Value: The fair market value as
established in this Section shall be adjusted from time to time as deemed
necessary by the Village. Such adjusted fair market value shall be used in
making calculations thereafter until further adjustment by the Village or
unless the subdivider, developer or the school district involved files a
written objection thereto. The objecting party shall follow the procedure for
objecting set forth in subsection B3 of this Section. In determining the fair
market value of an improved acre of land, the land shall be valued as if
subdivided or subject to an approved planned unit development at its highest
and best use and improved substantially as provided in subsection G of this
Section.
      5.   Criteria For Requiring Dedication And A Fee: There may be situations
when both a land dedication and a cash contribution are necessary. These
occasions may arise, among others, when:
         a.   If it is determined by the Village that the land to be dedicated
for a school site within a development contains fewer acres than the amount
called for by this 3Chapter, a cash contribution shall be required for the
difference between the amount of land called for by this Chapter and the amount
of land which is actually to be dedicated.
         b.   If a major part of a local school site has already been acquired
and only a small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the
site, the remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash
contribution for the difference shall be required.
   C.   Density Formula: The following table of population density is generally
indicative of current and short-range projected trends in family size for new
construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication
of acres of land or the cash contribution in lieu of unless a written objection
is filed thereto by the subdivider, developer, or school district:
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
CHILDREN PER UNIT
Type of Unit Pre-School Elementary Junior High Total
Type of Unit Pre-School Elementary Junior High Total
Grades       0-4        K-5        6-8         K-8
Years of Age 0-4        5-10       11-13       5-13
Detached Single-Family:
2 bedroom    .102       .122       .041        .163
3 bedroom    .254       .346       .138        .484
4 bedroom    .413       .470       .303        .773
5 bedroom    .236       .314       .231        .545
Attached Single-Family:
1 bedroom    -0-        -0-        -0-         -0-
2 bedroom    .092       .095       .077        .172
3 bedroom    .231       .237       .064        .301
4 bedroom    .332       .345       .155        .500
Apartments:
Efficiency   -0-        -0-        -0-         -0-
1 bedroom    -0-        .002       .001        .003
2 bedroom    .042       .082       .041        .123
3 bedroom    .050       .230       .123        .353
 
Note: There are only 3 significant categories provided in this chart, because
of the similarity of yields of all types of attached single-family dwelling
units, only 1 category is provided. The same is true with apartments; thus,
only 1 category. Because of the relatively short history of some newer types of
detached and attached single-family units, individual evaluations may be
necessary. Copyright 1993 Illinois School Consulting Service Associated
Municipal/Consultants, Inc. Naperville, Illinois.
      1.   Objections to Density Formula: In the event a subdivider, developer
or school district involved files a written objection to the Table of Estimated
Ultimate Population listed herein and submits his own demographic study showing
the estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision or
planned unit development, a final determination of the density formula to be
used in such calculations shall be made by the Village Board based upon such
demographic information as the Village shall require. It is recognized that
population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the
years, and the specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of
fees in-lieu-thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and
amendment if necessary.
      2.   Presumed Density Formula: In applying the above table of population
density to a development or subdivision for which the types of units and number
of bedrooms cannot reasonably be determined from the data on file with the
Village at the time the application for final plat approval is complete, the
following types of units and bedroom data shall be used unless written
objection is filed thereto by the subdivider, developer or school district:
 
Detached single-family: Four bedroom unit per lot.
Attached single-family: Equal mix of two and three bedroom units at maximum
                        unit density permitted by applicable zoning.
Low density apartment:  Equal mix of two and three bedroom units at maximum
                        unit density permitted by applicable zoning.
High density apartment: Equal mix of one and two bedroom units at maximum unit
                        density permitted by applicable zoning.
 
   D.   Reservation of Additional Land: Where the Comprehensive Plan of the
Village calls for a larger amount of school land in a particular proposed
development, subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is
required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's contribution
shall, if so determined by the Village Board, be reserved for subsequent
purchase by the Village or other public body designated by the Village provided
that such acquisition is made within one year from the date of approval of the
final plat.
   E.   Combining with Adjoining Developments: Where the subdivision or planned
unit development is less than forty acres, school space which is to be
dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining
developments in order to produce usable recreation areas or school sites
without hardship on a particular developer.
   F.   Topography and Grading: The slope, topography and geology of the
dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for school uses shall not differ greatly
from surrounding land.
   G.   Improved Sites: All sites shall be graded to a level condition
reasonably conforming with the adjacent property and suitable for construction
and operation of a school and dedicated in a condition ready for full service
of electricity, natural gas, water, sewer, sidewalks, street trees, storm water
control and streets, including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter.
   H.   Title to Sites: All sites to be dedicated shall be conveyed to the
Village either by warranty or trustee's deed, or such form of conveyance as the
Village shall require. The subdivider or developer shall be responsible for
conveying good, merchantable title to such sites, and shall be responsible for
payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance, including any
agricultural roll back taxes which might be extended or levied against such
sites. A commitment for title insurance issued by a company authorized to do
business in Illinois, for the benefit of the school district and at the expense
of the subdivider or developer, shall be required as evidence of clear title.
Conveyance shall occur only after or simultaneously with the passage of a
resolution by the school district in which the development is located in which
it indicates that the property will be accepted by the school district for
school purposes. Immediately thereafter, the Village shall convey such property
to the Township Trustees of Schools, for the use and benefit of the appropriate
school district.
   I.   Replacement Structures: Where a subdivider or developer has applied for
a certificate of occupancy for the use of a residential structure or structures
that replace an existing structure, the subdivider's or developer's obligation
under the terms of this Section shall be modified as follows:
      1.   If the replacement structure is a multi-family residential
structure, the formula for determining the required land dedication or impact
fee as set forth in subsection J shall be calculated using the increase in the
number of units in the replacement structure as compared to the original
structure.
      2.   If the replacement structure is a single-family residential
structure and there is no increase in the number of structures, it shall be
considered a de minimis increase in density and shall be exempt from the
obligations of this Section.
      3.   If the replacement structures are single-family residential
structures and the original structure remains, the land dedication/impact fee
requirement shall be applied only to the new structures.
      4.   If the replacement structures are single-family residential
structures and no original structure remains, the land dedication/impact fee
requirement shall be applied only to the increased number of structures. It is
the intent of this Title that the land dedication/impact fee requirement shall
first be applied to those structures with the largest amount of square footage,
or, if the square footage is equal, then inversely to the order in which the
application for the certificate of occupancy was filed.
   J.   Calculation of Land Dedication or Payment In-Lieu-Thereof:
      1.   The required land dedication or payments in lieu thereof under this
Chapter shall be calculated as follows:
         Step 1. Derive the children per unit (CPU) figures from the density
formula (subsection C) for the development type of K-5 children (CPU
elementary) and 6-8 children (CPU junior high) and multiply each by the number
of units (U). If the structure is a replacement multi-family residential
structure as defined in subsection I, the number of units (U) shall be the
increase in the number of units in the replacement structure from the original
structure or structures.
         A separate calculation shall be done for the CPU elementary and the
CPU junior high.
         Step 2. Divide the Step 1 figure by the maximum number of students for
elementary (maximum elementary) or junior high (maximum junior high)
(subsection A1).
         Step 3. Multiply the Step 2 figure by the corresponding minimum number
of acres for the type of school (minimum A. elementary, minimum A. junior
high).
         Step 4. If a payment in-lieu-of dedication is required, multiply the
Step 3 figure by the fair market value F.M.V. (subsection B3).
If both a dedication of land and a payment-in-lieu of dedication is required
under subsection B4, the dedication and payment amounts shall be calculated by
applying the CPU ratable for each figure.
      2.   Formula and Sample Calculations. The formula for dedications and
payments-in-lieu thereof is expressed as follows:
      elem.
   (C.P.U. j.h. x U)       elem.
   ______________________    x Min. A. j.h. x F.M.V. =
      elem.
   Max. j.h.
   Sample Calculation:    Elementary (K-5) District
Positioning a 4 bedroom single-family detached development of 20 units, and a
fair market value of $429,100.00 per acre, the calculation would be as follows:
   CPU elem. x U   .470 x 20 = 9.4
   ÷ Max. elem.       9.4 ÷ 600 = .01567
   x Min A. elem.      .01567 x 11 = .17237
            acres required dedication
   If payment in lieu-of-dedication,
   x F.M.V.      .17237 x $429,100.00 =
            $73,963.67
For an elementary school district consisting of grades K-8, the product of the
calculation for grades K - 5 would be added to the product of the calculation
for grades 6-8, to reach the final required dedication or payment.
   K.   Annexation: The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu
thereof required by this Chapter shall also be required as a condition to the
annexation of any land to the Village, and provisions therefor shall be
incorporated in any pre-annexation agreement governing such land.
   L.   Time for Dedication or Payment of Fees In-Lieu-Thereof: The dedication
of school lands or payments of fees in-lieu-thereof shall be made by the owner
of land within ten days after the land is annexed to the Village or prior to or
at the time of the approval of the certificate of occupancy, the final plat of
subdivision, or a final plat of, or issuance of a special use permit for, a
planned unit development, whichever is first to occur.
   M.   Expenditure of Cash Contributions: Any cash contributions received by a
School District hereunder must be spent for land or other improvements intended
to serve children residing within the corporate limits of the Village.
   N.   Effective Date: This Section's requirement of dedication of school
lands or payments of fees in lieu thereof shall apply only to those structures
for which the application for building permit was filed after the Section's
effective date of June 2, 1995. (Ord. 2640, 5-23-95)
CHAPTER 24
LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 1
SECTION:
10-24-1: Purpose And Intent
10-24-2: Definitions
10-24-3: Applicability
10-24-4: Design Standards
10-24-5: Tree Preservation
10-24-6: Maintenance
10-24-7: Landscape Plan Requirements
10-24-8: Application Procedures
10-24-9: Effective Date
10-24-10: Plant Types And Standards
10-24-11: Ornamental Metal Fencing
10-24-12: Sworn Statements
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 5, chapter 8 of this code.
10-24-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The landscaping and screening requirements specified herein are intended to
foster aesthetically pleasing development which will protect and preserve the
appearance, character, general health, safety and welfare of the village of
River Forest. In addition, these regulations are intended to increase the
compatibility of adjacent uses that are different, such as commercial uses
adjacent to residential uses, by requiring a buffer or screen between them. In
doing so, this will minimize the harmful impact of noise, dust and other
debris, motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusions and
other objectionable activities or impacts conducted or created by adjoining or
nearby uses. (Ord. 2960, 4-8-2002)
10-24-2: DEFINITIONS:
   ASCENDING: Upright, spreading tree form.
   BOTANICAL NAME: The Latin scientific name of a plant, a binomial consisting
of "genus" and "species"; each plant has a unique botanical name.
   CALIPER: Outside diameter of a tree trunk, measured at six inches
aboveground for trees of less than four inch caliper, and measured at twelve
inches aboveground for trees of four inches or more.
   COLUMNAR: Narrow, upright tree form (see also definition of Fastigiate).
   COMMON NAME: The English name of a plant.
   CONTAINER: Structure having sides and bottom, sitting on the sidewalk,
filled with soil, used for planting.
   COURTESY WALK: Narrow walk (usually two feet six inches or three feet)
crossing the planted part of the parkway, connecting the curb to the sidewalk.
   DECIDUOUS: Plants shedding or losing foliage at the end of the growing
season.
   DRIP LINE: Imaginary line at the outermost edge of the tree canopy. Minimum
distance from trunk at which protective fencing is to be maintained.
   EVERGREEN: Plants having foliage that persists and remains green all year.
   FASTIGIATE: Narrow, upright tree form (see also definition of Columnar).
   GROUND COVER: Low growing plants no higher than eighteen inches.
   INTERNAL PLANTING: An area inside the perimeter of a parking lot used for
landscaping.
   LANDSCAPED AREA: An area the ground of which is completely covered with
grass, ground cover, shrubs, trees, or other living plant material.
   MULTISTEM: A tree form characterized by several trunks, or stems, rather
than a single trunk. Examples include birch and alder.
   NATURAL LAWN: Lawns planted with groups of plants, such as grasses and
shrubs, native to northern Illinois. These lawns result from intentional
cultivation and management and are not the result of neglect or so called
passive management.
   ORNAMENTAL TREE: Deciduous tree, mature height less than thirty feet,
possessing qualities such as flowers, fruit, and attractive foliage or shape.
   PARKWAY: That portion of the public way between the street and the nearest
parallel property line, including sidewalk area.
   PARKWAY LANDSCAPE AREA: An area between the sidewalk and the back of street
curb used for landscaping.
   PARKWAY PLANTER: A large planter cutout in a sidewalk, usually edged with a
concrete curb and/or metal fence located in the parkway landscape area.
   PARKWAY TREE: A permitted shade or ornamental tree planted in the parkway.
   PERIMETER LANDSCAPE AREA: The seven foot wide area of a site measured inward
from the property line.
   ROOT PATH: A geotextile channel connecting tree root balls to other adjacent
trees and/or adjacent green space.
   SHADE TREE: Large scale deciduous tree, mature height above thirty feet,
generally having a single stem, planted primarily for shade.
   SHRUB: Small scale plants, generally without a single stem, used as hedges,
foundation planting, borders, and accents, possessing qualities such as
flowers, fruit, and attractive foliage or shape.
   SIGHT TRIANGLE: A defined area on either side of a street intersection or
driveway in which plantings are restricted in order to minimize visual
obstructions of oncoming pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   STRUCTURAL SOIL: Soil that has been amended with aggregate to support
concrete sidewalks and asphalt parking lots while providing nourishment to
plant roots (e.g., "Cornell", "Amsterdam", or other soil that has the ability
to support a concrete slab while allowing for root penetration).
   TREE GRATE: Cast iron covering over a tree pit allowing pedestrian
circulation over the pit while reducing soil compaction.
   TREE GUARD: Protective cage around a tree trunk, usually cast iron, attached
to a tree grate, to protect the tree trunk.
   TREE PIT: A cutout or hole in the sidewalk, filled with soil, in which a
tree is planted, sometimes covered with a tree grate.
   TURF GRASS: A species or cultivar of grass, usually of spreading habit
(rhizomes, tillers, stolons) that is maintained as a mowed tuft including
Kentucky bluegrass cultivars, perennial rye grass cultivars and fescue
cultivars.
   VEHICULAR USE AREA: Any area of the lot not located within any enclosed or
partially enclosed structure and which is devoted to a use by or for motor
vehicles including parking (accessory or nonaccessory) or storage of
automobiles, trucks or other vehicles; loading areas; service areas and drives;
and access drives and driveways. (Ord. 2960, 4-8-2002)
10-24-3: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to multi-family residential
buildings, commercial establishments, institutions and government buildings,
where the building footprint covers five thousand square feet or more of land
area. Only those provisions of this chapter related to subsection
10-24-4B, "Parkway Landscaping", of this chapter shall apply to single- family
residential properties.
Planned development applications which have been approved before April 18,
2002, are hereby exempt from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 3009, 1-
27-2003)
10-24-4: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Sight Triangles: (Rep. by Ord. 3009, 1-27-2003)
   B.   Parkway Landscaping: No less than seventy five percent of the area on
the parkway must be seeded or sodded with turf grass. They may also have
perennials no higher than eighteen inches and/or ground cover plantings as long
as access to utilities are left unobstructed. The area of plantings other than
turf grass shall not exceed twenty five percent of the total area of the
parkway. Parkway trees are required to be planted at intervals no farther than
thirty five feet and no closer than twelve feet (the exact placement of trees
within these parameters shall be at the discretion of the village forester).
The trees shall have a minimum caliper of two inches. Tree species must be
selected from the list of recommended species (see section
 10-24-10 of this chapter). Applications for planting such trees shall be
reviewed by the department of public works prior to installation. If approved,
a permit will be issued.
   C.   Parking Lot Landscaping: All surface parking lots designed for ten or
more parking spaces shall have interior landscaping as follows:
      1.   Parking lot landscape islands shall be located at both ends of each
parking row and landscape diamonds shall be provided within the parking row at
intervals of no more than eight adjacent parking spaces.
      2.   Landscape islands shall have minimum dimensions of six feet by
eighteen feet as measured from back of curb to back of curb.
      3.   Landscape diamonds shall have minimum dimensions of five feet as
measured from back of curb to back of curb.
      4.   The entire area of parking islands and parking diamonds is to be
backfilled with planting soil to a uniform depth of two feet. The finish grade
of the soil should be slightly crowned to improve drainage of the island.
      5.   One shade tree of a minimum of two and one-half inch caliper shall
be provided for each one hundred thirty square feet of landscape island. A
minimum of fifty percent of every landscape island shall be planted with live
plant material, such as shrubs, ground cover or turf grass to a maximum height
of thirty inches at maturity. The entire area of the landscape island shall be
covered with organic mulch.
      6.   Shrubs shall be no greater than thirty inches in height and the
branches of trees shall start no less than six feet above the pavement, to
ensure proper visibility within the parking lot.
   D.   Parking Lot Screening: All parking lots, regardless of number of
parking spaces or of intended use and service or loading areas, must be
landscaped around their perimeters as follows:
      1.   A minimum seven foot wide landscape area shall be provided around
the parking lot where it abuts another parcel or right of way.
      2.   Landscape areas shall have minimum plant coverage of seventy five
percent, which consists of a continuous screen, thirty to forty eight inches
high. The entire landscape perimeter area shall be covered with organic mulch.
      3.   All parking lots shall have concrete curbs around their perimeters.
   E.   Setbacks And Buffers:
      1.   Building Perimeter Landscaping:
         a.   Width: A landscaped area a minimum of three feet in width shall
be located around the front of all buildings.
         b.   Coverage: Required building perimeter landscaping areas shall
remain open and free of all paving except where walks to buildings and other
similar paving are required.
         c.   Planting Materials: Landscaping shall be provided along all front
facades except where sidewalks and driveways are located. Such landscaping
shall be comprised of a combination of plants such as shade trees, ornamental
trees, evergreens, shrubs and ground cover. Particular attentions should be
paid toward providing transitions between the building and ground plane, visual
breaks along monotonous building facades, and enhance walkways, entrances,
seating areas, bus stops or any other pedestrian areas; separate and buffer
pedestrian and public areas from cruise lanes, drives and parking areas, and
provide direction to focal areas and main entrances.
      2.   Lot Perimeter Landscaping:
         a.   Applicability: All nonresidential and multiple-family residential
developments shall provide lot perimeter landscaping in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
         b.   Nonresidential Property Abutting Residential Property: Where
nonresidential property abuts property zoned for residential use, landscaping
shall be provided as follows:
            (1)   Width: A landscaped area a minimum of five feet in width
shall be provided.
            (2)   Screening: Solid landscape screening to a minimum of six feet
in height above the grade of the subject property and in a design satisfactory
to the zoning administrator or his authorized designee shall be provided along
the length of the abutting property line. If determined necessary by the
village, due to topographical changes between the abutting commercial and
residential property, the minimum height of the required screening may be
increased to eight feet. Any landscape materials used shall be made up of
twenty five percent evergreen trees a minimum of six feet tall, twenty five
percent ornamental trees a minimum of three inches in caliper or clumps six
feet tall, and fifty percent evergreen and deciduous shrubs achieving a minimum
height of screening six feet at the time of planting. Whenever possible, berms
should be used in conjunction with the landscaping.
            (3)   Shade Trees: Shade trees shall be provided at the equivalent
of not more than thirty feet apart along the abutting property line. Such trees
may be clustered or spaced linearly.
            (4)   Ground Cover: Except where occupied by planting beds, all
perimeter landscaping areas shall be sodded or seeded.
         c.   Multiple-Family Residential Property: Multiple-family residential
property shall be landscaped as follows:
            (1)   Width: A landscaped area a minimum of ten feet in width shall
be provided.
            (2)   Landscaping: A minimum of fifty percent of the required
landscape setback shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall be made up of
fifty percent evergreen trees and ornamental trees a minimum of six feet tall
and fifty percent evergreen and deciduous shrubs a minimum of three feet tall.
Whenever possible, berms should be used in conjunction with the landscaping.
            (3)   Shade Trees: Shade trees shall be provided at the equivalent
of not more than thirty feet apart along the abutting property line. Such trees
may be clustered or spaced linearly.
            (4)   Ground Cover: Except where occupied by planting beds, all
landscaping areas shall be sodded or seeded.
            (5)   Building Perimeter Landscaping: Building perimeter
landscaping in a minimum planting bed with a width of eight feet shall be
provided along one hundred percent of all building facades except where
sidewalks and driveways are located. Fifty percent of the landscape
requirements shall be made up of evergreen trees and shrubs and fifty percent
deciduous trees, ornamental trees and shrubs.
   F.   Fencing And Walls: Fencing and walls are to be used where screening is
required but there is insufficient depth in the landscape area to exclusively
use plant materials and achieve satisfactory results.
      1.   Ornamental metal fencing, forty two inches high, is required along
public rights of way covered by corridor design guidelines which are
incorporated into this chapter as section
10-24-11.
      2.   Chainlink fence is not permitted along public rights of way
(excluding alleys) and/or outside the rear yard of a property. If erected in a
rear yard chainlink fencing must have a dark green or black vinyl coating. Vine
planting is recommended at the base of required perimeter fencing.
      3.   There shall be a minimum of one foot from the right of way line to
the fence.
      4.   Year round screening is required around dumpsters, air conditioning
units, garbage can storage areas, satellite dishes, dog runs and compost heaps.
   G.   Irrigation: Commercial, multi-family residential (six dwelling units or
larger), institutional, and governmental facilities must provide irrigation for
all required landscape areas.
      1.   Irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize overspray and
runoff onto adjacent impervious surfaces.
      2.   For sprinkler irrigated areas, perimeter sprinkler heads must be
included in the irrigation pattern.
      3.   Precipitation rates are to be matched for all irrigation heads in a
given zone.
      4.   Drip irrigation systems are required for trees unless within lawn
areas.
      5.   Consideration should be given to planting species of landscape
materials and arranging them in a way that promotes the conservation of water
used in their care.
   H.   Growing Medium: It is essential that trees and other plants be given a
sufficient quantity and quality of soil at the time of planting. Planters in
parkways and parking lots shall have planting soil installed as follows:
      1.   Three foot minimum depth.
      2.   Soil composition, soil acidity, and organic content are as per
standards by the American association of nurserymen.
      3.   Parkway planters shall be as long and continuous as possible.
      4.   In areas between parkway planters structural soil shall be installed
under the sidewalk. Root paths between the planting pits or cantilevered
sidewalks built over a typical soil mix are also acceptable.
   I.   Grading And Drainage: Any grading or alteration of drainage patterns
must not release any additional quantities or increase rates of runoff onto
adjacent properties than existed prior to the construction. (Ord. 2960, 4-8-
2002)
10-24-5: TREE PRESERVATION:
It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish regulations limiting
the removal and ensuring the replacement of trees from multi-family
residential, commercial, institutional and governmental property within the
village and, in doing so, safeguard the ecological and aesthetic environment of
the community. These regulations are further intended to serve to dissuade the
unnecessary clearing and disturbing of land so as to preserve, insofar as
practical, the existing natural trees, and preserve existing landscaping
buffers to minimize the impact of adjoining differing land uses, enhance and
protect the integrity of roadway corridors, and reduce the surface heat and
negative visual impact of vehicular use areas.
   A.   Tree Removal:
      1.   Approval Required: No tree having a trunk size of six inches or
greater in diameter as measured twelve inches above the established ground
levels, shall be removed from any multi-family residential, commercial,
institutional and governmental property requiring building permit approval as
set forth in this code, or which is the subject of a petition for a zoning
variation or subdivision in the village, without written approval from the
zoning administrator or his authorized designee. In cases where only a zoning
variation is sought, only those trees that are to be removed as a result of the
construction that requires the variation shall be subject to these regulations.
Undesirable species of trees such as those described in section
10-24-10 of this chapter shall be exempt from these regulations. A written
statement indicating the reasons for removal of trees and a general description
of the trees to be removed shall accompany the application for tree removal.
      2.   Conditions Of Approval: The zoning administrator or his authorized
designee shall approve all requests for tree removal if one or more of the
following conditions is present:
         a.   Safety Hazard To Pedestrians Or Vehicular Traffic: Necessity to
remove trees that pose a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
threaten to cause a disruption of public safety.
         b.   Safety Hazard To Buildings: Necessity to remove trees which pose
a safety hazard to a building.
         c.   Diseased Or Weakened Trees: Necessity to remove diseased trees or
trees weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury.
         d.   Observe Good Forestry Practice: Necessity to observe good
forestry practice, i.e., the number of healthy trees a given parcel of land
will support.
         e.   Location Of Proposed Structure: Necessity to remove trees in
order to locate proposed structure(s) without causing unreasonable economic
hardship.
         f.   Grade Changes: Necessity to remove trees in order to provide for
essential grade changes.
      3.   Replacement Trees: Any trees that have been identified for removal
must be replaced in accordance with the following criteria:
         a.   Replacement trees shall either:
            (1)   Equal or exceed the same size caliper as the tree removed; or
            (2)   Consist of smaller trees, not less than three inches in
caliper, which add up to the caliper of the original tree.
         b.   All replacement trees shall be selected from the village's
recommended species list (see section
10-24-10 of this chapter).
         c.   Replacement trees shall be documented on the final landscape
plan.
         d.   Replacement trees may be used for required perimeter yard
landscaping and screening on the subject property.
   B.   Protection Of Existing Trees During Construction:
      1.   Tree Survey: A tree survey shall be submitted at the time of an
application for building permit approval indicating the location, size and
species (both scientific and common) of all trees located on the parcel with a
trunk size of six inches or greater, as measured twelve inches above the
established ground level.
      2.   Integration Of Existing Trees Into Site And Landscape Plans: Subject
to the determination of the zoning administrator, every reasonable effort shall
be made to retain existing trees on the aforementioned trees survey through the
integration of those trees surveyed into the site and landscape plan for the
proposed development. Removal of trees designed for preservation shall only be
allowed by amendment to the approved landscape plan.
      3.   Tree Preservation Plan: A tree preservation plan shall be submitted
at the time of an application for site plan and architectural approval
indicating, at a minimum, the location of those trees to be preserved and the
methods which are to be used to preserve such trees. The tree preservation plan
shall specify the following preservation techniques:
         a.   Grading, Construction Equipment And Materials: All grading and
construction equipment and materials shall be forbidden from encroaching upon
the tree's drip line.
         b.   Materials Detrimental To Trees: Crushed limestone or any other
materials that may be detrimental to trees shall not be dumped within the drip
line of any trees nor shall be located at any higher location where drainage
toward the tree(s) could conceivably affect the health of said tree(s).
         c.   Storage Of Vehicles: No materials or vehicles shall be stored,
driven or parked within the drip line of any trees.
         d.   Installation Of Snow Fencing: Snow fencing, or an alternative
temporary barrier, with the written approval of the zoning administrator or his
authorized designee, shall be installed at the periphery of the tree's drip
line to protect trees from root compaction by the storage of materials or
vehicles.
         e.   Pruning: Identification of any trees which have to be saved, but
which could be negatively affected during the construction process. All such
trees shall be pruned by a qualified arborist to compensate for root loss
during construction.
         f.   Preservation Methodology: The methods that are to be used to
preserve those trees shall be clearly specified. If, in the opinion of the
zoning administrator, or his authorized designee the necessary precautions, as
specified in the tree preservation plan for the development, were not
undertaken before or during construction to ensure the preservation of those
trees, the site development permit for the parcel shall not be issued, or if
previously issued, may be revoked until such time as compliance with the
precautions is achieved.
         g.   Consultant: The village shall, at its discretion, have the right
to retain a professional tree consultant/forester to review the preservation
plans and to submit a written report to the zoning administrator. All expenses
incurred by the village shall be reimbursed by the developer.
         h.   Village Right To Inspection: The village shall have the right to
inspect the subject property at any time during the construction process, in
order to verify that the developer and contractor have protected trees in
accordance with the approved tree preservation plan.
      4.   Removal Of Trees Designated For Preservation: If it is determined by
the village that a tree designated for preservation is destroyed or razed
during the construction process by a deliberate action in violation of the
approved tree preservation plan, such tree shall be replaced with new trees in
accordance with the following exchange rate. Village staff may, with just
cause, waive the following exchange rate due to accidental damage to protected
trees:
         a.   Exchange Rate:
 
Existing Trees      Number Of Replacement Trees
(In Caliper Inches)
36+                 1" for each 1" of tree removal
30-35               11
26-29               10
20-25               9
13-19               8
6-12                7
 
   C.   Trunk Size: Trunk size as measured at twelve inches above the
established ground. For the above, in the event of a fraction of an inch, if
the fraction is less than one-half inch, it may be disregarded. If the fraction
is one-half or greater, it shall be counted as one inch.
   D.   Minimum Size Of Replacement Trees: All replacement trees shall be a
minimum trunk size of three inches in diameter, as measured six inches above
the established ground.
   E.   Payment In Lieu Of Replacement Trees: If it is determined by the
village that an insufficient area exists which would support any or all of the
replacement trees, the property owner shall contribute one hundred percent of
the dollar value (as determined by the most recent valuations of the
international society of arboriculture) of the replacement trees to the
village. Said funds shall be used for the sole purpose of planting trees at
locations determined by the village. (Ord. 2960, 4-8-2002)
10-24-6: MAINTENANCE:
All property owners shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair, and
replacement of all required landscape materials.
   A.   Grass shall be maintained at a height not in excess of eight inches.
   B.   All required landscape materials shall be maintained in good condition
so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance, shall be replaced when
dead or dying, and shall be kept free of refuse and debris. (Ord. 2960, 4-8-
2002)
10-24-7: LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Four blueline or blackline prints of the landscape plan must be submitted for
any project subject to this chapter. The plan must have a scale of one inch
equals forty feet or larger (e.g., one inch equals thirty feet or one inch
equals twenty feet) and be on standard size drawing sheets not to exceed thirty
six by forty eight inches.
   A.   The landscape plan must include the following information:
      1.   Drawing scale.
      2.   Drawing orientation (indicated by conventional north arrow).
      3.   Property lines, easements, and rights of way frontages, showing
dimensions.
      4.   Sight triangles at intersections and at alley and driveway curb
cuts.
      5.   Total vehicular use area calculation.
      6.   Location and dimensions of all landscaped areas including parkway
planting; parking lot and vehicular use area screening; parking lot and
vehicular use area internal planting.
      7.   Location, botanical name and sizes of all plants and the location of
other pertinent landscape features.
      8.   Location of all existing trees on site greater than two and one-half
inch caliper that the applicant proposes to remove.
      9.   Location of all existing trees on site greater than two and one-half
inch caliper which are to be retained and counted towards the planting
requirements.
      10.   Location of existing parkway trees including a description of their
quality and species.
      11.   Location, design, height, and building material of all proposed
walls, tree pits, planter containers, and fences.
      12.   Location of existing and proposed streetlights and fire hydrants in
public rights of way.
      13.   Size and location of all existing and proposed public and private
utility improvements, both underground and overhead, within the public rights
of way.
      14.   Proposed layout of vehicular use areas including the location and
dimensions of parking spaces, islands, internal planting, pedestrian walkways,
and driving aisles.
      15.   Direction of street traffic using one- or two-way arrows.
      16.   Estimated time scheduled for planting.
      17.   Names, addresses, and phone numbers of the owner and the registered
landscape architect responsible for preparing the landscape plans.
      18.   A certified statement, signed by the owner(s), committing to the
protection and, if necessary, replacement of all existing parkway trees and
internal trees designated for credit toward landscaping requirements (see
section
10-24-12 of this chapter).
      19.   A certified statement, signed by the owner(s), committing to the
maintenance of required landscaping (see section
10-24-12 of this chapter).
      20.   A certified statement, signed by the registered landscape architect
responsible for preparing the landscape plans, stating that the plans have been
prepared in accordance with the zoning standards and the landscape ordinance of
the village of River Forest (see section
10-24-12 of this chapter).
   B.   Other submission requirements include:
      1.   Plat of survey.
      2.   Survey showing existing trees (size, location, genus, and
condition).
      3.   Photographs of all existing trees with a caliper of two inches or
greater.
      4.   Plan of types and extent of soil modifications and drainage. (Ord.
2960, 4-8-2002)
10-24-8: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Submittals And Reviews: Building permit plans and landscape plans are
submitted to the public works department for the village of River Forest. Prior
to any site work along with any application fees that may be required.
   B.   Inspection And Approval: Following construction of all improvements and
installation of plant materials and prior to the issuance of an occupancy
permit, a site inspection will be made by the village forester to verify
compliance with all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2960, 4-8-2002)
10-24-9: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall take effect as of April 18, 2002. Properties that do not
conform to the sight triangle requirements of subsection
 10-24-4A of this chapter shall be brought into compliance within one year from
the effective date hereof. Properties that do not conform to the requirements
of this chapter except those provisions relating to sight triangles in
subsection 10-24-4A of this chapter shall be brought into compliance within
three years from the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2960, 4-8-2002)
10-24-10: PLANT TYPES AND STANDARDS:
This section describes general standards; tree planting standards; hedge
planting standards; shrub planting standards; and ground cover planting
standards.
   A.   General Standards: To ensure installation of plants that will thrive
under stressful urban conditions, certain species must be encouraged. The
standards listed in this section will help prevent the planting of trees that
become hazards, maintenance problems, or a scar on the landscape.
   B.   Quality:
      1.   Plants shall meet the standards of "American Standard for Nursery
Stock", ANSI Z60.1 latest edition, American association of nurserymen, which by
reference is made a part of these guidelines. References to minima and maxima
with respect to plant height and spread, root ball diameter and depth, etc.,
are from this publication.
      2.   Plants shall meet all requirements of federal, state, and local law
with respect to plant type, labeling, nursery or plant inspection, disease,
insect, and other pest infestation, and any other requirements.
      3.   Plants shall be high quality nursery grown stock.
      4.   Substandard "B-grade" or "park grade" plants are not acceptable.
      5.   Field collected plants are not acceptable, even if they have been
subsequently planted in the ground in a nursery or planted in a container.
      6.   Plants shall have been grown in a climate zone similar to River
Forest's, i.e., United States department of agriculture (most recent USDA zone
hardiness map) zone 4 or 5 (zone 5 plants are generally hardy only near the
warming influence of Lake Michigan). Plants from zone 6B or more, i.e., warmer
climate zones, are not acceptable.
      7.   Plants shall be in a healthy, vigorous condition, free of dead or
broken branches, scars that are not completely healed, frost cracks,
disfiguring knots, broken or abraded bark, redundant leaders or branches,
rubbing branches, or aberrations of any kind. Plants shall not have multiple
leaders, unless this is the natural form; multistem trees are not acceptable
for required planting in parkways.
      8.   Plants shall have full, even, well developed branching and a dense,
fibrous, and vigorous root system.
   C.   Digging And Handling:
      1.   Balled and burlapped (B&B) plants shall be dug with a firm root ball
of natural earth, of a size in proportion to the plant's size, as measured by
caliper, height, or spread.
      2.   Balled and burlapped plants shall be handled only by the root ball,
not by the trunk or branches, as this may break or loosen the root ball and
damage the root system.
      3.   Container plants shall have been established for a minimum of one
full growing season in their containers before installation.
      4.   Container plants shall be handled only by the container, not by the
stems or branches, as this may pull the plant out of the container and break or
loosen the root ball and damage the root system.
      5.   Bare root shrubs and ground cover plants are acceptable, if they are
dug and installed at the appropriate season and handled in the appropriate
manner.
      6.   Bare root trees are not acceptable.
      7.   Plants shall be protected from drying out during shipping with
tarpaulins or other covering.
      8.   Plants shall be protected from drying out after delivery by planting
immediately; if this is not possible, the root ball shall be covered with peat
moss or earth, and watered frequently to keep it moist until planting.
      9.   Not handled, moved, bound, tied or otherwise treated so as to damage
the root ball, roots, trunk, or branches in any way.
   D.   Inspection:
      1.   During construction, parkway trees will be inspected by the village
forester to confirm compliance with this chapter. If the trees fail to meet the
requirements of this chapter, they must be replaced at the owner's expense. At
the end of five years, the village forester will perform an acceptance
inspection. If the project is approved, the village will then assume
responsibility for the trees in the public right of way.
      2.   Standards for size are at time of installation.
      3.   Minimum size shall be two and one-half inch caliper, measured six
inches aboveground.
      4.   Trees shall have a clear trunk, free of branches, to a minimum
height of six feet.
      5.   Trees shall be balled and burlapped (B&B), with no exceptions.
      6.   Two and one-half inch caliper trees shall be twelve feet to fourteen
feet in height, with a maximum height of sixteen feet.
      7.   Two and one-half inch caliper trees shall have a minimum twenty
eight inch diameter by eighteen inch depth root ball.
   E.   Recommended Species; Trees: The following deciduous tree species and
varieties are recommended. The selection of trees is subject to the review of
the village for specific locations.
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                             Common Name
Acer saccharinum                           Silver maple
Catalpa spp.                               Catalpa species
Celtis occidentalis                        Hackberry
C. occidentalis 'Prairie Pride'            Prairie pride hackberry
Corylus colurna                            Turkish filbert
Fraxinus americana                         White ash
F. americana 'Autumn Applause'             Autumn applause white ash
F. americana 'Autumn Purple'               Autumn purple white ash
F. americana 'Rose Hill'                   Rose hill white ash
Fraxinus excelsior                         European ash
Fraxinus quadrangulata                     Blue ash
Fraxinus pennsylvanica                     Green ash
F. pennsylvanica 'Newport'                 Newport green ash
F. pennsylvanica 'Patmore'                 Patmore green ash
F. pennsylvanica 'Summit'                  Summit green ash
Ginkgo biloba (male only)                  Ginkgo
G. biloba 'Autumn Gold'                    Autumn gold ginkgo
G. biloba 'Fairmount'                      Fairmount ginkgo
G. biloba 'Lakeview'                       Lakeview ginkgo
G. biloba 'Princeton Sentry'1              Princeton sentry ginkgo
Gleditsia triacanthos                      Honey locust, straight species
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis              Thornless honey locust
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis 'Greenglory' Green glory honey locust
G. triacanthos inermis 'Halka'             Halka honey locust
G. triacanthos inermis 'Shademaster'       Shademaster honey locust
G. triacanthos inermis 'Skyline'           Skyline honey locust
Gymnocladus dioicus                        Kentucky coffee tree
Liriodendron tulipifera                    Tulip tree, yellow poplar
Phellodendron amurense                     Amur corktree
Pyrus calleryana 'Chanticleer'2            Chanticleer flowering pear
P. calleryana 'Redspire'2                  Redspire flowering pear
P. calleryana 'Whitehouse'2                Whitehouse flowering pear
Quercus bicolor                            Swamp white oak
Quercus imbricaria2                        Shingle oak
Quercus muehlenbergii2                     Chinkapin oak
Quercus robur2                             English oak
Quercus rubrum2                            Red oak
Quercus macrocarpa2                        Bur oak
Tilia americana                            American linden
T. americana 'Fastigiata'                  Pyramidal American linden
T. americana 'Redmond'                     Redmond linden
Tilia cordata                              Littleleaf linden
T. cordata 'Chancellor'                    Chancellor linden
T. cordata 'Glenleven'                     Glenleven linden
T. cordata 'Olympic'                       Olympic linden
Tilia x euchlora                           Redmond linden
Tilia platyphyllos                         Big leaf linden
Tilia tomentosa                            Silver linden
T. tomentosa 'Sterling Silver'             Sterling Silver silver linden
Tilia vulgaris                             European linden
Ulmus carpinifolia 'Accolade'              Accolade smooth leaf elm
U. carpinifolia 'Homestead'                Homestead smooth leaf elm
U. carpinifolia 'Regal'                    Regal smooth leaf elm
Zelkova serrata                            Zelkova
Z. serrata 'Greenvase'                     Greenvase zelkova
                                          Ponderosa pines
 
       1.   For use only in narrow parkways with nearby buildings and street.
      2.   Spring dig only.
The specification of improved varieties of plants is recommended. The varieties
of a given species may have a straighter trunk, a more symmetrical crown,
better flowering or fall color, resistance to disease or insect infestations,
etc. All trees shall be wrapped with burlap from base to lowest branches and
secured with biodegradable twine. Project owners are advised to seek advice
when selecting plants: a certified nurseryman, the cooperative extension
service of the University of Illinois, a registered landscape architect, a
reputable landscape contractor, etc.
   F.   Acceptable Species, Subject To Approval: The following tree species and
varieties are acceptable if specifically approved by the village forester:
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                 Common Name
Acer rubrum                    Red maple
Acer saccharum                 Sugar maple
A. saccharum 'Columnare'*      Columnar sugar maple
A. saccharum 'Green Mountain'  Green mountain sugar maple
A. saccharum 'Wright Brothers' Wright brothers sugar maple
Alnus glutinosa                Alder
Betula nigra                   River birch
Malus spp.                     Apples, crab apples
Metasequoia glyptostroboides   Dawn redwood
Populus spp.                   Poplars, cottonwood, aspen
Prunus spp.                    Cherries, plums
Robinia pseudoacacia           Black locust
Taxodium distichum             Bald cypress
 
G.   Unacceptable Species: The following tree species and varieties are
unacceptable (conifers or needle evergreens are unacceptable; trees with thorns
are unacceptable for any parkway planting):
 
Botanical Name                   Common Name
Acer negundo                     Box elder
Acer platanoides 'Emerald Queen' Emerald queen Norway maple
Ailanthus altissima              Tree of heaven
Elaeagnus angustifolia           Russian olive
Ginkgo biloba (female)           Female ginkgo
Maclura pomifera                 Osage orange
 
   H.   Hedge Planting Standards:
      1.   Size standards are at time of installation.
      2.   Minimum height of hedge plants shall be thirty inches.
      3.   Minimum spread of hedge plants shall be twenty four inches.
      4.   Narrow, upright, or smaller plants, such as Japanese barberry,
Peking cotoneaster, compact burning bush, Hick's yew, compact European
cranberry, and compact American cranberry may be difficult to obtain with a
twenty four inch spread, and shall have a minimum eighteen inch spread.
      5.   Spacing standards are at time of installation.
      6.   Maximum spacing of hedge plants shall be thirty six inches.
Narrow, upright, or smaller plants, such as Japanese barberry, Peking
cotoneaster, compact burning bush, Hicks yew, compact European cranberry, and
compact American cranberry make a more effective screen when planted closer
together, and shall have a maximum thirty inch spacing.
   I.   Hedge Maintenance:
      1.   Hedges shall be maintained as dense, continuous lines of foliage,
and shall not be sheared as a series of individual plants.
      2.   Hedges shall be sheared with "battered" sides, i.e., the base wider
than the top, to allow light to reach the lower part of the plant, to prevent
the foliage at the bottom from thinning.
      3.   Planting of any tree species or varieties not listed above as an
acceptable species will require application to, and permission from, the
village forester.
   J.   Unacceptable Forms: The following tree forms are unacceptable for
parkway planting:
      1.   Multistem: Trees with two or more trunks.
      2.   Espalier Or Topiary: Geometrical plant forms achieved through
pruning which are contrary to natural form.
      3.   Dwarf Or Small Scale: Those trees which grow higher than three feet
but cannot be undertrimmed to a minimum height of six feet.
      4.   Topped Or Dehorned: Trees with most of the crown removed, such that
the main branches end abruptly in stubs.
   K.   Recommended Species For Hedges: The following shrub species and
varieties are recommended:
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                Common Name
Berberis thunbergii           Japanese barberry
Caragana arborescens          Siberian pea shrub
Cotoneaster acutifolius       Peking cotoneaster
Euonymus alata 'Compacta'     Compact burning bush
Juniperus virginiana          Eastern red cedar
Ligustrum lucidum             Privet
Ribes alpinum                 Alpine currant
Syringa meyeri                Meyer's lilac
Syringa patula 'Miss Kim'     Miss Kim Korean lilac
Thuja occidentalis 'Technyi'  Mission arborvitae
Viburnum trilobum 'Compactum' Compact American cranberry
 
Planting of any species or varieties not listed above as an acceptable species
will require application to, and permission from, the village forester.
   L.   Shrub Planting Standards:
      1.   Shrub planting is not required, except as a hedge required for
vehicular use area screening. Shrub planting is encouraged in appropriate
locations supplemental to the internal landscaping required for vehicular use
areas. No shrubs shall be planted on the parkway unless approved by the
village.
      2.   Shrubs are subject to the following restrictions:
          a.   If used, they must be maintained below three foot height.
          b.   Shrubs are subject to the same location standards as trees.
   M.   Recommended Species; Shrubs: The following shrub species and varieties
are recommended:
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                 Common Name
Aronia melanocarpa             Black chokeberry
Berberis thunbergii            Japanese barberry
Buxus microphylla koreana      Korean boxwood
Caragana arborescens           Siberian pea shrub
Corylus americana              American filbert
Cotoneaster apiculata          Cranberry cotoneaster
Cotoneaster horizontalis       Rockspray cotoneaster
Euonymus fortunei 'Sarcoxie'   Sarcoxie wintercreeper
Forsythia 'Arnold Dwarf'       Arnold dwarf forsythia
F. viridissima 'Bronxensis'    Bronx green stem forsythia
F. x intermedia                Border forsythia
Ilex x meserveae               Blue holly
Juniperus chinensis            Chinese junipers
Juniperus chinensis procumbens Japanese garden juniper
Juniperus horizontalis         Dwarf creeping junipers
Ligustrum vulgare              Common privet
Ligustrum x vicaryi            Golden vicary privet
Potentilla fruticosa           Potentilla
Rhus aromatica 'Gro-low'       Gro low sumac
Ribes alpinum                  Alpine currant
Spirea japonica                Japanese spirea
Spirea x bumalda               Bumalda spirea
Syringa meyeri                 Meyer's lilac
Syringa patula 'Miss Kim'      Miss Kim Korean lilac
 
   N.   Ground Cover Planting Standards:
      1.   Ground cover planting is not required, except in required vehicular
use area internal planting. However, it is encouraged in appropriate locations
as an adjunct to required internal planting.
      2.   For safety and visibility, ground covers can be planted only in
certain areas of the parkway.
   O.   Recommended Species; Ground Cover: The following ground cover species
and varieties are recommended:
Botanical Name Common Name
Botanical Name                    Common Name
Aegopodium podagraria             Goutweed
Cotoneaster adpressa              Creeping cotoneaster
Cotoneaster dammeri               Bearberry cotoneaster
Cotoneaster horizontalis          Rock spray cotoneaster
Cotoneaster horizontalis 'Hessei' Hesse cotoneaster
Euonymus fortunei 'Colorata'      Purple leaf wintercreeper
Euonymus fortunei vegetus         Big leaf wintercreeper
Hedera helix                      English ivy
Juniperus chinensis procumbens    Japanese garden juniper
Juniperus chinensis sargentii     Sargent juniper
Juniperus conferta                Shore juniper
Juniperus horizontalis            Creeping juniper
Lonicera henry                    Henry honeysuckle
Pachysandra terminalis            Japanese pachysandra
Rhus aromatica 'Gro-low'          Gro low sumac
Vinca minor                       Periwinkle
 
Certain species listed above require a more sheltered planting environment and
project owners are advised to seek advice when selecting plants: a certified
nurseryman, the cooperative extension service of the University of Illinois, a
registered landscape architect, a reputable landscape contractor, etc.
   P.   Other Species: Planting of any species or varieties not listed above
will require application to, and permission from, the zoning administrator.
 
Botanical Name                Common Name
Taxus cuspidata               Japanese yew
Taxus x media 'Tauntonii'     Taunton yew
Viburnum carlesii 'Compacta'  Dwarf Korean spice viburnum
Viburnum trilobum 'Compactum' Compact American cranberry
Viburnum trilobum 'Hahs'      Hahs American cranberry
Viburnum x carlcephalum       Fragrant viburnum
 
   Q.   Permission Required For Unapproved Species: Planting of any species or
varieties not listed above will require application to, and permission from,
the zoning administrator. (Ord. 2960, 4-8-2002)
10-24-11: ORNAMENTAL METAL FENCING:
   A.   Criteria:
      1.   Ornamental fencing shall be designed with a prairie style motif.
      2.   Height, design and color should be consistent with surrounding
architectural and site characteristics (proposed or existing). As a guide,
freestanding metal fences should be forty two inches to forty eight inches
tall. Metal fences on planter curbs should be sixteen inches to twenty four
inches tall.
      3.   All fencing must be structurally sound and coated to withstand
vandalism and inclement weather.
   B.   Recommendations:
      1.   The ornamental fence shall be of square solid stock metal pieces
with square intermediate posts and contain a prairie style motif along the top
one-third of the fence.
      2.   There should be no more than a four inch space between any two metal
pieces.
      3.   All fencing shall be painted black to reduce their visual effect and
minimize rust.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2396.png]
(Ord. 2960, 4-8-2002)
10-24-12: SWORN STATEMENTS:
The following certified statements are to be signed by the appropriate parties
and made a part of each landscape plan:
   A.   Sworn Statement By Owner:
      1.   Commits to the maintenance of required landscaping in the following
form:
The undersigned acknowledges that the landscape planting plan shown on the
attached landscape plan(s) for the property at                 (street
address), River Forest, Illinois       (zip code) has, to the best of the
undersigned applicant's knowledge, been designed and will be installed,
maintained, and replaced as required in accordance with the requirements of the
zoning code and the landscape ordinance of the Village of River Forest.
      2.   Commits to the protection and replacement of required landscaping in
the following form:
Existing parkway and on-site interior trees are to be protected while project
is under construction and will be replaced by current and subsequent owner if
damaged.
   B.   Sworn Statement By Registered Landscape Architect: Commits to the
preparation of the landscape plan in the following form:
The undersigned landscape architect, registered in the State of Illinois,
acknowledges that the landscape planting plan and construction details shown on
the attached landscape plan(s) for the property at                 (street
address), River Forest, Illinois       (zip code) has been designed in
accordance with the requirements of the zoning code and the landscape ordinance
of the Village of River Forest.
(Ord. 2960, 4-8-2002)
TITLE 11
RIVER FOREST SPECIAL SERVICE AREA NUMBER ONE
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Authority
11-1-2: Findings
11-1-3: Established
11-1-4: Purpose Of Area
11-1-5: Effective Date, Review
11-1-1: AUTHORITY:
Special service area number one is established pursuant to the provisions of
article VII, section 7(6) of the constitution of the state, and pursuant to:
An act to provide the manner of levying or imposing taxes for the provision of
special services to areas within the boundaries of home rule units and nonhome
rule municipalities and counties 1 . (Ord. 2117, 4-25-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. Public act 78-901.
11-1-2: FINDINGS:
   A.   The question of the establishment of the area hereinafter described as
a special service area is considered by the village board pursuant to an
ordinance entitled "An Ordinance Proposing the Enactment of a Transfer Tax on
Real Property Transactions for the Provision of Special Services in the village
and Providing for a Public Hearing and Other Procedures in Connection
Therewith", adopted September 13, 1982, and is considered pursuant to a hearing
held on October 25, 1982, by the village board pursuant to notice duly
published in "Forest Leaves" and "Wednesday Journal", October 6, 1982,
newspapers published in the village, at least fifteen days prior to the hearing
and pursuant to notice by mail addressed to the person or persons in whose name
the general taxes for the last preceding year were paid on each lot, block,
tract or parcel of land lying within the special service area. Said notice was
given by depositing said notice in the United States mail not less than ten
days prior to the time set for the public hearing. In the event taxes for the
last preceding year were not paid, the said notice was sent to the person last
listed on the tax rolls prior to that year as the owner of said property. A
certificate of publication of said notice and an affidavit of mailing of said
notice are attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibits 1 and 2. Said
notices conformed in all respects to the requirements of section 5 of public
act 78-901, aforesaid.
   B.   A public hearing on the question set forth in the notice was held on
October 25, 1982, and November 8, 1982. All interested persons were given an
opportunity to be heard on the question of the creation of the special service
area and on the question of a transfer tax on real estate transactions to cover
special services, including the strict enforcement of the zoning code 1  by
inspections for and the issuance of zoning certificates of occupancy, as set
forth in the notice. Many questions were raised at the hearing regarding the
purpose, the inspections and the transfer tax. There were approximately one
hundred persons present. The public hearing was adjourned at approximately
eight forty five o'clock P.M. on November 8, 1982.
   C.   No petition opposing the special service area and the transfer tax was
received which complied with section 9 of the act.
   D.   After considering the data, as presented at the public hearing, the
board of trustees finds that it is in the public interest and in the interest
of the village special service area number one that said special service area,
as hereinafter described, be established.
   E.   Said area is contiguous and constitutes the single-family and multiple-
family dwelling areas of the village, excluding the tax exempt properties.
   F.   Said area is zoned for single-family and multiple-family purposes and
will benefit specially from municipal services proposed to be provided. The
proposed municipal services are necessary and in addition to the municipal
services provided to the village as a whole. (Ord. 2117, 4-25-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
11-1-3: ESTABLISHED:
A special service area to be known and designated as "Village of River Forest
Special Service Area Number One" is hereby established and shall consist of the
following described territory:
All housing units, to include the land and improvements thereon in R1, R2, R3,
R4, C1, C2, C3, ORIC, and PRI use districts, excluding all tax exempt
properties, within the village, in Cook County, Illinois, a map of said
territory being attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit 3. (Ord.
2117, 4-25-1983; amd. Ord. 2640, 5-23-1995)
11-1-4: PURPOSE OF AREA:
Village of River Forest special service area number one is established to
provide special municipal services to said area in addition to services
provided in the village generally. Included in said purposes shall be the
strict enforcement of the zoning code by inspections for and the issuance of
zoning certificates of occupancy. To pay for such services, effective May 1,
2003, a transfer tax in the amount of one dollar per each one thousand dollars
of the sale price is authorized to be imposed on the seller of real estate
located within the special service area on and after the effective date hereof.
Said tax shall be in addition to all other taxes provided by law and shall be
imposed pursuant to applicable law. (Ord. 3020, 4-14-2003)
11-1-5: EFFECTIVE DATE, REVIEW:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect on May 9, 1983. This chapter
shall be reviewed by the president and board of trustees in January 1984 and
again in January 1985. (Ord. 2118, 5-9-1983)
CHAPTER 2
TRANSFER TAX ON THE SALE OF REAL ESTATE
SECTION:
11-2-1: Findings
11-2-2: Transfer Tax
11-2-3: Zoning Inspections
11-2-4: Penalty For Violation
11-2-1: FINDINGS:
Village of River Forest special service area number one has been created by an
ordinance entitled: "an ordinance establishing village of River Forest special
service area number one and authorizing a transfer tax on real property
transactions", adopted April 25, 1983, after a public hearing on October 25,
1982, and November 8, 1982, and effective as of June 1, 1983, as amended May 9,
1983, to be effective May 9, 1983. No petition was filed opposing the special
service area and transfer tax which complied with 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes
235/9. Said special service area number one consists of the territory described
in the ordinance aforesaid. The village is now authorized to impose a transfer
tax on the sale of real estate and to provide for zoning inspections. (Ord.
2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-1-1983)
11-2-2: TRANSFER TAX:
   A.   Definitions:
   PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator,
assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint
venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal
corporation, political subdivision of the state of Illinois, domestic or
foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of
individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit
or otherwise, and the United States or any instrumentality thereof. Whenever
the term "person" is used in any clause pertaining and imposing a penalty, the
term as applied to associations shall mean the owners or part owners thereof,
and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   RECORDATION: The recording of deeds with the office of recorder of deeds or
the registration of deeds with the registrar of titles of Cook County,
Illinois.
   VALUE: The amount of the full actual consideration for any transfer covered
hereunder, including the amount of any mortgage or other lien to which the sale
is subject or the amount of any mortgage or other lien assumed by the grantee
or purchaser. (Ord. 2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-1-1983)
   B.   Imposition Of Tax: In order to pay for the zoning inspection provided
for in section
11-2-3 of this chapter, a tax is imposed on the transfer of title to real
estate located within River Forest special service area number one as evidenced
by the recordation of a deed by any person or by the delivery of any deed or
assignment of interest of said real property, whether investing the owner with
the beneficial interest in or legal title to said property or merely the
possession or use thereof for any purpose or to secure future payment of money
or the future transfer of any such real property. Pursuant to the description
of the territory of River Forest special service area number one, the real
estate transfer tax is not imposed on business, industrial and commercial
properties.
Effective May 1, 2003, the tax imposed shall be one dollar for every one
thousand dollar value or fraction thereof as stated in the declaration. (Ord.
3020, 4-14-2003)
   C.   Primary Liability: The primary liability for payment of said tax shall
be borne by the grantor or seller involved in any such transaction; provided,
however, it shall be unlawful for the grantee or purchaser to accept a
conveyance if the transfer tax has not been paid. The village administrator
shall issue no revenue stamps unless the village finance director certifies
that all water, sewer, refuse assessments, judgments from the ordinance
enforcement department, liens, encumbrances, and other debts due and owing to
the village, whether attached to the property or owed by the grantor or seller,
are paid in full for the property. (Ord. 3639, 2-13-2017)
   D.   Signed Declaration: At the time the tax is paid, there shall also be
presented to the village administrator, on a form prescribed by him, a
declaration signed by at least one of the sellers or grantors and also signed
by at least one of the purchasers or grantees involved in the transaction, or
their attorneys or agents, which declaration shall state the full consideration
for the property so transferred, and shall be deemed a confidential record by
the village administrator. Where the declaration is signed by an attorney or
agent who has the power of direction to deal with the title to the real estate
under a land trust agreement, the trustee being the mere repository of record
legal title with a duty of conveying the real estate only when and if directed
in writing by the beneficiary or beneficiaries having the power of direction,
said attorney or agent need only identify the land trust which is the
repository of record legal title and not the beneficiary or beneficiaries
having the power of direction under the land trust agreement. A copy of the
declaration must be attached to the deed when title is recorded. (Ord. 2119, 5-
9-1983, eff. 7-1-1983; amd. Ord. 2195, 11-25-1985)
   E.   Deed Information: Every deed shall show the date of the transaction
which it evidences, the names of the grantor and grantee, and a legal
description of the property to which it relates. (Ord. 2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-
1-1983)
   F.   Exempt From Tax: The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to the
following transactions, provided said transaction in each case is accompanied
by a certificate setting forth the facts or such other certificate or record as
the village administrator may require: (Ord. 2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-1-1983;
amd. Ord. 2195, 11-25-1985)
      1.   Transactions involving property acquired by or from any governmental
body or by any corporation, society, association, foundation or institution
organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or educational
purposes;
      2.   Transactions in which the deeds secure debt or other obligations;
      3.   Transactions in which the deeds, without additional consideration,
confirm, correct, modify or supplement deeds previously recorded;
      4.   Transactions in which the actual consideration is less than five
hundred dollars;
      5.   Transactions in which the deeds are tax deeds;
      6.   Transactions in which the deeds are releases of property which is
security for a debt or other obligation;
      7.   Transactions in which the deeds are pursuant to a court decree;
      8.   Transactions made pursuant to mergers, consolidations or transfers
or sales of substantially all of the assets of a corporation pursuant to plans
of reorganization;
      9.   Transactions between subsidiary corporations and their parents for
no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary
corporation's stock;
      10.   Transactions wherein there is an actual exchange of real property
except that the money difference or money's worth paid from one of the other
shall not be exempt from the tax;
      11.   Transactions representing transfers subject to the imposition of a
documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United States; and
      12.   A transfer by lease.
   G.   Exemptions: The taxes imposed by this chapter shall not be imposed on
or transferred by an executor or administrator to a legatee, heir or
distributee where the transfer is being made pursuant to will or by intestacy.
The tax provided by this chapter shall further be exempt where the transaction
is affected by operation of law or upon delivery or transfer in the following
instances:
      1.   From a decedent to his executor or administrator;
      2.   From a minor to his guardian or from a guardian to his ward upon
attaining majority;
      3.   From an incompetent to his conservator, or similar legal
representative, or from a conservator or similar legal representative to a
former incompetent upon removal of disability;
      4.   From a bank, trust company, financial institution, insurance company
or other similar entity or nominee, custodian or trustee thereof, to a public
officer or commission or person designated by such officer or commission or by
a court, in the taking over of its assets, in whole or in part, under state or
federal law regulating or supervising such institutions, nor upon redelivery or
retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereof;
      5.   From a bankruptcy or person in receivership due to insolvency to the
trustee in bankruptcy or receiver, from such receiver to such trustee or from
such trustee to such receiver, nor upon redelivery or retransfer by any such
transferee or successor thereto;
      6.   From a transferee under subsections G1 to G5 of this section,
inclusive, to his successor acting in the same capacity, or from one such
successor to another;
      7.   From a foreign country or national thereof to the United States or
any agency thereof, or to the government of any foreign country directed
pursuant to the authority vested in the president of the United States by
section 5(b) of the trading with the enemy act 1 , as amended by the first war
powers act 2 ;
      8.   From trustees to surviving, substitute, succeeding or additional
trustees of the same trust;
      9.   Upon the death of a joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, to the
survivor or survivors. (Ord. 2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-1-1983)
   H.   Revenue Stamps Required: The tax herein imposed shall be collected by
the village administrator or his designated agent through the sale of a revenue
stamp, which shall be caused to be prepared by said village administrator in
such quantities as said village administrator may from time to time prescribe.
Such revenue stamps shall be in a design to be established by the village
administrator. Such revenue stamps shall be in the following design:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2398.png]
Such revenue stamps shall be available for sale at, and during the regular
business hours of, the village offices. Upon payment of the tax herein imposed
and upon completion of the zoning inspection and issuance of the zoning
certificate of occupancy provided for in section
11-2-3 of this chapter, the purchase of the revenue stamps shall be completed
and the revenue stamps so purchased shall be affixed to the deed or other
instrument of conveyance. Any person so using and affixing a revenue stamp or
stamps shall cancel it and so deface it as to render it unfit for reuse by
marking it with his initials and the day, month and year when the affixing
occurs. Such markings shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or
by perforating with a machine or punch. However, the revenue stamp(s) shall not
be so defaced as to prevent ready determination of its denomination and
genuineness. (Ord. 2916, 2-12-2001)
   I.   Real Estate Transfer Declaration; Filing: A signed copy of the real
estate transfer declaration filed pursuant to section 3 of the real estate
transfer act of the state of Illinois shall be filed with the village
administrator by the grantee of any deed or assignment of beneficial interest
within ten days after delivery of the deed or assignment of beneficial
interest, or at the time of payment of the tax herein imposed, whichever first
occurs. (Ord. 2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-1-1983; amd. Ord. 2195, 11-25-1985)
   J.   Transfers In Trust: No trustee of real estate shall accept an
assignment of beneficial interest in nonexempt real estate located in River
Forest special service area number one without first obtaining a statement of
consideration from the assignor and assignee and unless revenue stamps in the
required amount, as set forth in this chapter, have been affixed to the
assignment. (Ord. 2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-1-1983)
   K.   Lien Created; Enforcement: In the event a deed is filed for recordation
conveying nonexempt real estate within River Forest special service area number
one without the revenue stamps provided by this chapter, a lien is declared
against said real estate conveyed in the amount of the tax. The fact that the
deed does not contain a River Forest revenue stamp in an amount equal to the
amount of the state transfer tax shall constitute constructive notice of the
lien. In addition, the village administrator may record a lien for the
nonpayment of the tax provided for herein. The lien may be enforced by
proceedings to foreclose, as in cases of mortgages or mechanics liens. Suit to
foreclose this lien must be commenced within three years after the date of
recording the deed. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the village
from bringing a civil action to collect the tax imposed by this chapter from
any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the same, including
interest and penalties as hereinbelow provided. (Ord. 2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-1-
1983; amd. Ord. 2195, 11-25-1985)
   L.   Enforcement; Suit For Collection: Whenever any person shall fail to pay
any taxes herein provided, or any purchaser or grantee shall accept a
conveyance where the tax has not been paid, the village attorney shall, upon
request of the village administrator, bring or cause to be brought an action to
enforce the payment of said tax, including interest and penalties, as
hereinbelow provided, on behalf of the village in any court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-1-1983)
   M.   Interest And Penalties: In the event of failure by any person to
collect and pay to the village administrator the tax required hereunder when
the same shall be due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax at
the rate of one percent per month commencing as of the first day following the
day when the tax became due. In addition, a penalty of ten percent of the tax
and interest due shall be assessed and collected against any person who shall
fail to pay the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-1-
1983; amd. Ord. 2195, 11-25-1985)
   N.   Proceeds Of Tax: All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax
under this chapter, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the
treasury of the village, in order to pay costs involved in conducting zoning
inspections required under section
11-2-3 of this chapter; provided, however, that in the event the grantee or
purchaser is a participant fully qualified for benefits in the Illinois home
ownership made easy program ("H.O.M.E.") as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 55/7.1, such participant shall receive from the village the particular
proceeds of the tax under this chapter as a donation from the village within
thirty days after the village has collected the tax and the purchase has been
completed. (Ord. 2464, 12-9-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. 40 Stat. 415.
2 2. 55 Stat. 839.
11-2-3: ZONING INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Inspection Required: It shall be unlawful to sell a nonexempt housing
unit located within River Forest special service area number one unless a
zoning inspection has been conducted and a zoning certificate of occupancy has
been issued not more than sixty days prior to the sale closing for such
property.
   B.   Conduct Of Inspection And Issuance Of Certificate: After payment of the
transfer tax imposed by this chapter, the department of public works shall,
within a reasonable time, conduct a zoning inspection of the particular housing
unit or units at a time and date mutually established by the seller and the
department. Thereafter, in conformity with section
 10-23-1 of the River Forest zoning code, the department shall promptly issue a
zoning certificate of occupancy which states compliance with the zoning code
and any item of noncompliance or nonconformity. Zoning inspections are subject
to the search provisions of title 4, chapter 14 of this code.
   C.   Disclaimer: By conducting a zoning inspection and issuing a zoning
certificate of occupancy, the village does not guarantee the condition of the
subject property and is not responsible for any claims arising out of the
subject property or the condition thereof. The village does not warrant that
all zoning deficiencies are listed in a zoning certificate of occupancy and
does not warrant anything as to the condition of the property or the
habitability thereof. (Ord. 2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-1-1983)
11-2-4: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
In addition to the remaining provisions of this chapter, any person found
guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement
of any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
a fine of not less than two hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars
for the first offense. (Ord. 2119, 5-9-1983, eff. 7-1-1983)
TITLE 12
CONDOMINIUM REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: General Purpose And Intent
12-1-2: Definitions
12-1-3: Certification And Code Inspections
12-1-4: Penalty
12-1-5: Appeals
12-1-6: Other Code Provisions And Statutes
12-1-1: GENERAL PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   It is concluded that equity ownership of multiple-family dwellings is a
positive development for the village of River Forest (hereinafter "village")
and, within certain limits, such ownership should be encouraged.
   B.   Because of the unique nature of condominium ownership and the age of
the existing multiple-family dwelling stock in the village, it is further
concluded that the quality of housing and the rights of the condominium
purchaser should be protected to a greater extent than the protections provided
under existing laws.
   C.   The village has the authority to introduce regulation into the
condominium process.
   D.   Therefore, the purpose and intent of this chapter is to introduce
regulatory elements into the condominium process that are aimed at the
protection of the rights of the condominium purchasers and preserving and
improving the quality of housing in an effort to encourage orderly development
of the condominium concept in the village. Further, this chapter is intended to
facilitate code inspections by the village and, thus, to reduce the possibility
of a condominium containing material defects that would have an adverse effect
on the safety of its occupants or neighboring property, would increase on
street vehicle density or would place unexpected burdens on unit buyers. (Ord.
3129, 9-12-2005)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this section. Other definitions to the extent
not set forth in this section, the definitions set forth in section
10-3-1 of this code shall apply.
   AGENT: Any person, firm, corporation, association, joint venture or any
other entity or any combination thereof who represent or act for or on behalf
of an owner and/or developer on the sale or offer of sale of any condominium
unit, excepting an escrow officer acting for a title company.
   ASSOCIATION: The unit owners acting as a group in accordance with the bylaws
of the association and the condominium declaration.
   CERTIFICATE OF CODE COMPLIANCE: A written instrument issued by the village
as evidence of a condominium project's compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   CLOSING: The act of transferring ownership of a condominium unit to the
purchaser from the owner and/or developer.
   CODE INSPECTION REPORT: A written report issued by the village as evidence
that all units and common elements in a condominium project have been inspected
for compliance with all applicable zoning, building and/or other life safety
code standards of the village.
   COMMON ELEMENTS OR AREAS: All portions of the condominium property,
including limited common elements, except the condominium units.
   CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE OF CODE COMPLIANCE: A written instrument issued by
the village for those portions of a condominium project which have not met all
the requirements of this chapter, but which comply with the requirements of
subsection
12-1-3D1 of this chapter.
   CONDOMINIUM: A form of property established pursuant to the Illinois
condominium property act.
   CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: The sale of or plan by an owner and/or developer to
sell or offer for sale residential condominium units, commercial condominium
units, or business condominium units, or any combination thereof, in an
existing building or any modification or reconstruction of an existing
building.
   CONDOMINIUM UNIT OR UNIT: A separate three-dimensional area within a
condominium building, identified as such in the declaration and on the
condominium plat, and shall include all improvements contained within such area
except those excluded in the declaration.
   CONVERSION, CONVERT (Or Other Like Words): The offering for sale by an owner
and/or developer or their agent of a condominium unit or building containing
such units.
   DEVELOPER: Any person or entity who/which undertakes to develop a
condominium unit or building by conversion.
   DIRECTOR: The director of public works or his authorized representative.
   LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS: A portion of the common elements so designated in
the declaration as being reserved for the use of a certain unit or units to the
exclusion of other units, including, but not limited to, balconies, terraces,
patios and parking spaces or facilities.
   OFFERING: Any inducement, solicitation, advertisement or announcement to
encourage the purchase of a condominium unit in a condominium or prospective
condominium.
   OWNER: The title holder of property being converted to a condominium.
   PARKING SPACE: A space: a) dedicated exclusively to the location or storage
of a motor vehicle, and b) which is in substantial compliance with the
requirements of title 10 of this code. The director shall establish a schedule
defining "substantial compliance" with this definition, which schedule shall be
revised from time to time and made available to the public.
   PARTIAL CERTIFICATE OF CODE COMPLIANCE: A written instrument, issued by the
village, as evidence of an individual condominium unit's compliance with this
chapter.
   PERSON: A natural individual, corporation, partnership, trustee or other
legal entity capable of holding title to real property.
   PROPERTY AND/OR BUILDING: All structures and the lot occupied or utilized by
all structures in or on which any condominium project is proposed.
   PROSPECTIVE PURCHASER: A person who investigates the condominium project
site for the purpose of inspection for possible purchase. (Ord. 3129, 9-12-
2005)
12-1-3: CERTIFICATION AND CODE INSPECTIONS:
   A.   No existing building or part thereof, shall be submitted to the
provisions of the Illinois condominium property act nor shall an existing
apartment be offered for sale or sold as a proposed condominium unit without
the prior issuance of a certificate of code compliance, conditional certificate
of code compliance, or partial certificate of code compliance issued pursuant
to this chapter.
   B.   A developer intending to submit a property to the provisions of the
Illinois condominium property act and/or offering an existing apartment for
sale as a proposed condominium unit shall file a written notice of intent to
convert with the director. The notice shall include a current survey of the
subject property, the address, a description of the subject units, and the
names and telephone numbers of existing occupants and the current property
owner if other than the developer. The developer shall timely provide such
other information regarding the condition of proposed development of the
property as the director shall reasonably request. A code inspection of the
property, including all projected condominium units and common elements and
facilities, shall be scheduled by agreement between the developer and the
director when the notice of intent to convert is received. The inspection shall
include compliance with all applicable zoning, building and/or other life
safety codes. The director shall issue a written code inspection report after
any inspection or reinspection and immediately mail a copy to the applicant at
the address provided. The inspection fee for each inspection or any
reinspection shall be one hundred fifty dollars per unit.
   C.   No certificate of code compliance shall issue until the director finds:
      1.   That the subject property is in substantial compliance with this
title. The director shall establish a schedule defining "substantial
compliance" with this title, which schedule shall be revised from time to time
and be made available to the public, and
      2.   a.   Except as provided in this subsection, that the subject
property has 2.5 parking spaces provided per unit.
         b.   A waiver of this requirement may be obtained by paying a fee into
the village parking reserve fund in the amount of fifteen thousand two hundred
sixty dollars per parking space deficiency.
         c.   The village shall refund a prorated portion of any such
contribution (without interest) for each parking space which is purchased in
the future. Any such refund shall be made to the association.
      3.   That the subject property is in substantial compliance with title
10, chapter 24 of this code unless said compliance would result in the loss of
parking or the need to relocate or alter an existing building. For purposes of
this subsection, the exception for building footprints less than five thousand
square feet contained in section
10-24-3 of this code shall not apply.
   D.   1.   The director may issue a partial certificate of code compliance
for those condominium units and/or common elements and facilities which are in
compliance with subsection C of this section and a conditional certificate of
code compliance has been issued for the remainder of the property. Any
condominium unit and/or common elements and facilities issued a partial
certificate of occupancy shall be deemed habitable.
      2.   The director may issue a conditional certificate of code compliance
for those condominium units and/or common elements and facilities not in
compliance with subsection C of this section if the following conditions are
met: a) a detailed written plan has been submitted providing for compliance
with subsection C of this section within the time required by any planned
development or building permit, and b) compliance with the plan is secured by a
performance bond, letter of credit or escrow issued by or with an approved
institution and in an amount equal to at least one hundred ten percent of the
estimated total cost of completion. Any failure to comply with a written plan
submitted pursuant to this section shall be a basis for revocation of any
conditional certificate issued pursuant to such plan and/or the imposition of
penalties provided in this chapter on or with respect to any unit(s) and/or
common areas not in compliance.
      3.   The director may extend any deadline and allow additional time for
compliance for good cause shown. Any such extension must be in writing and
shall not be deemed a waiver or estoppel by or against the village. In the
event an extension is allowed, any security provided shall be appropriately
modified as a condition precedent.
   E.   A developer shall be required to provide a prospective purchaser with a
copy of any code inspection report, certificate of code compliance, partial
certificate of code compliance, or conditional certificate of code compliance
prior to the closing of a condominium unit sales contract. All condominium
sales contracts shall contain the following provision:
The River Forest Condominium ordinance requires that the condominium property
and your unit be inspected for conformity with Village Codes. It also requires
that the person contracting to purchase have the opportunity to review the code
inspection report and the applicable code certificate issued by the Village.
   F.   1.   A tenant shall not unreasonably withhold consent to the developer
or village to enter the unit in order to comply with or enforce the provisions
of this chapter. Except in case of emergency, or unless otherwise provided in
the lease, a tenant shall be given at least two days' notice by the developer
of intent to enter. Unless the tenant consents, or the lease otherwise
provides, a developer shall not undertake construction for conversion of a unit
while it is occupied by a tenant, or create any unreasonable disruption of the
common areas, including, but not limited to, restricting access thereto, or
interfere with the quiet use and enjoyment of the premises.
      2.   If consent is withheld in violation of this section, the village may
seek a warrant from the circuit court for the limited purpose of enforcing this
chapter.
   G.   No revenue stamp, certification, or other approval shall issue if
property is submitted to the provisions of the Illinois condominium property
act in violation of this chapter. No revenue stamp or certificate shall issue
unless all water bills and village liens outstanding with respect to any
building, or any part thereof, being developed are paid or adequate surety is
provided.
   H.   1.   That the village has issued a certificate shall not be deemed a
finding that the village has in any way passed upon the merits or given
approval to the condominium project. It shall be unlawful to make or cause to
be made to a prospective purchaser any representation contrary to the
foregoing.
      2.   The following provision shall be reprinted on every certificate
issued by the village pursuant to this chapter:
By virtue of the issuance of this certificate, the Village does not guarantee
the condition of the subject property, or its suitability or fitness for the
purpose for which it is being sold or transferred, and the Village shall not be
responsible or liable for any claims arising out of the condition of the
property or any defects or deficiencies therein.
(Ord. 3129, 9-12-2005)
12-1-4: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than one hundred dollars nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars for each offense. Each violation of the
provisions of this chapter and each day such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense.
   B.   The remedies provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in
addition to provisions and remedies provided elsewhere in this code regarding
zoning, building and/or other life safety regulations.
   C.   The developer, the unit owner and the association shall be liable for
violations occurring in a unit and each may be cited for any individual
violation. The developer and the association shall be liable for violations
occurring in common areas and each may be cited for any individual violation.
   D.   In addition to the imposition of a fine, the village may seek
injunctive relief to prevent a violation of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, enjoining the occupancy and/or sale of any building or unit. (Ord.
3129, 9-12-2005)
12-1-5: APPEALS:
   A.   All reports and decisions of the director made pursuant to this chapter
shall be made timely and in writing. Any decision of the director regarding
title 10 of this code may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals and may
include a request for a variation pursuant to title 10, chapter 5 of this code.
   B.   Appeals shall be heard in a timely manner. Appeals must be made in
writing and filed with the village administrator within ten business days of
the issuance of the memorandum of the action appealed. The burden of proof
shall be on the appellant. No decision of the director shall be reversed or
modified unless the board finds that the director's action or interpretation of
this code was clearly erroneous. The board shall timely report its decision in
writing to the village administrator. The decision of the board shall be final
and binding.
   C.   All reports and decisions of the director and decisions of board made
pursuant to this chapter shall be sent immediately to the applicant/appellant
by mail and, if an address within the village is provided, also by delivery.
(Ord. 3353, 1-10-2011)
12-1-6: OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND STATUTES:
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon approval. This chapter
shall not be construed to prevent, limit or modify any other provisions of this
code regarding zoning, building and/or life safety. This chapter shall not
limit or modify the application of other provisions of this code with respect
to properties submitted to the provisions of the Illinois condominium property
act prior to its effective date. (Ord. 3129, 9-12-2005)
TITLE 13
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
CHAPTER 1
HISTORIC PRESERVATION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13-1-1: Scope, Purposes And Goals
13-1-2: Definitions
13-1-3: Historic Preservation Commission
13-1-4: Applications For Approval Of A Local Landmark
13-1-5: Withdrawal Of Property Designation
13-1-6: Certificate Of Appropriateness
13-1-7: Review Required
13-1-8: Hearing Procedures
13-1-9: Recording And Notice
13-1-10: Appeals
13-1-11: Penalty
13-1-12: Procedures To Obtain Certificate Of Appropriateness In Flow Chart
Format
13-1-1: SCOPE, PURPOSES AND GOALS:
   A.   Purposes And Goals:
      1.   To identify, preserve and enhance the distinctive character, history
and architectural heritage of the village;
      2.   To conserve and improve the value of properties throughout the
village;
      3.   To enhance the attractiveness of the village to residents, visitors,
tourists, and shoppers and thereby support business and commerce in the village
and provide economic benefits to the village;
      4.   To foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past as
manifested in properties, structures, improvements and areas of historical and
architectural significance within the village;
      5.   To maintain and update a register of areas, properties, structures,
sites and objects of historical or architectural significance;
      6.   To allow for appropriate renewal and modernization of the village's
building stock; and
      7.   To foster and encourage preservation, restoration and continued
utilization of these areas, properties, structures, sites and objects valued by
the village and its residents as significant to the village history, culture
and architecture.
   B.   Local Landmarks: No property shall be subject to any restriction or
regulation as a local landmark as set forth in section
13-1-6 of this chapter unless it has been submitted to the commission for
approval by an owner (or by the commission with approval of the owner) and
approved as a local landmark. Upon designation as such by the commission, the
subject property shall remain a local landmark unless withdrawn in accordance
with section 13-1-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 3589, 3-14-2016)
13-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
   ALTERATION: Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior
architectural features of a structure.
   ARCHITECTURALLY SIGNIFICANT:
   A.   A structure designed by or associated with an architect, builder or
architectural firm whose work is recognized by the commission as significant.
   B.   A structure which is an example of a particular style in terms of
detail, material or workmanship, and which possesses a high degree of
integrity, having undergone little or no alteration since its original
construction.
   C.   A structure which is one of a contiguous grouping of such structures
having a sense of cohesiveness expressed through a similarity of
characteristics of a style, period or method of construction and representing
the architectural significance of the whole group.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate issued by the commission
authorizing plans for the alteration, renovation, or remodeling of the street
facade, the demolition of a property, or otherwise certifying compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
   COMMISSION: The River Forest historic preservation commission.
   DEMOLITION: The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in significant
part of a building, structure, site or object. Demolition includes the removal
of a building, structure or object from its site or the removal or destruction
of its facade or surface.
   DIRECTOR: The director of the Illinois historic preservation agency, or
successor.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT: The River Forest historic district that appears on the
national register of historic places or any other area designated in the future
by the commission and approved as historic by the village board.
   HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT:
   A.   A building, structure, area or monument associated with the life or
activities of a person or persons who have contributed significantly to or
participated significantly in the history or historic events of the nation,
state of Illinois, or village of River Forest.
   B.   A building, structure, area or monument associated with a historic
event having significance to the nation, state of Illinois or village of River
Forest.
   IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, fence, parking facility or other
object affixed, attached to, erected or installed on real property.
   LOCAL LANDMARK: Any property found by the commission to be either
historically significant or architecturally significant and which has been
submitted by an owner (or by the commission with approval of the owner) for
certification and approved pursuant to section
13-1-4 of this chapter.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: The process of building a structure on vacant land.
   OWNER: All owners of record of the subject property. In the case of a land
trust, all beneficial owners. In the case of a corporation, any officer of the
corporation. No lienholder shall be considered an owner based solely upon the
lien. In the case of a deceased or disabled owner, the legal representative
shall be considered the owner.
   RECONSTRUCTION: The process of replacing or rebuilding all or part of an
existing structure that has been demolished or destroyed.
   REHABILITATION: The process of returning a property to a state of utility,
through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary
use.
   RESTORATION: The process of repair or alteration of an existing structure
which recaptures or replicates historical features which may have deteriorated
or been replaced.
   SIGNIFICANT PROPERTY: Any structure found by the commission to be
historically significant or architecturally significant.
   STREET FACADE: Any building surface which can be seen from any street or
sidewalk which is adjacent to the subject property. In determining what can be
"seen", any obstruction from landscaping or fencing shall not be considered. If
any part of a surface falls within this definition, the entire surface of that
building feature shall be considered as a "street facade".
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location
on or in the ground. (Ord. 3589, 3-14-2016)
13-1-3: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
   A.   Appointment; Membership: The commission shall consist of seven members
appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the village
board of trustees. The chairman shall be a member and shall be designated by
the village president with the advice and consent of the village board of
trustees. Each member shall serve a four year term, provided, however, three
members of the initial commission shall serve two year terms with their
successive terms being four years. Individuals appointed to the commission
shall be residents of the village. The chairman shall have experience or
training in building or landscape architecture, construction, land use
planning, real estate law, studying/documenting village history or be a
licensed real estate broker. Other commission members need not have these
qualifications, however, individuals with such qualifications shall be given
preference.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The commission shall:
      1.   Develop its own rules of procedure and criteria for review. In the
absence of procedural rules, the commission shall conduct its business, as
nearly as practicable, in accordance with "Robert's Rules Of Order";
      2.   Periodically and with prior village board approval cause a survey to
be conducted of structures, buildings, sites, and areas in the village in order
to list those properties which are found to be significant. If the commission
finds that a property should be added to the original significant properties
list, dated June 15, 2013, written notice of the intent to add the property to
the significant property list shall be sent to the owner of record at least
fourteen days prior to the date on which the property is added to the
significant properties list. The owner receiving such notice shall be asked to
provide written acknowledgment of receipt of the intent to add the property to
the significant properties list, however, the failure of the owner to receive,
or acknowledge receipt of, the notice described herein, shall not result in the
removal of the property from the significant properties list. The updated list
shall be forwarded to the village board for final receipt and approval;
      3.   Keep a register of all buildings that have been identified as
significant or local landmarks, including all information pertinent to such
designation;
      4.   Provide information regarding: a) physical and financial aspects of
preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, including information
about incentives (including tax freeze) that may be available and possible
designation under this chapter; and b) procedures for inclusion on the state or
national register of historic places;
      5.   Inform and educate the residents of the village, village boards/
commissions and village staff concerning preservation issues and the village's
historic and architectural heritage;
      6.   Hold public hearings, review applications, conduct prehearing
conferences, and make findings and recommendations regarding all matters
subject to this chapter;
      7.   Request technical advice and assistance from village staff members
and to retain specialists or consultants when authorized by the village board
or village administrator;
      8.   Advise and make recommendations to other village boards and
commissions on matters before those bodies regarding historic preservation;
      9.   When requested by the village board, review the zoning code and this
chapter and recommend any amendments appropriate for the protection and
continued use of structures, buildings, or sites within the village;
      10.   Issue certificates of appropriateness or demolition delay;
      11.   Recommend to the village board such changes in the boundaries of
the historic district or establishment of additional historic districts as may
be deemed appropriate;
      12.   Perform such advisory reviews of proposed construction as may be
required by section
 13-1-7 of this chapter;
      13.   Perform such other functions within the scope of this chapter as
directed by the village board;
      14.   Establish specific criteria for identifying significant properties,
which criteria shall be subject to approval by the village board;
      15.   Work with the Oak Park Area Association Of Realtors (and/or the
real estate listing broker, if any), Landmarks Illinois, the National Trust For
Historic Preservation and other interested historic or preservation
organizations to publicize the availability of properties listed on the
village's survey of architecturally or historically significant properties, as
well as local landmarks, which are available for purchase; and
      16.   Take such actions as are necessary to seek and maintain certified
local government status (established by the national historic preservation act
amendments of 1980, 16 USC section 470 et seq., as amended) including, without
limitation, requiring: a) annual attendance by a commission representative at
at least one informational or educational meeting per year as approved by the
director; b) an annual report of the commission's activities to be presented to
the director; and c) monitoring and notifying the director of any proposed
major alteration or actual/proposed demolition of any structure listed on the
Illinois register of historic places or the national register of historic
places. (Ord. 3589, 3-14-2016)
13-1-4: APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL OF A LOCAL LANDMARK:
Applications for approval as a local landmark shall be filed with the village
administrator in writing and shall include the following:
   A.   The name and address of owner.
   B.   The legal description and common street address of the property.
   C.   If the commission has not previously identified the property as
historically or architecturally significant, a written statement describing the
structure, building, or site and setting forth reasons in support of the
proposed designation, including a list of significant exterior architectural
features that should be protected.
   D.   Written documentation and evidence acceptable to the village
administrator and the commission establishing that the applicant is the current
owner.
   E.   A site plan, photographs, and front, side and rear elevations.
   F.   Such other relevant information as may be requested by the village
administrator or the commission. (Ord. 3589, 3-14-2016)
13-1-5: WITHDRAWAL OF PROPERTY DESIGNATION:
   A.   A previous finding that a property has been designated as a local
landmark or a significant property may be withdrawn by the commission upon the
request of: 1) a member of the commission after prior written notice to the
owner, or 2) the owner, under any of the following conditions:
      1.   The structure, building, site, or area has ceased to meet the
criteria for designation because the qualities which caused it to be originally
designated have been lost or destroyed;
      2.   Additional information shows that the structure, building, site, or
area does not possess sufficient significance to meet the designation criteria;
      3.   The original designation was clearly in error; or
      4.   There was a material misstatement of fact or prejudicial procedural
error in the designation process.
   B.   An application for the withdrawal of property designation shall be
filed with the village administrator in writing and shall include the
following:
      1.   Name and address of owner;
      2.   The legal description and common street address for the property;
      3.   A site plan, photographs and front, side and rear elevations;
      4.   A written explanation describing in detail why one or more of the
conditions contained in subsection A of this section has been met with respect
to the property in question;
      5.   Such other relevant information as may be requested by the village
administrator or as the commission may require. (Ord. 3589, 3-14-2016)
13-1-6: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
   A.   Certificate Required: No repair, rehabilitation, reconstruction,
restoration, demolition, improvement or signage, to or on the street facade of
a local landmark, shall be done without the prior issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness and compliance with subsections C and D of this section. No
demolition of a significant property as designated on the significant
properties survey shall be done without either: 1) the prior issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness; 2) the expiration of a certificate of
demolition delay issued by the commission pursuant to subsection
13-1-8B2 of this chapter; or 3) the village board's reversal, on appeal, of the
commission's withholding of a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to
section
13-1-10 of this chapter.
   B.   Exemption: Certificates of appropriateness shall not be required in
connection with compliance with an order or permit issued by the director of
public works, or his/her designee, to correct an immediate health or safety
problem; provided that such order expressly exempts the project from
certificate of appropriateness procedures and that such order or permit is made
subject to appropriate conditions to advance the purposes and goals of this
chapter.
   C.   Construction Standards:
      1.   The distinguishing original qualities or character of a structure or
site and its environment shall not be destroyed.
      2.   All structures, sites, and areas should be recognized as products of
their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and that seek to
create an earlier appearance than the true age of the property are not
permitted.
      3.   Changes that may have taken place in the course of time and which
have acquired significance in their own right shall be recognized and respected
when dealing with a specific architectural period.
      4.   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
that characterize a structure, site or area shall be maintained.
      5.   Deteriorated architectural features shall be preferably repaired
rather than replaced. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material
should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color,
texture, and other visual qualities.
      6.   Repair or replacement of missing architectural features shall be
based on accurate duplications of features substantiated by historic, physical,
or pictorial evidence, or expert opinion.
      7.   Demolition of a local landmark shall not be permitted if a structure
is economically viable in its present condition or could be economically viable
after completion of commercially reasonable alterations, even if demolition
would permit a more profitable use of such site.
   D.   Design Standards: The height, adjacent open space, directional
expression, roof type, roof shape, architectural details, landscaping,
accessory structures and paving shall be consistent with the original
structure.
   E.   Procedures For Application For A Certificate: Any person or entity
required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness shall submit a formal
application as a precondition to commencing work and/or obtaining any required
building permit. The application for a certificate of appropriateness shall
include the following information and specifications:
      1.   Applicant's name;
      2.   Owner's name if different from applicant;
      3.   Street address and legal description of the site;
      4.   A site plan and front, side, and rear elevation drawings;
      5.   A brief description and photographs of the structures, buildings,
and landscape features on the site;
      6.   A detailed description of the proposed alteration or demolition,
together with pictorial renditions indicating how and to what extent such
proposed changes will affect the subject property;
      7.   Identification of any architect or developer involved in the
project; and
      8.   Such other relevant information as requested by the village
administrator or as the commission may require.
   F.   Additional Provisions: Applicable standards and requirements set forth
in the zoning and building codes are to be applied in addition to those set
forth in this section.
   G.   Economic Hardship: Any of the requirements of subsection C or D of this
section or subsection
13-1-8B2 of this chapter may be waived by the commission if the applicant shows
by clear and convincing evidence, and if the commission finds that any of the
following conditions exist:
      1.   The applicant's economic circumstances and the condition of the
subject property present a substantial hardship; or
      2.   Compliance with the requirement(s) is commercially unreasonable and
is not essential to achieve the purposes and goals set forth in section
 13-1-1 of this chapter.
The normal escalation of construction or land acquisition costs within the
village, per se, shall not be deemed a hardship or create commercially
unreasonable circumstances.
Personal financial information submitted for consideration pursuant to this
subsection shall be considered confidential and shall be disclosed at a public
hearing only to the extent necessary for a complete discussion of the issues.
Personal financial records, statements and tax returns shall be withheld from
public disclosure pursuant to section 7(1)(b) of the Illinois freedom of
information act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 et seq., as amended. (Ord.
3589, 3-14-2016)
13-1-7: REVIEW REQUIRED:
   A.   No repair, rehabilitation, reconstruction, restoration, improvement or
signage involving more than twenty percent of any individual building facade of
any local landmark or significant property viewable from a street shall be
initiated, nor shall any building permit be issued for such work, until the
commission is notified of the proposed work, including a description of the
scope of work, and the conditions of subsection B of this section are met. Said
twenty percent shall be based upon the total footprint of any building facade
viewable from any portion of any street, or streets, adjacent to the
significant property as measured in linear feet. Work under this subsection
shall not be structured through the execution of multiple projects designed
with the apparent intention to avoid said twenty percent.
   B.   The commission shall have thirty days (seven days in the case of
windows) from the submission of a complete building permit application
(including architectural elevations with a description of materials together
with floor plans and site plans) to review the proposed work. After review, the
commission shall advise the applicant in writing of any recommendations it has
regarding the proposed work. The recommendations of the commission regarding
items covered by subsection A of this section as to significant properties
shall be advisory, shall not be binding upon the owner, and the proposed work
may proceed upon the occurrence of the earlier of either the expiration of the
thirty day period or receipt of the recommendations.
   C.   Upon request of an owner or the commission, the commission shall
schedule (and the owner shall attend) a meeting to consider and discuss
proposed work regarding items covered by subsection A of this section. Such
meetings shall not be subject to the requirements of section
13-1-8 of this chapter.
   D.   Demolition of a significant property as designated on the significant
properties survey shall be delayed for a period of not more than six (6) months
for significant properties that are not zoned in the PRI Public, Recreational
and Institutional District, and not more than twelve (12) months for
significant properties that are zoned in the PRI Public, Recreational and
Institutional District, following the commission's receipt of an application to
the village for a demolition permit and a public hearing regarding the issuance
of a certificate of appropriateness for such proposed demolition shall be held
pursuant to subsection
13-1-8B of this chapter. (Ord. 3589, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 3850, 12-13-2021)
13-1-8: HEARING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Public Hearing Not Required: Review of applications pursuant to section
13-1-7 of this chapter (other than for a proposed demolition) may be conducted
by the commission's architectural review subcommittee comprised of two members
and does not require a public hearing. Applications regarding proposed window
replacement shall be reviewed within seven days of commission's receipt of
proposed alterations, including photographs of current conditions and proposed
replacements; all other proposed alterations requiring review (except proposed
demolition) shall be reviewed by the commission at its next scheduled meeting
within thirty days following the commission's receipt of such completed
application and materials; provided, however, the review shall be conducted by
the architectural review subcommittee of the commission comprised of two
members if no commission meeting is scheduled to occur (or held) within such
thirty days. Any application denied without a public hearing shall be set for a
public hearing at the request of the applicant, which hearing shall proceed in
accordance with subsection B of this section.
   B.   Procedures: Public hearings regarding applications made pursuant to
sections
13-1-4 through
13-1-6 of this chapter shall be heard in accordance with the following
procedures:
      1.   Hearing Procedures: Within sixty days of the proper filing of a
complete application, or if requested by the applicant pursuant to subsection A
of this section, a public hearing shall be held by the commission. Notice of
such public hearing, summarizing the application, shall be published at least
fifteen days (and not more than thirty days) in advance of such public hearing
in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. Said notice shall be sent
via U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested by the applicant to all
owners of property within five hundred feet of the subject property at least
fifteen days in advance of such public hearing. An affidavit regarding proof of
mailing of the notice shall be provided by the applicant to the village prior
to the commencement of the public hearing. The village shall, at the
applicant's cost, post a sign in front of the subject building so as to be
readily visible from the frontage street at least fifteen days in advance of
such public hearing which shall contain the following information: a) in the
case of a proposal demolition requiring a certificate of appropriateness, as
described in subsection
13-1-6A of this chapter, capitalized words: "APPLICATION FOR DEMOLITION
PERMIT"; b) date, time and location of the hearing; c) property address; d)
name and address of the applicant, if not the owner of the property; e) name
and address of the owner of the property; and f) statement that all interested
persons will be heard, that written comments may be submitted in advance if
such interested person is unable to attend the hearing, as well as information
detailing where to obtain copies of the application and meeting agenda.
      2.   Findings By The Commission: The commission shall review all evidence
and (as applicable), either:
         a.   Determine if the application does or does not meet the
requirements of the definition of a "local landmark"; and the commission may
either grant or deny designation of local landmark status, as applicable. In
the event the subject property is listed on any national or state registry of
historic, landmark or architecturally significant properties, the commission
may consider such listing as prima facie evidence that the requirements for
designation as a local landmark have been met;
         b.   Determine if the proposed alteration or demolition of a local
landmark would be detrimental to the historical, architectural or cultural
resources of the village and the commission may either grant or deny a
certificate of appropriateness for the repair, rehabilitation, reconstruction,
restoration, demolition, improvement or signage, as applicable;
         c.   Issue a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of a
property listed on the village survey of architecturally or historically
significant properties; or
         d.   Withhold a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of a
property listed on the village survey of architecturally or historically
significant properties and, in such event, issue a certificate of demolition
delay for a period of not more than six (6) months for significant properties
that are not zoned in the PRI Public, Recreational and Institutional District,
and not more than twelve (12) months for significant properties that are zoned
in the PRI Public, Recreational and Institutional District, following the
filing of an application for a demolition permit with the village.
The applicant may present evidence of economic hardship during the public
hearing. In any of such events, the commission shall render a written decision
within fifteen days following the completion of a public hearing, and cause the
decision to be served upon the applicant.
      3.   Reconsideration: An applicant whose application is denied may
request reconsideration of the commission's withholding of a certificate of
appropriateness by filing a written request within thirty days after the
decision is rendered; provided, however, that the commission shall reconsider
an application only if substantial new evidence or information regarding the
subject property is provided, including a claim of economic hardship as set
forth in subsection 13-1-6G of this chapter, if not previously presented during
the public hearing. Such request for reconsideration shall be subject to the
provisions of subsection B1 of this section. Once an application has been
denied upon reconsideration, no further applications involving substantially
the same relief under this chapter for any structure, building, site, or area
may be filed for one year.
      4.   Meeting With Commission: The owner of a local landmark or
significant property as designated on the significant properties survey shall,
from and after the filing of an application for a certificate of
appropriateness for the proposed demolition of such local landmark or
significant property and until the earlier of: a) the expiration of such
demolition delay period (regarding a significant property); or b) the decision
of the village board (following an appeal) to reverse the commission's decision
to withhold a certificate of appropriateness for the proposed demolition, meet
with the commission in order to consider and discuss such proposal, as well as
explore potential preservation solutions including finding a prospective owner
to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore the property (or such other
reasonable alternative to demolition). Such meetings shall be scheduled by the
commission and may be conducted by a two member subcommittee and do not require
a public hearing.
   C.   Successive Applications:
      1.   Second Applications Without New Grounds Barred: Whenever any
application filed pursuant to this chapter has been finally denied on its
merits, a second application seeking essentially the same relief, whether or
not in the same form or on the same theory, shall not be brought unless in the
opinion of the village administrator and the village attorney there is
substantial new evidence available or a mistake of law or fact significantly
affected the prior denial.
      2.   New Grounds To Be Stated: Any such second application shall include
a detailed statement of the grounds justifying consideration of such
application.
      3.   Summary Denial With Or Without Hearing: Any such second application
may be denied summarily, and without hearing, on a finding that no grounds
appear that warrant a new hearing. In any case where such application is set
for hearing, the applicant shall be required to establish grounds warranting
reconsideration of the merits of its application prior to being allowed to
offer any evidence on the merits. Unless such grounds are established, the
application may be summarily dismissed for such failure.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: The burden of proving each requirement for the relief
sought shall remain with the applicant throughout all proceedings. (Ord. 3589,
3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 3850, 12-13-2021)
13-1-9: RECORDING AND NOTICE:
   A.   Immediately upon approval of the subject property as a local landmark,
the applicant shall file a memorandum of such approval with the Cook County
recorder of deeds. The memorandum shall state that the property is subject to
the River Forest historic preservation ordinance, has been certified as a local
landmark, and shall provide the address and telephone number of the village to
request further information. A file stamped copy of the memorandum shall be
provided to the village administrator.
   B.   All sale contracts for properties designated as local landmarks shall
contain a rider in substantially the following form, signed by the buyer and
seller:
The Village of River Forest Board of Trustees adopted a Historic Preservation
Regulations Ordinance in Chapter 13-1 of the River Forest Village Code. Those
seeking to purchase property in River Forest should be aware of this Ordinance,
a copy of which is available for review at the River Forest Village Hall,
separate and apart from the Village's Zoning Ordinance and Building Codes.
(Ord. 3589, 3-14-2016)
13-1-10: APPEALS:
   A.   All decisions and findings by the commission pursuant to subsection
13-1-3B3, section
13-1-4,
13-1-5,
13-1-6 or subsection
13-1-8B of this chapter shall be served on the owner forthwith and may be
appealed to the village board by the owner. Any appeal shall be filed not later
than thirty days following service. The appeal shall be filed with the village
administrator in writing and shall contain the following:
      1.   A caption reading "appeal of" giving the name and address of the
applicant;
      2.   A brief description of the specific order, decision or determination
being appealed;
      3.   A statement of the relief sought;
      4.   The reasons why such relief should be granted.
   B.   The village administrator shall cause the appeal to be set for hearing
before the village board within sixty days of receipt of the notice and shall
immediately notify the appellant and all persons requesting such information,
in writing, of the date, time and location of the hearing.
   C.   The village board shall consider only the evidence presented to the
commission, its decision and findings, and the arguments of interested parties.
The village board shall render a written decision within fifteen days following
the completion of a public hearing, and cause the decision to be served on the
applicant.
   D.   Any decision of the village board shall be final. Any decision or
finding of the commission pursuant to this chapter shall become final if no
appeal is taken pursuant to subsection A of this section. No permit regulated
by the provisions of this chapter shall issue, nor shall any rights vest
therein, until the decision of the commission or appeal to the village board is
final. (Ord. 3589, 3-14-2016)
13-1-11: PENALTY:
Any person or entity which violates this chapter shall be guilty of a petty
offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less
than fifty dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars. Every day such
violation shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate violation. In
addition to such penalties, the village may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to enjoin, correct or abate any violation of this chapter. (Ord.
3589, 3-14-2016)
13-1-12: PROCEDURES TO OBTAIN CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS IN FLOW CHART
FORMAT:
These charts are intended as a meaningful aid in understanding the requirements
of this chapter. To the extent that there is any conflict between this chapter
and the charts, this chapter controls.
   A.   Procedure To Obtain Certificate Of Appropriateness (COA) For Proposed
Window Replacement In Significant Property: To replace windows of a significant
property's facade that is viewable from the street:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2360.png]
   B.   Alterations To Significant Properties: Procedure to obtain certificate
of appropriateness (COA) for repair, rehabilitation, reconstruction, or
restoration involving more than twenty percent of facade visible from street
(excluding windows and demolition):
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2362.png]
 
   C.   Procedure To Obtain Certificate Of Appropriateness (COA) For Demolition
Of A Significant Property:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ba5074aa5ceff263aeef80ac435565457508a3fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2364.png]
   Note:
   1.    Demolition delay period is six (6) months from completed application
for properties not zoned in the PRI Public, Recreational and Institutional
District, and twelve (12) months for properties zoned in the PRI Public,
Recreational and Institutional District.
(Ord. 3589, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 3850, 12-13-2021)
