VILLAGE CODE
of
ROANOKE, ILLINOIS
1974
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-02, passed 3-3-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the Village of Roanoke, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2024-04, passed June 3, 2024, and
resolution 2025-02, passed March 3, 2025. Ordinances of the Village adopted
after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the extent that
they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the Village office in
order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has been
amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-07
 
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE GENERAL PENALTY
AND ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PROVISIONS
IN CHAPTER 4 OF TITLE 1 OF THE ROANOKE VILLAGE CODE
 
 
WHEREAS, Village Officials have reviewed the current general penalty provisions
in the Village Code, as well as the fines provided under the Village’s
administrative citation process in the Village Code, and
 
WHEREAS, Village Officials have determined that it is appropriate to adjust the
fines for ordinance violations that fall under the general penalty provisions
and the administrative citation process in the Village Code; and
 
WHEREAS, the Village has determined that it is in the Village’s best interests
to revise the fines for ordinance violations that fall under the general
penalty provisions and the administrative citation process in the Village Code
as provided herein;
 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF ROANOKE, WOODFORD COUNTY, ILLINOIS, THAT:
 
Section 1 . Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the Roanoke Village Code is hereby
amended as follows (additions are indicated by underline; deletions by
strikeout):
 
1-4-1: PENALTY:
 
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code, including the
doing of any act which is prohibited or the failure to do any required act as
set forth under this code, shall be fined in a sum not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) and not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first violation of a specific
provision of this code during any twelve (12) month period each violation,. The
fine imposed for a second violation of the same specific provision of this
code by the same person or responsible party within a twelve (12) month period
beginning on the date of the first violation of the particular code provision
shall be no less than three hundred dollars ($300.00)   and not to exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). The fine imposed for a third violation of the
same specific provision of this code by the same person or responsible party
within a twelve (12) month period beginning on the date of the first violation
of the particular code provision shall be no less than three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00)   and not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
The provisions of this general penalty section 1-4-1 shall not apply to
excepting any violation of a section of this code wherein the fine is
specifically set forth. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day any violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance shall
continue. Additionally, any such person convicted of a violation of any section
of this code may, in addition to any fine imposed for the violation, be
required to perform a reasonable number of hours of public service which may
include picking up litter in public parks or along public highways or
maintaining any public facility.
 
 
Section 2 . Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 13 of the Roanoke Village Code Section
is hereby amended as follows (additions are indicated by underline; deletions
by strikeout):
1-4-13: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS:
 
(A) Any village officer authorized to enforce the provisions of this code,
including any law enforcement officer acting on behalf of the village and the
code official as set forth in section 7-4-13 of this code, may issue and serve
administrative enforcement citations to an offender for a violation of this
code. Furthermore, the village clerk may issue administrative enforcement
citations by certified mail to the offender.
   
(B) Every administrative enforcement citation issued under this provision shall
impose a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) one hundred dollars
($100.00) to be paid to the village of Roanoke, unless the code provision
specifically provides a lesser fine, in which case the maximum fine
specifically set forth in such code provision shall be paid to the village of
Roanoke. A fine of three two hundred dollars ($300.00$200.00) shall be imposed
for a second violation of the same code provision by the same person or
responsible party within a twelve (12) month period beginning on the date of
the first violation of the particular code provision. A fine of three hundred
fifty dollars ($350.00$300.00) shall be imposed for a third or subsequent
violation of the same code provision by the same person or responsible party
within a twelve (12) month period beginning on the date of the first violation
of the particular code provision. If a provision of this code provides for a
penalty of less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) one hundred dollars
($100.00) for a first offense charged as an administrative enforcement action
under this section, then the specific fine amount set forth for a first offense
shall be doubled for a second offense and tripled for a third or subsequent
offense during the twelve (12) month period as described above in this section.
Payment of any fine under this section shall be made to the village clerk at
the village hall. Any check tendered to pay a fine under this section which is
returned to village unpaid for any reason shall not be considered to be "full
payment" under this section.
   
(C) The offender shall pay any fine imposed under this section within thirty
(30) calendar days, unless a shorter period of time is specifically provided by
the applicable code provision. If the fine imposed under this provision is not
paid within the required thirty (30) day period, the fine shall be increased by
one hundred dollars ($100.00) if paid through the   administrative enforcement
citation process provided in this section 1-4-13 increase as provided herein.
If the fine is imposed for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period
and is not paid within the required thirty (30) day period, the fine shall be
increased to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to be paid to the village,
regardless of the amount of the fine for this initial offense in a twelve (12)
month period if the fine was paid during the required thirty (30) day period.
If the fine is imposed for a second violation within a twelve (12) month period
and is not paid within the required thirty (30) day period, the fine shall be
increased to three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) to be paid to the village,
regardless of the amount of the fine for this second offense in a twelve (12)
month period. If the fine is imposed for a third or subsequent violation within
a twelve (12) month period and is not paid within the required thirty (30) day
period, the fine shall be increased to four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) to
be paid to the village, regardless of the amount of the fine for this third or
subsequent offense in a twelve (12) month period.
  
(D) This administrative enforcement process shall not initiate any court
proceedings related to a particular violation of this code and shall be
independent of any court proceeding related to the enforcement of this code.
Furthermore, action taken under this section shall not prevent the village from
pursuing other types of enforcement action against the offender or another
person for the same violation. However, any violation of this code which is
concluded by the full payment of the fine amount set forth above by the
offender in the specified time period shall not be brought by the village as an
action against that offender to recover a fine for such violation in a court
proceeding.
 
 
Section 3 . This Ordinance is hereby ordered to be published in pamphlet form
by the Roanoke Village Clerk and said Clerk is ordered to keep at least three
(3) copies hereof available for public inspection in the future and in
accordance with the Illinois Municipal Code.
 
Section 4 . All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby superseded and repealed by this
ordinance, and any conflicts shall be governed by the ordinance.
 
Section 5 . This Ordinance shall be immediately in full force and effect from
and after its passage and approval in the manner provided by law.
 
PASSED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF ROANOKE, WOODFORD COUNTY,
ILLINOIS, IN REGULAR AND PUBLIC SESSION THIS 3rd DAY OF NOVEMBER 2025.
 
AYES:
NAYS:
 
ABSENT:
 
APPROVED:
 
 
                     ________________________________
                           President
 
ATTEST:
 
 
__________________________________
Village Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION
 
 
I, JENNIFER CRUMRINE and the undersigned, do hereby certify that I am the duly
qualified and acting Clerk of the Village of Roanoke, a municipal corporation
of and in the County of Woodford, Illinois, that the foregoing Ordinance No.
2025- 07 is a true and accurate copy of the Ordinance passed by the Village
Board and President of the Village of Roanoke on the meeting date set forth
therein, and that the Ordinance was published by me in pamphlet form this 3rd
day of November, 2025, by making three (3) copies thereof available on that
date for public inspection.
 
 
____________________________________
Village Clerk
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 74-9
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE OFFICIAL CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF
ROANOKE; PROVIDING FOR THE CONTINUANCE IN EFFECT OF ALL GENERAL LAWS IN EFFECT
ON THE DATE OF SUCH ADOPTION; PROVIDING FOR THE CONTINUATION OF ALL SPECIAL
ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED IN THE OFFICIAL CODE AND PROVIDING FOR THE REGULAR
SUPPLEMENTATION OF THE OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE.
BE IT ORDAINED By the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Roanoke, Illinois:
   Section 1. Pursuant to the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
2-3 of the Illinois Municipal Code and from and after the date of passage of
this ordinance, this Village Code of the Village of Roanoke, Illinois, prepared
by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., under the direction of the governing body of the
Village of Roanoke, is hereby approved and accepted and declared to be the
Official Village Code containing all ordinances of a general nature in effect
at the time of such codification. Said Code shall be accepted in all courts
without question as the Official Code and law of the Village as enacted by the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Roanoke.
   Section 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding, together with continuous supplement service
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding to or deleting
provisions of the Official Code is identified by the proper catchline and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new
provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance. Insertion
of the proper replacement pages shall be made in the copies of the Code, three
(3) copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk, certified
as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said
office is regularly open.
   Section 3. All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official
Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provisions
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official Village Code. All
ordinances of a special nature, as set forth in the Saving Clause (Title 1,
Chapter 2) of said Code shall continue in full force and effect unless
specifically repealed and amended by provisions of this Village Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official Village Code.
   Section 4. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately upon
its passage, approval and publication in book or pamphlet form as provided by
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-4 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
PASSED AND APPROVED This  2  day of December, 1974.
   VILLAGE OF ROANOKE
   /S/ Elmer J. Wehrli
   Mayor
ATTEST:
/S/ John G. Paluska
Village Clerk
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Official Village Code   1
Savings Clause   2
Definitions   3
General Penalty; Enforcement   4
Board Of Trustees   5
Village Officers   6
Village Personnel   7
Corporate Seal   8
Elections (Rep. by Ord. 2014-05, 6-16-2014)   9
Ethical Conduct   10
Investment Policy   11
Local Taxpayers' Bill Of Rights And Responsibilities   12
Payment/Reimbursement Of Travel Expenses   13
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Interpretations
1-1-5: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees this Village Code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of the Village of
Roanoke. This Village Code of Ordinances shall be known and cited as the
Roanoke Municipal Code, and it is hereby published by authority of the Board of
Trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided in Section
1-1-3 under the direction of the Village Attorney, acting for said Village
Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any Section contained herein
shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate Chapter and Title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the Section itself, when reference is made to
this Village Code by title in any legal document.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code 1 .
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-6.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Village Code shall set forth the Title, Chapter and
Section number of the Section or Sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Village Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Village Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the Village Code within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage.
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each Section of this Code the
following rules shall be observed:
(A) Intent to Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to
constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud
any person.
(B) Liability of Employers and Agents: When the provisions of any Section of
this Village Code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person
actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the
employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said
person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set
forth.
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any Section or page of this Village Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
Village Board. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this Village Code shall
make every effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner.
He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such
are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the Village
Clerk. Said Code Books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the Village and shall
be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the
Village Board. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVINGS CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this
Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as
being still in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following Section), from
which are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: Tax
levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries
and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special
rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the Village; and all special ordinances.
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Village Code or
by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this Village Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case this Village Code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such
provisions only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or any right of the
Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this Village Code. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any Section of this Village Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this Village Code by
words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several
matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate
shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction
shall not be applied to any Section of this Village Code which contains any
express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or
content may be repugnant thereto.
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: The word "agent" as used in this Code shall mean a person acting on
behalf of another.
   BOARD: The word "Board", unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the Board of
Trustees of the Village.
   CODE: The word "Code" shall mean the Municipal Code of Roanoke and
amendments thereto.
   COUNTY: The word "County" shall mean County of Woodford.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
Village of Roanoke".
   FEE: The word "fee" as used in this Code shall mean a sum of money charged
by the Village for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
(1974 Code)
   FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the Village shall begin on the first Monday
of the month of May in each and every year. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 3)
   KNOWINGLY: The word "knowingly" imports only a knowledge that the facts
exist which bring the act or omission within the provisions of this Code. It
does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
   LICENSE: The word "license" as used in this Code shall mean the permission
granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR: The word "misdemeanor" shall mean any offense deemed a
violation of the provisions of this Code which is a lesser offense than a
felony as defined by State law. (1974 Code)
   MUNICIPAL YEAR: The municipal year of the Village shall begin on the first
Monday of the month of May in each and every year. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 3)
   NEGLIGENT: The word "negligent", as well as "neglect", "negligence" and
"negligently" imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concern.
   NUISANCE: The word "nuisance" shall mean anything offensive or obnoxious to
the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village; or any act or thing
repugnant to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the
property of another person or to the community.
   OCCUPANT: The word "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include
any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
   OFFENSE: The word "offense" shall mean any act forbidden by any provision of
this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
   OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
Village of Roanoke".
   OPERATOR: The word "operator" as used in this Code shall mean the person who
is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
   OWNER: The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of
a part of such building or land.
   PERSON: The word "person" shall mean any natural individual, firm, trust,
partnership, association or corporation in his or its own capacity or as
administrator, conservator, executor, trustee, receiver or other representative
appointed by the Court. Whenever the word "person" is used in any Section of
this Code prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or
associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and such
word as applied to corporations shall include the officers, agents or employees
thereof who are responsible for any violation of said Section.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: The term "personal property" shall include every
description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action
and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title
to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated,
discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein.
   RETAILER: The word "retailer" as used in this Code, unless otherwise
specifically defined shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in small quantities direct to the consumer.
   STATE: The word "State", unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the State of
Illinois.
   STREET: The word "street" shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards,
public squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: The word "tenant" applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
   VILLAGE: The word "Village" shall mean the Village of Roanoke, County of
Woodford, State of Illinois.
   WHOLESALER: The words "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this
Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WILFULLY: The word "wilfully" when applied to the intent with which an act
is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act
or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate
law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: The terms "written" or "in writing" may include
printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the
written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public
writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such
person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several Sections of this Village Code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the content of the Section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such Sections, nor as any part of the Section, nor
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
Sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalty
1-4-2: License
1-4-3: Application
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-5: Action Before Proper Officer
1-4-6: Summons; Warrant; Complaint
1-4-7: Contents Of Warrant
1-4-8: Proceed With Trial
1-4-9: Enter Judgment
1-4-10: Arrest Without A Warrant
1-4-11: Execution Of Duty
1-4-12: Suit By Summons
1-4-13: Administrative Process For Ordinance Violations
1-4-1: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code, including the
doing of any act which is prohibited or the failure to do any required act as
set forth under this code, shall be fined in a sum not less than three hundred
fifty dollars ($350.00) and not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for each violation, excepting any violation of a section of this code wherein
the fine is specifically set forth. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day any violation of any provision of this code or any
ordinance shall continue. Additionally, any such person convicted of a
violation of any section of this code may, in addition to any fine imposed for
the violation, be required to perform a reasonable number of hours of public
service which may include picking up litter in public parks or along public
highways or maintaining any public facility. (Ord. 2014-05, 6-16-2014)
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any
license previously issued him by the village may be revoked by the court or by
the board of trustees. (1974 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section in
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing
nature or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1974 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1974 Code)
1-4-5: ACTION BEFORE PROPER OFFICER:
All actions brought to recover any fine or to enforce any penalty for a
violation of any provision of this code, shall be begun before the proper
officer and shall be brought in the corporate name of the village as plaintiff.
No prosecution, recovery or acquittal for the violation of any code provision
shall constitute a defense to any other prosecution of the same party for any
other violation of such code provision, although the different causes of action
existed at the same time, and, if united, would not have exceeded the
jurisdiction of the court. In addition to the ability to initiate court action,
the village may bring such action to recover any fine or to enforce any penalty
for a violation of any provision of this code through the administrative
process set forth in section
1-4-13 of this chapter. If action taken under section
1-4-13 of this chapter is concluded by the full payment of a fine by the
offender within the specified time period, the village shall not bring any
other action for the specified violation through court proceedings. (Ord. 2002-
15, 8-19-2002)
1-4-6: SUMMONS; WARRANT; COMPLAINT:
In all actions for violation of any code provisions, the first process shall be
summons; and it shall not be necessary to file a complaint in writing prior to
issuing the same; provided however, that a warrant for the arrest of the
offender may issue in the first instance upon the affidavit of any person that
such code provision has been violated, and that the person making the complaint
has reasonable grounds to believe that the person charged is guilty thereof.
Every person arrested upon such warrant shall, without unnecessary delay, be
tried for the alleged offense. However, this section shall not apply if action
is first taken by the village under the administrative process set forth in
section
1-4-13 of this chapter for a violation of this code and properly concluded
under that section. (Ord. 2002-15, 8-19-2002)
1-4-7: CONTENTS OF WARRANT:
All warrants issued by virtue of the foregoing section shall state, or recite
briefly, the allegations of the complaint, and shall be directed to any
constable of Woodford County. The officer receiving such warrant shall
immediately arrest the person against whom the warrant is issued and bring such
person before the proper court issuing the same for trial, unless such arrest
shall be made in the nighttime or upon Sunday, in which case such officer may
detain the person in custody until he can be brought before such court. (R.O.
1908, Ord. 15; amd. 1974 Code; Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-1979)
1-4-8: PROCEED WITH TRIAL:
In case the officer issuing the warrant is, on account of sickness or other
cause, unable to attend the trial of said offender, it shall be the duty of the
officer having the custody of the person arrested to convey him to the nearest
proper county officer for trial, and without unnecessary delay, proceed with
the trial of such person in the same manner as if warrant had been issued by
said officer. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 15; amd. 1974 Code; Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-
8-1979)
1-4-9: ENTER JUDGMENT:
Upon the person so arrested being produced before him, the proper officer shall
proceed with the examination or trial without unnecessary delay, and shall
immediately upon conviction enter judgment against the defendant in favor of
the village for the amount of fine or penalty and costs of prosecution and
order such person to be committed until such fine or penalty and costs are
paid. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 15; amd. 1974 Code)
1-4-10: ARREST WITHOUT A WARRANT:
In all cases where any person is arrested on view, without a warrant, the
officer making the arrest, without unnecessary delay, shall take such person
before the proper officer who shall proceed to hear and determine the matter,
as in other cases. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 15; amd. 1974 Code)
1-4-11: EXECUTION OF DUTY:
All village officers shall, unless otherwise directed by this or some other
village code provision, proceed in the execution of their duty in the same
manner as such officers are required to proceed under the laws of the state in
similar cases, and all general laws in force and relating to proceedings in
action before the proper officer, and the duties of marshals are hereby
declared to be in force in the village for the government of such officers in
the discharge of their duties. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 15; amd. 1974 Code)
1-4-12: SUIT BY SUMMONS:
When suit to recover any fine or penalty is begun by summons, it shall be in
the ordinary form of summons in civil actions, except that it shall state the
code provision violated and the particular breach thereof, which summons shall
be served and trial and subsequent proceedings had as in other civil
proceedings had before the proper officer. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 15; amd. 1974 Code)
1-4-13: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Any village officer authorized to enforce the provisions of this code,
including any law enforcement officer acting on behalf of the village and the
code official as set forth in section
7-4-13 of this code, may issue and serve administrative enforcement citations
to an offender for a violation of this code. Furthermore, the village clerk may
issue administrative enforcement citations by certified mail to the offender.
   (B)   Every administrative enforcement citation issued under this provision
shall impose a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be paid to the village
of Roanoke, unless the code provision specifically provides a lesser fine, in
which case the maximum fine specifically set forth in such code provision shall
be paid to the village of Roanoke. A fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00)
shall be imposed for a second violation of the same code provision by the same
person or responsible party within a twelve (12) month period beginning on the
date of the first violation of the particular code provision. A fine of three
hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be imposed for a third or subsequent violation
of the same code provision by the same person or responsible party within a
twelve (12) month period beginning on the date of the first violation of the
particular code provision. If a provision of this code provides for a penalty
of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense charged as an
administrative enforcement action under this section, then the specific fine
amount set forth for a first offense shall be doubled for a second offense and
tripled for a third or subsequent offense during the twelve (12) month period
as described above in this section. Payment of any fine under this section
shall be made to the village clerk at the village hall. Any check tendered to
pay a fine under this section which is returned to village unpaid for any
reason shall not be considered to be "full payment" under this section.
   (C)   The offender shall pay any fine imposed under this section within
thirty (30) calendar days, unless a shorter period of time is specifically
provided by the applicable code provision. If the fine imposed under this
provision is not paid within the required thirty (30) day period, the fine
shall increase as provided herein. If the fine is imposed for a first violation
within a twelve (12) month period and is not paid within the required thirty
(30) day period, the fine shall be increased to two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) to be paid to the village, regardless of the amount of the fine for
this initial offense in a twelve (12) month period if the fine was paid during
the required thirty (30) day period. If the fine is imposed for a second
violation within a twelve (12) month period and is not paid within the required
thirty (30) day period, the fine shall be increased to three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) to be paid to the village, regardless of the amount of the
fine for this second offense in a twelve (12) month period. If the fine is
imposed for a third or subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period
and is not paid within the required thirty (30) day period, the fine shall be
increased to four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) to be paid to the village,
regardless of the amount of the fine for this third or subsequent offense in a
twelve (12) month period.
   (D)   This administrative enforcement process shall not initiate any court
proceedings related to a particular violation of this code and shall be
independent of any court proceeding related to the enforcement of this code.
Furthermore, action taken under this section shall not prevent the village from
pursuing other types of enforcement action against the offender or another
person for the same violation. However, any violation of this code which is
concluded by the full payment of the fine amount set forth above by the
offender in the specified time period shall not be brought by the village as an
action against that offender to recover a fine for such violation in a court
proceeding. (Ord. 2003-12, 10-20-2003; amd. Ord. 2019-02, 3-4-2019)
CHAPTER 5
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Board Meetings
1-5-2: Appointment Of Committees
1-5-3: Rules
1-5-4: Order Of Business
1-5-5: Passage Of Ordinances
1-5-6: Requested Village Action; Payment Of Legal Fees
1-5-1: BOARD MEETINGS:
   (A)   Time Of Meetings: The regular and special meetings of the Board of
Trustees shall be held at Village Hall, located at 101 North Main in the
Village of Roanoke. Regular meetings shall be held on the first and third
Monday of each month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., except when such date shall
fall on a holiday, when such meeting shall be held on the Tuesday immediately
following the first or third Monday of the month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
   (B)   Special Meetings: The Village Board may prescribe, by ordinance, the
time of the Board meetings, and the manner in which special Board meetings may
be called. The President or any three (3) Trustees may call special meetings of
the Village Board by leaving with the Village Clerk written notice of the date
and hour of holding such special meeting, and for the purpose of which such
special meeting is called. The Village Clerk shall immediately issue a written
notice of such meeting to each member of the Board and further post and provide
public notice of such meeting in a timely manner as required by Illinois law.
   (C)   Salaries: The amount paid to Trustees for their service will be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. This amount shall constitute the entire
compensation for Trustees for any and all full Board meetings attended and for
other duties of Trustees conducted on behalf of the Village.
In addition, the amount paid to Trustees shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for
every committee meeting attended. Multiple committee meetings held on any
particular evening will be considered one meeting for the purpose of
determining compensation.
These salaries shall be effective for Board members taking office after May 1,
2011.
   (D)   Claims Paid In Vacation:
      1.   General: During the time period between regular Village Board
meetings, the appropriate Village officials can pay certain routine bills and
invoices on behalf of the Village when these routine bills and invoices are
provided to the Village for services or items received by the Village. Such
routine bills and invoices that are paid in this manner shall be considered as
"claims paid in vacation", such that the Village can continue regular business
operations during the time period between regular Village Board meetings.
Subject to approval by the Village President, the following listing of routine
bills and invoices shall be considered matters that can be paid by the Village
as a "claim paid in vacation":
         Employee health insurance plan premiums.
         Employee uniforms.
         Engineering services.
         Fuel charges for Village vehicles.
         Garbage collection services.
         Gas and electric utilities.
         Internet service.
         Legal services.
         Phone service.
         Policing and dispatch services.
         Regular building cleaning services.
         Regular chemicals and operating supplies for water and sewage
treatment systems and facilities.
         Regular employee wages and salaries.
         Regular operating supplies for Ambulance Department.
         Regular operating supplies for Street Department.
         Regular periodic water testing and monitoring services.
         Security and alarm services.
      2.   Committee Approval: Between regular Village Board meetings, a
committee Chairperson shall have the authority to approve an expenditure of up
to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per expenditure, which shall
include the payment of the bill or invoice for such expenditure, for matters
under the direct authority of the committee Chairperson. The payment of any
expenditure under this provision shall be included with the other "claims paid
in vacation" for the next regular Village Board meeting.
      3.   Village Board Approval: All "claims paid in vacation" shall be
presented to the Village Board and Village President for review and final
approval at the next regular Village Board meeting and such "claims paid in
vacation" shall be listed as a separate agenda item and action item at this
next regular Village Board meeting.
   3.   Village Board Approval: All "claims paid in vacation" shall be
presented to the Village Board and Village President for review and final
approval at the next regular Village Board meeting and such "claims paid in
vacation" shall be listed as a separate agenda item and action item at this
next regular Village Board meeting.
   (E)   Electronic Participation at Village Board Meetings:
      1.   Subject to the provisions of this section, a Village Board member
may electronically attend any open or closed meeting of the Village Board via
telephone, video, internet connection, or other electronic technology which
allows effective audio interaction with the Board member from a remote
location. Except as otherwise provided in Part G of this section, a Board
member may electronically attend a meeting of the Village Board only under the
following conditions:
         (a)   The Board member must notify the Village Clerk (or designee) as
soon as practicable before the meeting of the Board member's request to
electronically attend the meeting so that necessary communications equipment
can be made available.
         (b)   The Board member must assert one or more of the following
reasons why the Board member is unable to physically attend the Village Board
meeting and explain to the Village Clerk (or designee) the factual basis for
that assertion:
            (1)   The Board member cannot attend due to the Board member's
illness or disability; or
            (2)   The Board member cannot attend because of conflicting
obligations to the Board member's employer or is engaged in business on behalf
of the Village; or
            (3)   The Board member cannot attend because of a family or other
emergency.
         (c)   Any Board member participating electronically and those members
of the Village Board who are physically present at the site of the meeting must
have the capability during the meeting to effectively and instantaneously
engage in interactive communication with each other. During open meetings,
members of the audience must have the capability to hear all audio interactions
among all the members of the Village Board who are present either physically or
electronically at the open Board meeting.
      2.   Upon receiving a request from a Village Trustee to electronically
attend a Village Board meeting, the Village Clerk (or designee) shall promptly
inform the Village President of that request prior to the Board meeting. Upon
receiving a request from the Village President to electronically attend a
Village Board meeting, the Village Clerk (or designee) shall promptly inform
the most senior Village Trustee who will be attending the Board meeting.
      3.   A quorum of the Village Board must be physically present at the
scheduled meeting location in order to take the necessary action to allow a
Board member to electronically attend that Village Board meeting.
      4.   After taking roll call at the Board meeting at which the Board
member requests to electronically attend and before any action is taken by the
Village Board, the request to electronically attend a Village Board meeting
shall be the first order of business to be considered by the Board members
physically present at the Board meeting in accordance with the following
procedures:
         (a)   After establishing that a quorum is physically present at the
Board meeting at which the Board member desires to electronically attend and
establishing that the communications equipment necessary to permit electronical
participation is functioning properly, the Village President, or the presiding
officer if the Village President is not present, shall state that:
            (1)   A Board member has requested permission to electronically
attend the meeting, and
            (2)    The Board member will be authorized to electronically attend
the meeting unless a motion objecting to the member's electronic attendance is
made, seconded, and adopted by a two-thirds majority of the members of the
Village Board physically present at the meeting.
         (b)   If a motion objecting to the Board member's participation is
made and approved by a two-thirds majority of the members of the Village Board
physically present at the meeting, the member making the request may not
electronically attend the meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded or if
any such motion is made and seconded but not approved by a two-thirds majority
of the members of the Village Board physically present at the meeting, then the
request by the member to electronically attend the meeting shall be deemed
approved by the Village Board, and the Village President or other presiding
officer shall declare that the requesting member is present at the Board
meeting. After such declaration by the Village President or presiding officer,
the ability of the Board member to electronically participate in that Board
meeting may not be withdrawn for the remainder of that meeting.
         (c)   As an alternative to the procedure under parts 1 and 2 of this
subsection D of Section 2.08.140, a simple majority vote of the members of the
Village Board physically present at the Village Board meeting to allow
attendance by the non-physically present Board member will authorize the
electronic attendance of this Board member at that Village Board meeting under
the terms and conditions otherwise set forth herein.
      5.   The minutes of any meeting during which a Board member
electronically attends shall identify any such member as attending by
electronic means.
      6.   A Board member permitted to electronically attend a Village Board
meeting shall have the authority to participate in the meeting to the same
extent as those members physically present, subject to the same limitations
applicable to those members physically present. A Board member attending
electronically may leave a meeting and return to the same extent and under the
same conditions as members who are physically present, provided the member
attending electronically shall announce when leaving and returning to the
meeting.
      7.   The Village Board may electronically hold any open or closed meeting
via telephone, video, internet connection, or other electronic technology which
allows for effective audio or video conferencing between the Board members from
remote locations when the Governor or the Director of the Illinois Department
of Public Health has issued a disaster declaration related to public health
concerns that covers the Village of Roanoke and that limits attendance at
public meetings, and all of the following additional conditions have been met:
         (a)   The Village President has issued a declaration that in-person
public meetings are not practical or prudent because of the declared disaster;
         (b)   All members of the Village Board participating in the meeting
can hear each other and can hear all discussion and testimony during the
meeting;
         (c)   All members of the public can contemporaneously hear all
discussion, discussion, testimony, and votes taken during the open portion of
the meeting;
         (d)   At least one member of the Village Board or the Village Clerk or
the Village Attorney is present at the regular meeting location unless not
feasible because of the declared disaster;
         (e)   Notice is provided to the public that the meeting will be held
by electronic means, including information on how the public can electronically
attend the open portion of the meeting;
         (f)   All votes of the Village Board are taken by roll call vote;
         (g)   The Village has complied with all meeting notice requirements
under the Open Meetings Act while also posting such meeting notices on the
Village's website; and
         (h)   A verbatim record of all portions of the meeting is maintained
by the Village in an audio or video recording. (Ord. 2017-09, 7-5-2017; amd.
Ord. 2021-06, 9-7-2021)
1-5-2: APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEES:
   (A)   The Village President shall, at the first regular meeting of the Board
in May after the consolidated election at which any Trustees and the President
are seated and commence their terms in office, or as soon thereafter as
convenient, appoint, with the advice and consent of the Board, the following
committees, consisting of three (3) Trustees each: Finance and Offices
(includes Appropriations and Claims); Public Safety and Insurance; Streets,
Alleys, and Ordinances; Village Property/Light and Power; Local and Industrial
Improvement; Personnel; Liquor Commission and License; Board of Health;
Waterworks and Sewer; and Ambulance and Civil Defense. At this same time, the
Village President shall also appoint, with the consent of the Village Board,
the ESDA Director, the Zoning Officer, and any members of the Joint Zoning and
Planning Board whose terms of office have expired.
Each of said committees shall have jurisdiction over all matters indicated in
the name and title of said committee, and over such other matters as may from
time to time be specially and specifically referred to it by the Board.
Vacancies occurring in such committees may be filled at any time by the Village
President, with the advice and consent of the Trustees, as in the original
appointment of the committee. The first member named in each committee shall
act as Chairman thereof.
   (B)   All special committees shall be appointed by the Village President
with the concurrence and consent of the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   All reports of committees shall be addressed to the "President and
Board of Trustees of the Village of Roanoke". Said report shall briefly
describe the matter referred and the conclusion to which the committee has
arrived after careful investigation and study of the matter referred, and said
report should be accompanied by a recommendation from the committee as to which
course of action should be pursued by the Board relative to such matter. Each
committee shall attach to such report all resolutions, petitions,
remonstrances, and other materials or documents in their possession relative to
the subject matter of the report so that the President and Trustees can act
advisedly with regard to such matter.
The President and Board of Trustees hereby agree that the names of various
committee members will not be published in this Code annually due to the
constantly changing nature of the makeup of each committee. In the alternative,
the President and Board of Trustees of the Village will maintain an up-to-date
list of committee members with the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk is hereby
instructed and empowered to place a copy of said up to date listing of the
various committees and the persons serving on those committees on the Village
website and on the Village bulletin board which can be viewed by the public at
any time. (Ord. 2011-03, 6-6-2011; amd. Ord. 2022-02, 1-17-2022)
1-5-3: RULES:
The following rules shall govern the Board in its actions and deliberations:
   Rule 1. A majority of all the Trustees elected shall constitute a quorum.
   Rule 2. In the absence of the President, the Board may elect one of their
number President Pro Tem and the appointment of such member to the Chair shall
not deprive him of his vote on any question which may come before the Board for
decision.
   Rule 3. The vote of the president shall be cast to decide all tie votes
should he see fit to cast said vote.
   Rule 4. All questions relating to priority of business shall be decided
without debate.
   Rule 5. While a member is addressing the board, no other member shall carry
on any private conversation or pass between the speaker and the chair.
   Rule 6. When a member desires to speak he shall address the presiding
officer as "Mr. President", and then, if recognized, he may proceed with his
remarks.
   Rule 7. No member shall be permitted to leave the boardroom during a session
without the consent either of the president or of the board.
   Rule 8. A member when called to order, unless allowed by the board to
explain, shall immediately sit down. If no appeal be taken, the decision of the
chair shall be conclusive, but if the decision of the chair be appealed from,
the question shall be put to the board, without debate, as follows: "Shall the
decision of the chair be sustained?".
   Rule 9. Every member who shall be present when a question is stated by the
chair, must vote thereon, unless he be interested or excused from voting by the
board.
   Rule 10. Every motion if required by any member, shall be reduced to
writing, and no motion shall be put or debated until it be seconded.
   Rule 11. When a question is before the board no motion shall be in order but
the following:
      1.   To adjourn.
      2.   To lay on the table.
      3.   The previous question.
      4.   To postpone indefinitely.
      5.   To postpone to certain date.
      6.   To commit or to refer.
      7.   To amend.
These motions shall have precedence in the order stated in the rule, and a
motion to adjourn, to lay on the table, and for the previous question, shall be
decided without debate.
   Rule 12. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except:
      1.   When a member has the floor.
      2.   When a vote is being taken.
      3.   When adjournment was the last preceding motion.
   Rule 13. Whenever a resolution or motion is offered by a member, the name of
the member offering the same must be entered on the minutes.
   Rule 14. When a blank is to be filled, and different sums or times are
proposed, the question shall first be put upon the largest sum and the longest
time.
   Rule 15. No vote of the village board shall be reconsidered or rescinded at
a special meeting, unless at such special meeting there shall be present as
many members as attended the meeting when the original vote was taken.
   Rule 16. No person except a member of the board shall be permitted to
address the same without the consent of two- thirds (2/3) of the members
present.
   Rule 17. The president, or president pro tem, shall decide all questions of
order, and when the rules herein specified and provided are not sufficient, or
do not bear upon the point, then reference shall be had to Robert's manual, and
the rules therein shall prevail.
   Rule 18. The president shall preserve order and decorum, and if any member
of the board transgresses the rules herein, the president shall, or any member
may, call him to order; and if he refuses to take his seat or persists in
behaving in a discourteous manner, or uses improper language, the president may
appoint one or more sergeants at arms from the members of the board who shall
have power to compel obedience and eject such unruly member from the place of
meeting unless he complies with the rules.
   Rule 19. An appeal may be taken from the decision of the chair on any
question whatever by any member of the board, and the question shall then be
put without debate, by the clerk, as follows: "Shall the decision of the chair
be sustained?". And if a majority of the members present vote nay on such
question, the decision of the chair shall be overruled and so entered by the
clerk in the journal.
   Rule 20. The foregoing rules shall not be repealed, amended nor suspended,
except by a majority vote of the board, and it shall be the duty of the village
clerk to read these rules at the first regular meeting of the new board after
the annual election in each year.
   Rule 21. The yeas and nays shall be called on the request of any member of
the board, upon any question whatsoever, pending before the board, and such
request may be made, either before or after the taking of any viva voce vote on
such question. (Ord. 2014-05, 6-16-2014)
1-5-4: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The regular order of business and rules of procedure shall in all cases be
adhered to, except when temporarily suspended by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all
the members present. The board shall proceed to transact the business before
them in the following order:
   (A)   Roll call.
   (B)   Reading of the minutes of last meeting, their amendment, if necessary,
and approval.
   (C)   Report of village officers.
   (D)   Communications and bills to the board.
   (E)   Report of standing committees.
   (F)   Report of special committees.
   (G)   Hearing of petitions.
   (H)   Unfinished business.
   (I)   New business.
   (J)   Ordinances, resolutions and other business not otherwise provided for.
(R.O. 1908, Ord. 2)
1-5-5: PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES:
The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and upon
all propositions before the board to create any liability against the village,
or where the proposition is for the expenditure or appropriation of its money,
which shall be entered on its record of its proceedings, and a concurrence of a
majority of its members elected to the board shall be necessary for the passage
of any such ordinance or proposition. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 2)
1-5-6: REQUESTED VILLAGE ACTION; PAYMENT OF LEGAL FEES:
   (A)   When the Village is contacted by a person, organization, or other
entity to undertake a project or action that primarily benefits the requesting
party, the requesting party shall be required to reimburse the Village for
legal fees and costs incurred by the Village for undertaking the requested
project or action. The Village shall make an assessment when initially
contacted by the requesting party as to whether the requested project or action
primarily benefits the requesting party and has little to no benefit for the
Village or whether the requested project or action does benefit the Village.
This determination of whether the requested project or action primarily
benefits the requesting party shall be in the sole discretion of the Village
Board. When the Village makes a determination that the requesting party will be
responsible for reimbursing the Village for legal fees and costs incurred by
the Village for undertaking and completing the requested project or action, the
Village shall promptly provide written notice to the requesting party of this
determination and obligation to reimburse the Village. The legal fees shall be
based upon the rates paid by the Village to the Village's Attorney at the time
the requested project or action is completed.
   (B)   Village projects or actions covered by this Section shall include, but
not be limited to, preparation of a Village ordinance, resolution, or motion
and any supporting documents, preparation of contracts or agreements in any
form and any supporting documents, and document recording or filing with a
governmental unit or the State of Illinois.
   (C)   Village projects or actions covered by this Section shall be
contingent upon and shall not become final until the required reimbursement
under this Section has been received by the Village.
   (D)   When the Village has determined that the requesting party will be
responsible for reimbursing the Village for any legal fees and costs incurred
by the Village for undertaking and completing the requested project or action
as provided herein, the requesting party shall reimburse the Village in full
for such legal fees and costs within thirty (30) days after receiving written
notice from the Village of these fees and costs. The written notice shall
deemed to have been received by the requesting party when the requesting party
is personally served with the notice, on the date when the notice is emailed by
the Village Clerk to the requesting party at the email address provided by the
requesting party, or three (3) days after such notice is mailed by regular
first-class U.S. mail by the Village Clerk to the mailing address provided by
the requesting party.
   (E)   The Village, at the Village's discretion, may require a deposit from
the requesting party before undertaking the requested project or action. The
Village shall determine the deposit amount when the request is made to the
Village based upon the type of project or action requested and the anticipated
legal services to complete the requested project or action. If a deposit is
collected by the Village under this Section, the deposit shall be applied to
the Village's legal fees and costs when the requested project or action is
completed. The requesting party shall be responsible for reimbursing the
Village as provided in this Section for any shortfall between the deposit and
the final total cost for the requested project or action. The Village shall
promptly return to the requesting party any remaining portion of the deposit
after the Village's costs have been paid as provided herein.
   (F)   Any person or entity violating any provision of this Section shall be
punished by a fine as provided under the general penalty provisions of this
Village Code (Chapter 4 of Title 1, as amended from time to time), which shall
include a failure to pay reimbursement to the Village as provided in this
Section. (Ord. 2019-14, 10-21-2019)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election Of Officers
1-6-2: Village President
1-6-3: Appointment Of Officers
1-6-4: Board To Fill Vacancies
1-6-5: Term Of Office
1-6-6: Oath Of Office
1-6-7: Bonds
1-6-8: Compensation
1-6-9: Officers Commissioned
1-6-10: Eligibility To Office
1-6-11: Place Of Meetings
1-6-12: Village Clerk
1-6-13: Village Treasurer
1-6-14: Chief Of Police (Rep. by Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-1979)
1-6-15: Water And Sewer Commissioner
1-6-16: Street Commissioner
1-6-17: Village Collector
1-6-18: Reports
1-6-19: Accounts Against Village
1-6-20: Removal Of Appointed Officers
1-6-21: Deliver Books To Successors
1-6-22: Suspension Of Officers (Rep. by Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-1979)
1-6-23: Violation
1-6-24: Signing Of Checks, Authorization
1-6-1: ELECTION OF OFFICERS:
   (A)   There shall be elected in and for the village one president, one clerk
and six (6) trustees, all and each of them for the term of four (4) years, with
the trustees' terms to be staggered. Said election shall be held on the day
appointed by statute. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 18; amd. 1974 Code)
   (B)   The elected municipal officials of the village shall take office on
the first monthly meeting of the month of May immediately following the
proclamation of the results of the municipal election. (Ord. 1981-2, 3-16-1981)
1-6-2: VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
   (A)   President Of Village Board: The village president shall act as
president of the board of trustees in compliance with the provisions of the
Illinois municipal code.
   (B)   Salary:
      1.   Through May 2017, when the new village president is sworn into
office, the amount paid to the village president for each meeting of the board
of trustees of the village, whether or not the meeting is actually attended by
the president, will be seventy five dollars ($75.00) per meeting.
      2.   Beginning in May 2017, after the new village president is sworn into
office, the village president shall receive a salary of three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) per month.
      3.   The compensation level for the village president shall not be
increased or decreased during the fiscal year for which the annual
appropriation has been made. Further, the compensation level for the village
president shall not be increased or decreased during the village president's
term of office, but may be increased or decreased for a future term of office
for the village president if done so at least one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to the beginning of such future term. (Ord. 2015-18, 11-2-2015)
1-6-3: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
The president of the board of trustees shall, annually after the regular
village election, or as soon thereafter as may be, appoint by and with the
advice and consent of the board, one village treasurer, one street commissioner
and one water and sewer commissioner. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19; amd. 1974 Code; Ord.
79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-1979)
1-6-4: BOARD TO FILL VACANCIES:
Whenever any vacancy occurs in any office filled by appointment, the president
and members of the board of trustees shall immediately proceed to fill such
vacancy in the manner hereinbefore provided in section
1-6-3 of this chapter. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19)
1-6-5: TERM OF OFFICE:
All officers of the Village shall hold their respective offices for and during
the respective terms for which they are elected or appointed, and until their
successors are elected or appointed and qualified. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19)
1-6-6: OATH OF OFFICE:
All officers of the Village, either elected or appointed, shall, before
entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe the
following oath or affirmation:
I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the
United States, and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of            according to the
best of my ability;
which oath or affirmation so subscribed shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk and copied upon the records of the Village. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19)
1-6-7: BONDS:
   (A)   All officers of the Village, except Trustees, shall, before entering
upon the duties of their respective offices, execute a bond, with security, to
be approved by the President and Board of Trustees, payable to the Village,
conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their respective
offices, and for the payment of all moneys received by them, according to law
and the provisions of this Code.
   (B)   The bond of the Treasurer shall be in the penal sum of three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00), which may be increased at the beginning of each fiscal
year, as the President and Board of Trustees may determine. Provided however,
that in no case shall the Treasurer's bond be fixed at a less sum than the
amount of the estimated tax and special assessments for the current year. Bonds
of other officers shall be as follows: (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19)
   Street Commissioner   $ 500.00
   Village Clerk   500.00
   Village Collector   1,000.00
(R.O. 1908, Ord. 19; amd. Ord. 177, 10-29-1940; Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-
1979 at 6:00 A.M.; Ord. 1998-09, 11-2-1998)
   (C)   No person holding any Village office shall be taken as surety upon any
bond payable to the Village.
   (D)   All bonds required by this Chapter shall be filed with the Village
Clerk except the bond of the Village Clerk, which shall be filed with the
Village Treasurer, and all bonds shall be copied upon the records of the
Village. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19)
1-6-8: COMPENSATION:
The compensation to be paid the various elected or appointed officers shall be
set from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees. (1974 Code)
1-6-9: OFFICERS COMMISSIONED:
After taking the oath and filing the bond as aforesaid, and before entering
upon the duties of their respective offices, all Village officers, except the
Trustees and Clerk, shall be commissioned by warrant, under the Corporate Seal,
signed by the President and attested by the Clerk. The President of the Board
of Trustees shall issue a certificate of election, underneath the Corporate
Seal, to the Clerk. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19; amd. 1974 Code)
1-6-10: ELIGIBILITY TO OFFICE:
No person shall be eligible to any office in the Village who is not a qualified
elector of the Village, according to the provisions of this Code on elections,
and who has not resided therein for one year next prior to his election or
appointment. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19; amd. 1974 Code)
1-6-11: PLACE OF MEETINGS:
The Board of Trustees shall provide a place for the meetings of the Board and
shall also furnish the necessary books and blanks for the use of the officers
of the Village and all necessary stationery, lights and fuel for the use of the
President and Board of Trustees. And the President and Board of Trustees may,
in their discretion, employ legal counsel for the current year, or from time to
time during such year as they may deem necessary. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19; amd.
1974 Code)
1-6-12: VILLAGE CLERK:
   (A)   Duties:
      1.   The village clerk shall attend all meetings of the board of
trustees, and keep a correct record of all the proceedings of the same in a
suitable book kept for that purpose.
      2.   The village clerk shall keep the corporate seal, provided under the
direction of the board of trustees, and all books, papers and documents
belonging to the village, not belonging to some other officer.
      3.   The village clerk shall notify all committees appointed by the
president or board of trustees of their appointment and of the business
referred to them.
      4.   The village clerk shall maintain duplicate receipts, warrants, and
vouchers received from the village treasurer.
      5.   The village clerk shall, at the first meeting of the board each
month, give all monthly reports required by law and/or ordinance.
      6.   The village clerk shall record in a book to be kept for that purpose
all ordinances passed by the board of trustees, and at the foot of each
ordinance so recorded, the village clerk shall make a memorandum of the date of
the passage and, when required by law or ordinance, the date of the publication
of the same.
      7.   The village clerk shall index all ordinances by their titles, keep a
list of all committees appointed and of the business referred to them,
respectively, and shall note when committees report and the date and nature of
their report.
      8.   The village clerk shall attest all deeds, contracts and leases made
by the president, and board of trustees and in conjunction with the president,
sign all ordinances, bonds, leases and orders on the village treasurer, and
affix the corporate seal thereto, and perform such other and further duties as
may be required by law and said board.
      9.   When required by law, the village clerk shall cause ordinances,
approved and adopted by the board, to be either: a) printed or published in
book or pamphlet form and maintained at the village hall for public inspection,
or b) published within thirty (30) days after passage in a newspaper published
in the village, or if a newspaper is not published in the village, then in a
newspaper with general circulation in the village.
      10.   The village clerk shall immediately, upon receipt of the
treasurer's annual report, maintain a copy of the report and cause the same to
be published in a newspaper published in the village, or if a newspaper is not
published in the village, then in a newspaper with general circulation in the
village.
   (B)   Salary: The salary of the position of village clerk shall be set and
established by the village board by means of an ordinance and such salary shall
not be increased or diminished during the village clerk's elective term of
office. Such salary may only be changed or adjusted for the next elective term
by an ordinance passed at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the
beginning of a new elective term for the village clerk. (Ord. 2002-16, 10-7-
2002)
1-6-13: VILLAGE TREASURER:
   (A)   Duties:
      1.   The village treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the
village, and shall allow disbursement of the same only upon an appropriate
warrant that is in compliance with the other provisions of this code.
      2.   The village treasurer shall keep a full and accurate account of all
monies received and disbursed on behalf of the village, with date of receipt
and disbursement, from whom received and to whom disbursed, and from what fund
received and disbursed. The village treasurer shall keep a separate account of
each fund or appropriation, and the debits and credits belonging to each fund
or appropriation.
      3.   The village treasurer shall render an account to the board of
trustees at the end of every month, and more often if required by the board,
under oath, showing the state of the treasury and the balance of money in the
treasury, together with a statement of all money received, on what account, all
warrants redeemed and paid. This account shall be presented to the board no
later than the second board meeting during the month following the month for
which the account is rendered. Upon the presentation of this accounting, all
warrants and vouchers held by the village treasurer, along with a copy of the
monthly account, shall be delivered to the village clerk and filed in the
clerk's office. The village treasurer shall maintain a register of all warrants
paid, describing them and showing date, amount, number, the fund from which
paid, to whom and when paid.
      4.   Within six (6) months after the end of each fiscal year, the village
treasurer shall prepare and file with the village clerk a detailed account of
all receipts and expenditures, and of all transactions during the preceding
fiscal year. Within this same time period, the village treasurer shall also
file this account, along with a certification from the village clerk that this
annual account has been properly published, with the village collector and the
Woodford County collector.
      5.   The village treasurer shall hold all funds received for a special
assessment in a separate account for each separate special assessment, and the
funds held in the special assessment account shall be used for no other purpose
except for reimbursement for funds expended for improvements associated with
the special assessment.
      6.   The village treasurer shall deposit village funds in a manner and in
such depositories as directed by the board of trustees. Additionally, the
village treasurer shall keep all village money and funds separate and distinct
from his own, and shall not intermingle his own money with or make private or
personal use of village funds.
   (B)   Salary: The salary or remuneration paid to the village treasurer for
the performance of duties required by that office shall be set and established
by the village board by means of a resolution or motion without the necessity
of an amending ordinance, but such motion or resolution shall require the same
number of votes for its adoption or passage as an ordinance would require. Such
salary or remuneration may be changed or adjusted from time to time in the same
manner. (Ord. 2002-16, 10-7-2002)
1-6-14: CHIEF OF POLICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-1979)
1-6-15: WATER AND SEWER COMMISSIONER:
The water and sewer commissioner shall supervise the operation and maintenance
of the water and sewer systems of the village and shall report monthly to the
board of trustees the conditions of said systems and shall perform such other
duties as may be required by law and the provisions of this code. (Ord. 46, 6-
16-1908; amd. 1974 Code)
1-6-16: STREET COMMISSIONER:
It shall be the duty of the street commissioner to superintend, under the
direction of the street and alley committee, the opening, altering, closing,
grading, repairing, planking, paving and cleaning of all streets, alleys and
avenues within the village and the constructing, grading and repairing of all
sidewalks, sewers and street crossings in the village, and perform such other
duties as may be required by law and the provisions of this code. (Ord. 46, 6-
16-1908)
The president of the board of trustees shall have the power to suspend the
street commissioner. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19)
1-6-17: VILLAGE COLLECTOR:
   (A)   Appointment; Term: There is hereby created the office of village
collector, an executive office of the village, which village collector shall be
appointed for a tenure of one year or for such other period as the board of
trustees of the village may determine.
   (B)   Clerk As Village Collector: The board of trustees may designate and
appoint the village clerk as the village collector as allowed by statute, or
the board may appoint any other eligible and qualified person deemed
appropriate as the village collector.
   (C)   Duties:
      1.   The village collector shall collect and receive all money due to the
village that is not by law paid directly to the village treasurer, including
the collection of special assessments and special taxes, and to keep such
records pertaining to the collection and receipt of these funds, providing
copies of such records to the village treasurer as may be required by statute
or village ordinance. Further, the village collector shall prepare and send
bills to all persons indebted to the village for water and sewer services and
any other service or debts due to the village.
      2.   The village collector shall disburse monies and funds on behalf of
the village only upon warrant of the village president, countersigned by the
village clerk, and such warrant shall state the fund or appropriation to which
the warrant is chargeable and to whom payable.
      3.   The village collector shall preserve all warrants returned to the
collector.
      4.   The village collector shall record upon a register an entry of all
warrants and vouchers paid or received on behalf of the village, describing
them and showing date, amount, number, the fund from which paid, to whom and
when paid. A copy of such register shall be provided to the village treasurer
on a monthly basis, or more often if required by the board of trustees.
      5.   The village collector shall supervise and be responsible for the
performance of the duties of his office delegated or handled by other personnel
that may be authorized by the board of trustees.
      6.   The village collector shall deliver all monies and funds collected
or received on behalf of the village to the village treasurer at least once
each week, or more often if required by the board of trustees, and receive a
receipt therefor, and will make a monthly report to the board showing what
money has been received and the source thereof. The village collector may
deposit said monies and funds collected or received on behalf of the village
into designated depositories, providing receipt of such action to the village
treasurer, as a means to fulfill this obligation to the village treasurer.
      7.   The village collector shall also make an annual report during the
last month of the fiscal year showing all the activities of the office.
      8.   The village collector shall keep all warrants, books, vouchers, and
papers pertaining to the office of collector open for the inspection by the
village president, village trustees, the village clerk, or any committee of the
village board.
   (D)   Salary: The salary or remuneration paid to the village collector for
the performance of duties required by that office shall be set and established
by the village board by means of a resolution or motion without the necessity
of an amending ordinance, but such motion or resolution shall require the same
number of votes for its adoption or passage as an ordinance would require. Such
salary or remuneration may be changed or adjusted from time to time in the same
manner. (Ord. 2002-16, 10-7-2002)
1-6-18: REPORTS:
Every officer of the village, except trustees, shall make and return to the
president of the board of trustees a semiannual statement, verified by
affidavit, of all fees and emoluments received by him during the preceding six
(6) months, which report shall be read to the board of trustees and filed by
the clerk. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19)
1-6-19: ACCOUNTS AGAINST VILLAGE:
No account or claim against the village, excepting for the salary of village
officers, or for the payment of a special contract made by the board of
trustees, or by some officer of the village duly authorized to make the same,
or for the payment of any judgment against the village, or for the fee bills of
officers of court, shall be paid unless the person presenting the same or some
creditable person for him, shall make oath in writing, attached thereto that
the same is correct, due and unpaid.
No claim or account against the village upon any account made or indebtedness
incurred by any such officer shall be paid unless accompanied by a certificate
of such officer stating that he has examined such account or claim and believes
that it is correct, reasonable and in accordance with the contract. (R.O. 1908,
Ord. 23)
1-6-20: REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS:
Any officer appointed under any of the provisions of this code may, by a
majority vote of the board of trustees, be removed at any time for
incompetency, neglect or violation of duty; provided that, no officer shall be
removed without due notice and opportunity to justify. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19)
1-6-21: DELIVER BOOKS TO SUCCESSORS:
Every officer of the village shall, upon his resignation, removal or the
expiration of his term of office, deliver to his successor, within five (5)
days after demand, all papers, books, documents or other property belonging to
the village and pertaining to his office. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19)
1-6-22: SUSPENSION OF OFFICERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-1979)
1-6-23: VIOLATION:
Any officer of the village who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter, or who shall wilfully refuse to perform any of the duties of his
office, or who shall be guilty of misfeasance or malfeasance in office shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 19)
1-6-24: SIGNING OF CHECKS, AUTHORIZATION:
   (A)   Grant Monies:
      1.   In any situation involving the disposition of grant monies, that is
grant monies coming from any source, be it federal, state or any other agency,
the check from the village disposing of those monies must be signed by two (2)
individuals duly authorized by the board of trustees of the village pursuant to
this section.
      2.   Those individuals authorized to sign on behalf of the village in
matters disposing of grant monies, are:
         (a)   The village clerk.
         (b)   The president of the board of trustees.
         (c)   In those situations where either the president of the board of
trustees or the village clerk is not available, then the chairman of the
village finance committee is authorized to sign as the second signatory. (Ord.
1986-7, 11-17-1986; amd. Ord. 1997-08, 9-2-1997)
   (B)   General Check Authorization:
      1.   All checks of the village will be signed by two (2) parties, those
two (2) parties being the duly appointed village clerk and the president of the
board of trustees of the village.
      2.   No check purportedly issued by the village will be valid unless it
is signed by the village clerk, or an acting village clerk so appointed by the
president and board of trustees, and the president of the board of trustees, or
an individual opting on behalf of the president of the board of trustees duly
appointed by the board of trustees. (Ord. 1997-08, 9-2-1997)
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-7-1: Statement Of Purpose
1-7-2: Definitions; Classifications
1-7-3: Residence
1-7-4: Employment And Discharge
1-7-5: Salaries; Pay Periods
1-7-6: Paid Time Off (PTO)
1-7-7: Overtime; Compensatory Time Off
1-7-8: Travel For Village Business 1  (Rep. by Ord. 2017-02, 2-27-2017)
1-7-9: Leaves Of Absence
1-7-10: Working Day; Time Clock
1-7-11: Performance Of Duties
1-7-12: Confidentiality
1-7-13: Disciplinary Action
1-7-14: Holidays
1-7-15: Jury Duty Leave
1-7-16: Employee Benefit Program
1-7-17: Personal Work; Village Time
1-7-18: Death In Family
1-7-19: Reserved
1-7-20: Suggestions
1-7-21: Employment Review
1-7-22: Equal Employment Policy
1-7-23: Harassment (Including Sexual Harassment) And Discrimination Policy
1-7-24: Drug And Alcohol Policy
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 13 of this title.
1-7-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of these policies and procedures is to bring into the Village
service a high degree of understanding, cooperation, efficiency, and unity that
comes through systematic application of good procedures to the handling of
personnel.
It is the intent of the Village Board of the Village of Roanoke to adhere to
the fundamental objectives of good personnel administration, which are as
follows:
   (A)   To promote and increase economy and efficiency in the Village service.
   (B)   To maintain a uniform plan of pay based upon the duties and
responsibilities of positions in the Village service.
   (C)   To provide fair and equal opportunity to all qualified citizens who
enter Village employment on the basis of demonstrated merit and fitness as
ascertained through fair and practical methods of selection.
   (D)   To promote high morale among Village employees by providing good
working conditions, consideration for employee welfare and a basis of
understanding of all Village affairs.
   (E)   To develop a program and atmosphere that will encourage each employee
to give his best service to the Village.
   (F)   To establish a system of personnel administration applicable to all
Village employees.
   (G)   To establish general Village personnel policies such as hours of work,
leaves of absence and other conditions. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-2: DEFINITIONS; CLASSIFICATIONS:
   DEPARTMENT HEAD(S): The Superintendent of Public Works.
   SENIORITY: Seniority is measured from the date the employee last became a
regular full time employee on a continuous basis.
   VILLAGE PERSONNEL:
Part Time/Temporary Employees: A part time employee is one who works less than
thirty two (32) hours per week; a temporary employee is one who works less than
one thousand (1,000) hours per year.
Part time or temporary employees may be hired by the Superintendent of Public
Works with the approval of the Village President. The Village board shall be
informed of the hiring at its next meeting at which time the superintendent of
public works shall outline the nature and the expected duration of the
employment. All part time/temporary employees will be paid at the rate
established for part time employees as established from time to time by the
village board and will be under the direct supervision of the superintendent of
public works, who will set hours and direct work to be performed.
Regular Full Time Employees: An employee who is regularly scheduled to perform
a minimum of thirty two (32) hours each calendar week or whose job title is
specifically listed in the salary ordinance and is designated as a full time
position in the salary ordinance; and shall not include the position(s) in
which the employee performs services at time of his own discretion, on a per
unit basis or for a specified fee (whether regularly assigned or not). (Ord.
2014-07, 10-6-2014)
1-7-3: RESIDENCE:
Unless specifically waived by the village board, each employee of the village
must reside within the village limits and continue to reside therein as long as
he or she continues such employment. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-4: EMPLOYMENT AND DISCHARGE:
Regular full time salaried employees can be placed on and removed from the
payroll only with the approval of the village board. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-5: SALARIES; PAY PERIODS:
   (A)   Salaries to be paid to employees of the village shall be set from time
to time by the president and board of trustees.
   (B)   The workweek shall begin on Monday morning and end on Sunday night.
Salaried employees shall be paid on a weekly basis on the last working day of
the week following the end of the workweek. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-6: PAID TIME OFF (PTO):
   The village seeks to provide village employees with time away from work for
periods of rest and relaxation. As provided herein, the village further seeks
to provide employees with time off necessitated by sickness and ill health and
to address personal business. Therefore, all employees shall be granted paid
time off (“PTO”) in lieu of specified vacation, personal, or sick leave as
provided herein. Thus, the purpose of paid time off (“PTO”) is to allow
employees to accrue and use paid time off without distinction between absences
for recreation, rest or relaxation, personal business, or sickness or ill
health.
   (A)   Employment Year. As used in this Section, the term “employment year”
shall mean a period of 12 months measured from the date an employee was hired,
or in cases of employees with more than one year of service, the anniversary of
the date an employee was hired.
   (B)   Eligibility For PTO Days / Full-time Employees:
      1.   Regular full time employees with less than twelve (12) months of
full time employment shall not be eligible for PTO; however, they will be
granted three (3) PTO days after working ninety (90) days for the village.
      2.   Regular full time employees with one consecutive year and less than
two (2) consecutive years of full time employment shall be granted nine (9) PTO
days each Employment Year.
      3.   Regular full time employees with at least two (2) consecutive years
and less than ten (10) consecutive years of full time employment shall be
granted sixteen (16) PTO days each Employment Year.
      4.   Regular full time employees with at least ten (10) consecutive years
and less than twenty (20) consecutive years of full time employment shall be
granted twenty one (21) PTO days each Employment Year.
      5.   Regular full time employees with at least twenty (20) consecutive
years of full time employment shall be granted twenty six (26) PTO days each
Employment Year.
      6.   All regular full time and part time employees are covered by social
security.
      7.   The regular full time employee’s hire date shall be used as a basis
for calculating the employee’s Employment Year.
      8.   A PTO day under this section is equal to the number of hours that
the employee works on a regular workday during a regular five (5) day workweek.
      For example, if a regular full time employee works thirty (30) hours
during a regular workweek, then the employee’s PTO day is six (6) hours.
      9.   A salaried employee shall be required to use PTO in half day
increments. Regular nonexempt employees shall be required to use PTO in hourly
increments.
   (C)   Eligibility For PTO Days / Part-time Employees:
      1.   “Part-time employees”, as this term is used herein, are all village
employees who are not considered regular full-time employees, including any
seasonal employees or other employees hired on a temporary or indeterminate
basis or for a limited period of time.
      2.   For every forty (40) hours worked in an Employment Year, a part-time
employee shall receive one (1) hour of PTO. A part-time employee can earn up to
a maximum of forty (40) hours of PTO in an Employment Year. This one (1) hour
of PTO cannot be earned in factional amounts and is not earned until the full
forty (40) hours are worked by the part-time employee.
      3.   For new part-time employees, the employee is not entitled to use any
PTO time until ninety (90) days after the part-time employee’s hire date. If
the employee terminates employment during this 90-day period after the
employee’s hire date, the employee will not receive any PTO time.
      4.   Upon a part-time employee’s voluntary or involuntary termination of
employment with the Village, including retirement, the employee shall not
receive any additional compensation for any unused PTO.
   (D)   PTO Pay And Rollover:
      1.   A regular full time employee shall receive the employee’s wage or
salary while using PTO.
      2.   With approval of both the employee’s supervisor and the village
board of trustees, a regular full time employee may relinquish and convert to
salary up to one workweek of PTO time for any unused PTO time exceeding three
(3) PTO days. The employee can only convert unused PTO time in excess of three
(3) PTO days and may not convert the baseline three (3) unused PTO days. In the
event that approval is granted, the full-time employee shall be compensated at
the employee’s applicable regular hourly rate times the number of hours of
unused PTO up to the one workweek (5 PTO days) maximum, or in the case of a
salaried employee, the full-time employee shall be compensated at the
employee’s applicable regular daily rate times the number of days of unused PTO
up to the one workweek (5 PTO days) maximum.
      3.   If a full-time employee does not convert any unused PTO time to pay
under subsection (D)2 of this section for a particular Employment Year, the
full-time employee may rollover up to a maximum of one workweek of unused PTO
time exceeding three (3) PTO days for that Employment Year to the next
Employment Year as provided herein. The full-time employee can only rollover
unused PTO time in excess of three (3) PTO days and may not rollover the
baseline three (3) unused PTO days. In order to rollover any unused PTO days,
the full-time employee must notify the employee’s supervisor and the village
clerk of the employee’s intent to rollover up to one workweek of unused PTO
days (a maximum of 5 PTO days) no later than ten (10) calendar days after the
conclusion of the employee’s Employment Year. Under no circumstance shall an
employee rollover more than five (5) unused PTO days from one Employment Year
to the next Employment Year.
      4.   For part-time employees who do not use all their PTO time prior to
the end of their Employment Year, the employee shall have an additional sixty
(60) days after the beginning of the next Employment Year to use any remaining,
unused PTO time. If the PTO time is not used within the Employment Year or this
60-day period after the beginning of the employee’s next Employment Year, the
part-time employee will lose any remaining unused PTO time. Part-time employees
shall not have the option to convert unused PTO to wages or salary.
   (E)   Requesting And Scheduling PTO Time: Except when used for an unplanned
absence due to illness, medical condition or a personal or family emergency
situation, use of PTO must be scheduled and cleared with the employee’s
supervisor, and if the employee does not have a supervisor, with the village
president in advance at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the requested use
of the PTO time. However, all vacation PTO time of four (4) consecutive days or
more must be cleared with the employee’s supervisor and the village president
at least thirty (30) days in advance of the time when the employee wishes to
use PTO time for vacation. No two (2) employees in the same department may use
PTO time at the same time unless specifically approved by the village
president.
   (F)   Use Of PTO During Leave Of Absence: In the event an employee wishes to
take a leave of absence, such request must be approved by the village board in
accordance with section 1-7-9 of this chapter, and if granted, shall be without
pay for the period unless the village board specifically approves use of PTO
during the leave of absence or any portion of the leave of absence.
(Ord. 2016-08, 6-20-2016; amd. Ord. 2023-12, 12-18-2023; Ord. 2024-04, 6-3-
2024)
1-7-7: OVERTIME; COMPENSATORY TIME OFF:
   (A)   Overtime shall be paid to all hourly employees as provided under the
federal minimum wage laws and/or state laws. No overtime shall be paid or
credited until a total of forty (40) hours has been worked by that employee.
Any holiday during the normal workweek shall count toward the forty (40) hours
provided it is an approved and paid day off.
If an hourly employee is called into work outside his/her normal working hours,
he/she shall be compensated a minimum of one hour's pay.
   (B)   Salaried employees who work extra hours may receive, at the option of
the department head, equal time off at a future date within the pay period
convenient to the workload of their department in lieu of straight time
overtime pay. This should be called compensatory time and the department head
granting such leave should make reference to the number of compensatory days
due the employee.
Hourly employees who work extra hours may receive, at the option of the
department head, equal time off at a future date within the pay period
convenient to the workload of their department in lieu of time and a half
overtime pay. This should be called compensatory time and the department head
granting such leave should make reference to the number of compensatory days
due the employee. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-8: TRAVEL FOR VILLAGE BUSINESS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-02, 2-27-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 13 of this title.
1-7-9: LEAVES OF ABSENCE:
All requests for personal leaves of absence shall require the approval of the
Village Board. Specific understanding should be reached regarding such matters
as duration, purpose, feasibility of using unused vacation, salary continuation
or loss, and other pertinent matters. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-10: WORKING DAY; TIME CLOCK:
The normal working day for a Village employee is seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
until three thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M. with a one-half (1/2) hour nonpaid
lunch. Lunch is to be taken between eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and one o'clock
(1:00) P.M. except with prior approval of the employee's supervisor or in the
case of an emergency situation. At the starting and quitting of each working
day, under normal (nonemergency) conditions, the employee shall punch the time
clock on or before starting time and on or after quitting time. Any time beyond
starting time or before quitting time will result in forfeiture of pay for the
time from the starting or quitting time to the time the clock is punched to the
starting or quitting time to the quarter hour. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000; amd.
Ord. 2007-02, 4-16-2007)
In order to provide proper maintenance of the water plant facilities of the
village, it shall be provided that if an employee is given the assignment of
backflushing the water plant on a Saturday and Sunday, he/she will work only
one- half (1/2) day on Friday preceding that Saturday and Sunday when he/she
must do the backflushing. He/she will then work three (3) hours on Saturday and
one hour on Sunday for a total of four (4) hours between the two (2) days, more
or less, in order to complete the backflushing.
The purpose of this enactment is to limit the number of hours an employee works
to forty (40) hours a week, barring emergencies and special work assignments.
(Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-11: PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES:
The village of Roanoke cannot function effectively without the confidence of
the citizens it serves. Employees, therefore, must encourage citizen confidence
in the village by maintaining high standards of honesty, integrity, and
impartiality. Employees should conduct themselves during and after working
hours in a manner that will enhance public respect for the employee and will
bring credit upon the village.
All contact with fellow employees and the public must be conducted in a manner
which will not cause injury to the background, character, or integrity of any
individual, and will not cause discord with the public or fellow employees,
disrupt official business, or endanger public safety. Employees may not engage
in harassment, or threaten to use political or personal influence or bias to
secure or deny changes in pay, grade, or character of work.
Employees are required to respond readily to the directions of their
supervisors, to cooperate fully with all properly constituted authorities, and
to complete work promptly and accurately. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-12: CONFIDENTIALITY:
Information will only be disclosed on a need to know basis in order to
investigate and resolve the matter and to comply with applicable legal
obligations.
Physical or mental defect which, in the judgment of the village board,
incapacitates the employee for the proper performance of the duties of his
position.
Wanton use of offensive conduct or language toward the public or municipal
officers or employees.
Conduct unbecoming a village employee or which brings discredit upon the
village service.
Dishonesty in the performance of his duties.
Use abusive or threatening language to or about fellow associates; create an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment.
The department supervisor shall adjust schedules of hours, when necessary, for
emergencies or increased workloads. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-13: DISCIPLINARY ACTION:
The following actions are among those deemed serious and justifying
disciplinary action by the village board or its supervisory personnel:
   (A)   Suspension:
      1.   Reporting to work under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs of
any type.
      2.   Gross carelessness leading to damage or destruction of property,
tools or equipment, or of endangering the lives or property of others.
      3.   Violation of any village employment rules set forth herein.
      4.   Failure to observe established safety rules.
      5.   Duplication of any keys issued by the village of Roanoke.
      6.   Refusal to work mandatory overtime as instructed.
   (B)   Discharge:
      1.   Consuming alcohol or illegal drugs while on duty.
      2.   Gross insubordination. This shall include actions or activities
directed toward a supervisor, a trustee, a village officer or the village
president. All employees and all office holders are expected to treat each
other with respect and to work together to accomplish the work of the village.
      3.   Deliberate destruction of property.
      4.   Theft or any attempt to defraud the village of any money or
property.
      5.   Two (2) or more suspensions.
Suspensions are to be for a period of three (3) days without pay. Suspensions
may be initiated by the superintendent of public works, or by the village
president. An employee may appeal a suspension and subsequent loss of pay to
the village board at its next regular meeting and in executive session.
Matters that merit a discharge shall result in an immediate suspension without
pay. That suspension shall remain in effect until the next regular village
board meeting or special board meeting if called to deal with the matter. Such
consideration shall occur in executive session(s) with any final action
occurring in open session. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-14: HOLIDAYS:
The village regularly observes the holidays listed below. When any holiday
falls on a Saturday, it will be observed on the preceding Friday, and when the
holiday falls on a Sunday, it will be observed the following Monday, unless the
village board declares otherwise. Regular full time employees shall receive the
following ten (10) full-workday holidays and two (2) half-day holidays off duty
with pay:
   New Year’s Day
   Presidents Day
   Memorial Day
   Independence Day
   Labor Day
   Veterans Day
   Thanksgiving Day
   Day after Thanksgiving
   Christmas Eve (1/2 day in the p.m.)
   Christmas Day
   New Year’s Eve (1/2 day in the p.m.)
   One Floating Holiday (as provided below)
Regular full time employees will receive one (1) floating holiday each calendar
year in addition to village’s observed holidays listed above and the employee’s
regular PTO days. This floating holiday may only be used on a federal holiday
during the year when the village otherwise remains open for business.
This floating holiday is available starting on January 1st each calendar year
for all regular full time employees, or upon being hired for an employee who is
first employed by the village prior to July 1st. A regular full time employee
hired on or after July 1st will receive one-half (1/2) day for this floating
holiday for the remainder of that calendar year. A newly hired employee shall
not be entitled to receive or use this floating holiday until having worked for
the village for a minimum period of thirty (30) days.
The request to use a floating shall be made by the employee in accordance with
the PTO scheduling provisions of section
1-7-6(D).
The floating holiday does not carry over from year to year, and thus will be
lost if not used by the employee during the calendar year in which it is
earned.
The employee must work or take PTO the day before and the day after a holiday
(or holiday weekend) in order to be paid for the holiday, as well as work or
take PTO the first part of the day of a half-day holiday. (Ord. 2007-02, 4-16-
2007; amd. Ord. 2025-02, 3-3-2025)
1-7-15: JURY DUTY LEAVE:
A village employee who must be off work to serve jury duty shall be paid the
employee’s regular wages or salary during the period of jury service. To be
eligible, the village employee must provide a copy of the jury notice documents
to the village clerk promptly after receiving the jury notice, and the employee
must surrender to the village clerk any compensation received for jury duty,
except for mileage fees. An employee off on jury duty shall report to work when
released from jury duty during any period when the employee is regularly
scheduled for work. If the village employee is a part-time employee, the
employee shall be paid only for the hours that the part-time employee would be
expected to work during the days of jury service. (Ord. 2025-02, 3-3-2025)
1-7-16: EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PROGRAM:
The village will provide to all regular and supervisory full time employees of
the village, the following benefit programs to any employee who has been a full
time village employee for at least ninety (90) days:
The opportunity to participate in a basic medical benefit program that will
vary depending upon legislation, costs and coverage that can be obtained
dependent on group size and qualifications imposed by the insurance carrier.
The plan may offer a shared cost arrangement between the village and the
employee and the carrier. Responsibility for filing any claims and providing
necessary information and documentation rests solely with the employee. The
village may require documentation from the provider, the carrier and the
employee before making any reimbursements. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-17: PERSONAL WORK; VILLAGE TIME:
No village employee may do any personal work or engage in any personal pursuits
while he/she is acting as an employee of the village. Under no circumstances
may a village employee store anything of his personal property on village
property. No village property or equipment may be used by village employee for
personal purposes without permission from the superintendent of public works
and shall not include major equipment such as trucks or tractors. (Ord. 2000-
04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-18: DEATH IN FAMILY:
   (A)   In the event of a death in the immediate family of an employee or
spouse (mother, father, sibling, spouse or child), a village employee will be
granted up to three (3) days with pay, from the date of death to the day
following the funeral (if air travel outside the area is required to attend
services). Under no circumstances will the time off with pay exceed three (3)
days.
   (B)   In the event of a death of any employee's grandfather, grandmother,
grandchild, son-in-law or daughter-in-law, the employee shall be granted one
day off with pay to attend the funeral. Under no circumstances will the time
off with pay exceed one day.
   (C)   In the event of a death not described in either subsection (A) or (B)
of this section, or in the event of extenuating circumstances in connection
with a death in the employee's family, the village president may grant
additional days off without pay. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-19: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2016-08, 6-20-2016)
1-7-20: SUGGESTIONS:
Superintendent of public works welcomes suggestions from employees for
improving municipal services. Suggestions which appear desirable and feasible
will be implemented. (Ord. 2000-04, 5-1-2000)
1-7-21: EMPLOYMENT REVIEW:
The village board shall review the performance of all employees at annual
intervals (in November) relating to their duties and responsibilities of
employment. Recommendations may be suggested for improvements and merit raises
granted when justified. (Ord. 2014-05, 6-16-2014)
1-7-22: EQUAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY:
For the purpose of this section, the term "minority" will refer to American
Indians, Asians, Blacks, or Hispanics, or to such protected classes as youth,
elderly, women, or persons with disabilities.
   (A)   The village of Roanoke hereby declares to uphold, defend, enforce, and
advocate for all laws related to equal employment opportunity including, but
not limited to, the following:
      1.   Title VI of the civil rights act of 1964 which prohibits
discrimination in the participation in or benefits of programs or activities
receiving federal financial assistance on the basis of race, color, or national
origin.
      2.   Title VII of the civil rights act of 1964 which prohibits
discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin in all
employment practices including hiring, firing, promotions, compensation, and
other terms, privileges and conditions of employment.
      3.   Title IX of the education amendments of 1972 which prohibits
discrimination in federally assisted education programs.
      4.   The equal pay act of 1963 which covers all employees who are covered
by the fair labor standards act. The act forbids pay differentials on the basis
of sex.
      5.   The age discrimination act of 1967 which prohibits discrimination
because of age against anyone between the ages of forty (40) and sixty five
(65).
      6.   Federal executive order 11246 which requires every contract with
federal financial assistance to contain a clause against discrimination because
of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
      7.   Section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 and DOL implementing
regulations at 29 CFR 32 which prohibits any discrimination based on
disability.
      8.   Section 188 of WIA and the U.S. DOL regulations at 29 CFR parts 31
and 32 which provides that no person in the United States shall be excluded
from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subject to
discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national origin, under any
program or activity receiving federal financial assistance from the department
of labor.
      9.   Chapter 68, article I, section 17-19 of the Illinois constitution
which prohibits discrimination based on race, color, creed, national ancestry,
disability, and sex in the hiring and promotion practices of any employer.
      10.   The Americans with disabilities act of 1990 which prohibits any
discrimination against qualified individuals with disabilities on the basis of
their disability.
      11.   Illinois human rights act 1  which prohibits discrimination based
on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, order of
protection status, marital status, physical or mental disability, military
status, sexual orientation, or unfavorable discharge from military service in
connection with employment, real estate transactions, access to financial
credit, and the availability of public accommodations.
   (B)   The village of Roanoke will assure nondiscriminatory employment
practices in recruitment, recruitment advertising, employment, placement,
layoff or termination, promotion, demotion or transfer, rate of pay or other
forms of compensation and use of facilities.
   (C)   The village of Roanoke will not contract with other agencies, banks,
businesses, vendors, etc., who practice or establish a pattern of
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry,
age, order of protection status, marital status, physical or mental disability,
military status, sexual orientation, or unfavorable discharge from military.
   (D)   The village of Roanoke will incorporate into any contract for
construction work, or modification thereof, subject to the relevant rules,
regulations, and orders of the secretary of labor or of any prior authority
that remains in effect, which is paid in whole or in part with the aid of such
financial assistance, the following "equal opportunity clause":
      1.   In the event of the contractor's noncompliance with the provisions
of this equal employment opportunity clause, the act or the rules and
regulations of the department, the contractor may be declared ineligible for
future contracts or subcontracts with the state of Illinois or any of its
political subdivisions or municipal corporations, and the contract may be
canceled or voided in whole or in part, and other sanctions or penalties may be
imposed or remedies invoked as provided by statute or regulation. During the
performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows:
         (a)   That he or she will not discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, marital status, national origin or ancestry, citizenship status,
age, physical or mental disability unrelated to ability, sexual orientation,
military status or an unfavorable discharge from military service; and,
further, that he or she will examine all job classifications to determine if
minority persons or women are underutilized and will take appropriate
affirmative action to rectify any underutilization.
         (b)   That, if he or she hires additional employees in order to
perform this contract or any portion of this contract, he or she will determine
the availability (in accordance with the department's rules and regulations) of
minorities and women in the areas from which he or she may reasonably recruit
and he or she will hire for each job classification for which employees are
hired in a way that minorities and women are not underutilized.
         (c)   That, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees
placed by him or her or on his or her behalf, he or she will state that all
applicants will be afforded equal opportunity without discrimination because of
race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, national origin
or ancestry, citizenship status, age, physical or mental disability unrelated
to ability, sexual orientation, military status or an unfavorable discharge
from military service.
         (d)   That he or she will send to each labor organization or
representative of workers with which he or she has or is bound by a collective
bargaining or other agreement or understanding, a notice advising the labor
organization or representative of the contractor's obligations under the Act
and the department's rules and regulations. If any labor organization or
representative fails or refuses to cooperate with the contractor in his or her
efforts to comply with the Act and rules and regulations, the contractor will
promptly notify the department and the contracting agency and will recruit
employees from other sources when necessary to fulfill its obligations under
the contract.
         (e)   That he or she will submit reports as required by the
department's rules and regulations, furnish all relevant information as may
from time to time be requested by the department or the contracting agency, and
in all respects comply with the Act and the department's rules and regulations.
         (f)   That he or she will permit access to all relevant books,
records, accounts and work sites by personnel of the contracting agency and the
department for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with the Act
and the department's rules and regulations.
         (g)   That he or she will include verbatim or by reference the
provisions of this clause in every subcontract awarded under which any portion
of the contract obligations are undertaken or assumed, so that the provisions
will be binding upon the subcontractor. In the same manner as with other
provisions of this contract, the contractor will be liable for compliance with
applicable provisions of this clause by subcontractors; and further it will
promptly notify the contracting agency and the department in the event any
subcontractor fails or refuses to comply with the provisions. In addition, the
contractor will not utilize any subcontractor declared by the Illinois Human
Rights Commission to be ineligible for contracts or subcontracts with the State
of Illinois or any of its political subdivisions or municipal corporations.
   (E)   The Village of Roanoke assures that it will actively provide
nondiscriminatory outreach, selection, and service to all individuals.
   (F)   Efforts will be made to hire minority individuals for all job
categories so that minority employment in all categories of the work force will
represent a proportionate share of minority populations in the Village of
Roanoke as well as surrounding areas.
   (G)   The Village of Roanoke will provide accommodations to the best of its
ability for employees with disabilities, contingent on budget and structural
limitations.
   (H)   All Village of Roanoke employees are expected to adhere to the above
policy and to work actively for its implementation both internally and in
carrying out Village program activities.
   (I)   The Village of Roanoke designates the Village President and Village of
Roanoke to carry out the EEO/AA plan. (Ord. 2011-06, 8-1-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 775 ILCS 5.
1-7-23: HARASSMENT (INCLUDING SEXUAL HARASSMENT) AND DISCRIMINATION POLICY:
   (A)   Statement Of Policy:
The Village strives to maintain an environment free from discrimination and
harassment, where employees, elected officials, and appointed officials treat
each other with respect, dignity, and courtesy. This policy applies to all
phases of employment, including but not limited to, recruiting, testing,
hiring, promoting, demoting, transferring, laying off, terminating, paying,
granting benefits, and training. Further, this policy shall apply to all
elected or appointed Village officials, all Village employees and agents, and
all members of any Village Boards, Committees, or Commissions.
The Village does not and will not tolerate any type of harassment of employees,
applicants for employment, or customers. Therefore, it is the Village's policy
that it will not tolerate or condone discrimination or harassment on the basis
of race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender-identity, gender-expression,
sexual orientation, pregnancy, childbirth, medical or common conditions
relating to pregnancy and childbirth, genetic information, national origin,
age, physical or mental disability, ancestry, marital status, military status,
arrest record, unfavorable discharge from military service, order of protection
status, citizenship status or any other classification protected under federal
or state law. Sexual misconduct is also prohibited. The Village will neither
tolerate nor condone discrimination, harassment, or sexual misconduct by
employees, managers, supervisors, elected officials, co-workers, or non-
employees with whom Village has a business, service, or professional
relationship. Further, retaliation and the filing of false reports as provided
in this policy is a violation of this policy and is prohibited.
"Employee," for purposes of this policy only, includes any individual
performing work for Village, an apprentice, an applicant for apprenticeship, or
an unpaid intern.
The Village has appointed Jennifer Crumrine as the Village's Ethics Officer,
and her duties shall include receiving and overseeing investigations of
complaints made pursuant to this policy. She can be contacted by email at
roanoke@mchsi.com or by phone at 309-923-3661. The Village reserves the right
to change the Ethics Officer from time to time.
   (B)   Prohibition On Sexual Harassment And Sexual Misconduct:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of the Village to prohibit harassment of any
person by any Village official, Village agent, Village employee or Village
agency or office, including the harassment on the basis of sex or gender. All
Village officials, Village agents, Village employees and Village agencies or
offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person, regardless of any
employment relationship or lack thereof.
Further, sexual misconduct is strictly prohibited by the Village and can
include any inappropriate and/or illegal conduct of a sexual nature including,
but not limited to, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, sexual intimidation,
rape, sexual assault, or ANY sexual contact or sexual communications with a
minor (including, but not limited to, conduct or communications which are
written, electronic, verbal, visual, virtual or physical).
   (C)   Definition Of Sexual Harassment:
      1.   As provided herein, sexual harassment and sexual misconduct are
prohibited. Sexual harassment includes unwelcome sexual advances, requests for
sexual favors, or any other visual, verbal or physical conduct of a sexual
nature when:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment;
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
         (c)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive working environment.
      2.   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
         (a)   Verbal: Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor,
and jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature;
         (b)   Non-verbal: Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls," "smacking"
or "kissing" noises;
         (c)   Visual: Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites;
         (d)   Physical: Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault; and
         (e)   Text/Electronic: "Sexting" (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
      3.   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. However, on the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is
more subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a "reasonable person." Further, sexual harassment can occur in a
variety of circumstances, including but not limited to the following:
         (a)   The employee as well as the harasser may be a woman or a man;
the employee does not have to be of the opposite sex.
         (b)   The harasser can be the employee's supervisor, an agent of the
employer, a supervisor in another area, a co-worker, or a non-employee.
         (c)   The employee does not have to be the person harassed, but could
be anyone affected by the offensive conduct.
         (d)   Unlawful sexual harassment may occur without economic injury to
or discharge of the employee.
         (e)   The harasser's conduct must be unwelcome.
   (D)   Responsibilities - Supervisors: Each supervisor shall be responsible
for ensuring compliance with this policy, including the following:
      1.   Monitoring the workplace environment for signs of discrimination,
harassment, or sexual misconduct;
      2.   Immediately notifying law enforcement where there is reasonable
belief that the observed or complained of conduct violates the criminal laws of
the State of Illinois.
      3.   Immediately notifying the Department of Children and Family Services
(DCFS) Hotline (1-800-25-ABUSE or 1-800-252-2873) if the observed or complained
of conduct involves the abuse of a minor.
      4.   Immediately stopping any observed acts of discrimination,
harassment, or sexual misconduct and taking appropriate steps to intervene,
whether or not the involved employees are within his/her line of supervision;
      5.   Immediately reporting any complaint of harassment, discrimination,
or sexual misconduct to the Ethics Officer or to the Village President, and:
      6.   Taking immediate action to limit the work contact between the
individuals when there has been a complaint of discrimination, harassment, or
sexual misconduct, pending investigation.
   (E)   Responsibilities - Employees: Each employee must exercise good
judgment to avoid engaging in conduct that may be perceived by others as sexual
harassment or harassment based on any status protected by law. Further, each
employee is responsible for assisting in the prevention of discrimination,
harassment, and sexual misconduct through the following acts:
      1.   Refraining from participation in, or encouragement of, actions that
could be perceived as discrimination, harassment, or sexual misconduct;
   2.   Immediately reporting any violations of this policy to a supervisor,
the Ethics Officer, or the Village President and law enforcement (if
appropriate under the circumstances) and/or DCFS (if appropriate under the
circum   stances). Employees are obligated to report violations of this policy
as soon as they occur. An employee should not wait until the conduct becomes
unbearable before reporting the prohibited conduct. All employees are obligated
to report instances of prohibited conduct even if the conduct is merely
observed and directed toward another individual and even if the other person
does not appear to be bothered or offended by the conduct. All employees are
obligated to report instances of prohibited conduct regardless of the identity
of the alleged offender (e.g. man, woman, supervisor, elected official, co-
worker, volunteer, vendor, member of public).
      3.   Encouraging any employee who confides that he/she is the victim of
conduct in violation of this policy to report these acts to a supervisor or the
Ethics Officer.
An employee's failure to take action to stop known discrimination, harassment,
or sexual misconduct may be grounds for discipline.
There is a clear line in most cases between a mutual attraction and a
consensual exchange and unwelcome behavior or pressure for an intimate
relationship. A friendly interaction between two persons who are receptive to
one another is not considered unwelcome or harassment. Employees are free to
form social relationships of their own choosing. However, when one employee is
pursuing or forcing a relationship upon another who does not like or want it,
regardless of friendly intentions, the behavior is unwelcome sexual behavior.
An employee confronted with these actions is encouraged to inform the harasser
that such behavior is offensive and must stop. You should assume that sexual
comments are unwelcome unless you have clear unequivocal indications to the
contrary. In other words, another person does not have to tell you to stop for
your conduct to be harassment and unwelcome. Moreover, sexual communications
and sexual contact with a minor are ALWAYS prohibited.
If you are advised by another person that your behavior is offensive, you must
immediately stop the behavior, regardless of whether you agree with the
person's perceptions of your intentions. The following are illustrations of
actions that the Village deems inappropriate and in violation of this policy:
         (a)   Unwanted sexual advances;
         (b)   Offering employment benefits in exchange for sexual favors;
         (c)   Retaliating or threatening retaliation after a negative response
to a sexual advance or after an employee has made or threatened to make a
harassment complaint;
         (d)   Visual conduct such as leering, making sexual gestures,
displaying sexually suggestive objects or pictures, cartoons, calendars or
posters;
         (e)   Verbal conduct such as making derogatory comments, using
epithets or slurs, making sexually explicit jokes or suggestive comments about
a person's body or dress;
         (f)   Written or electronic communications of a sexual nature or
containing statements or images which may be offensive to individuals in a
particular protected group, such as racial or ethnic stereotypes or stereotypes
about disabled individuals; and
         (g)   Physical conduct such as unwanted touching, assaulting, impeding
or blocking movements.
The Village does not consider conduct in violation of this policy to be within
the course and scope of employment and does not sanction such conduct on the
part of any employee, including supervisory and management employees.
   (F)   Procedures For Reporting An Allegation Of Harassment: The Village
takes allegations of discrimination, harassment, and sexual misconduct very
seriously and will actively investigate all complaints
      1.   Direct Communication. If there is sexual harassing behavior in the
workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly express her/his
objection to the other employee that the conduct is unwelcome and request that
the offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      2.   Bringing a Complaint. Any employee of Village who believes that
there has been a violation of this policy may bring the matter to the attention
of Village in one of the following ways by advising his or her supervisor or
the Ethics Officer, or in the event that the alleged harasser is the Ethics
Officer, advising the Village President.
If the complaint involves someone in the employee's direct line of command,
then the employee should go directly to the Ethics Officer or the Village
President. The complaint should be presented as promptly as possible after the
alleged violation of this policy occurs.
The Village will take steps to ensure that complaints made are kept
confidential to the extent permissible under the law. Individuals who are
involved in an investigation under this policy are required to keep the matter
confidential to the fullest extent permitted under the law.
      3.   Resolution Outside of the Village. The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
Village. However, all Village employees have the right to contact the Inspector
General, the Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) at 312-814-6200, or the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) at 800-669-4000, for information
regarding filing a formal complaint with those entities. An IDHR complaint must
be filed within three hundred (300) days of the alleged incident(s) unless it
is a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must be filed within three
hundred (300) days.
   (G)   Resolution of a Complaint: Promptly after a complaint is submitted,
the Village will undertake such investigation, corrective and preventive
actions as are appropriate. In general, the procedure in resolving any
complaints can (but will not necessarily) include any of the following items:
      1.   A meeting between the employee making the complaint and an
individual designated by the Village to investigate such complaints. Important
data to be provided by the complaining employee includes the following:
         (a)   A description of the specific offensive conduct;
         (b)   Identification of all person(s) who engaged in the conduct;
         (c)   The location where the conduct occurred;
         (d)   The time when the conduct occurred;
         (e)   Whether there were any witnesses to the conduct;
         (f)   Whether conduct of a similar nature has occurred on prior
occasions;
         (g)   Whether there are any documents which would support the
complaining employee's allegations; and
         (h)   What impact the conduct had on the complaining employee.
      2.   While not required, the Village encourages anyone who makes a
complaint under this policy to provide a written statement setting forth the
above details and attaching any pertinent records.
      3.   After a complaint is submitted by the employee, the alleged
offending individual should be contacted by a designated representative of the
Village. The alleged offending individual should be advised of the charges
brought against him or her, and may be provided with a copy of the written
statement of complaint made by the complaining employee (if applicable). The
alleged offending individual should have an opportunity to fully explain his or
her side of the circumstances, and may also submit a written statement, if
desired.
      4.   After the alleged offending individual is interviewed, any witnesses
identified by either the complaining employee or the alleged offending
individual may be interviewed separately.
      5.   Once this investigation is completed, the Village will take such
action as is appropriate based upon the information obtained in the
investigation.
      6.   Upon completion of the investigation, the Village will advise the
complaining employee of the results of the investigation, including action
taken, if any, against the offending individual.
When investigating alleged violations of this policy, the Village looks at the
whole record including, but not limited to, the nature of the allegations, the
context in which the alleged incidents occurred, and the statements of the
parties and witnesses. A determination on the allegations is made from the
facts on a case-by-case basis.
   (H)   Reporting and Independent Review of an Allegation of Sexual Harassment
Made Against an Elected Village Official by Another Elected Village Official
In addition to the methods of reporting included above, an elected official who
either observes another elected official engage in sexual harassment or
believes himself or herself to be the object of sexual harassment by another
elected official may report such conduct for independent review to the Village
Attorney. If the Village Attorney believes a conflict exists which prevents the
Village Attorney from conducting an independent review, the Village Attorney
must notify the Village President or Village Board of such conflict. Upon
receiving notification of the conflict, the Village President or Village Board
shall authorize the engagement of outside legal counsel to conduct the review.
The Village Attorney or outside legal counsel shall conduct an independent
review of the allegations and provide any findings to the Village Board. Any
documents, communications or other records created pursuant to the review shall
remain confidential, subject to attorney-client privilege, and will not be
disclosed unless such disclosure is authorized by resolution with the
concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office on the Village
Board or as otherwise required by applicable State or federal law.
Such records shall also be presumed as exempt from disclosure under the Freedom
of Information Act, to the extent it is applicable.
   (I)   Consequences For A Violation Of This Policy: In the event that the
Village finds merit in the charges made by the complaining employee,
disciplinary action will be taken against the offending employee. This
disciplinary action may, but need not necessarily, include:
      1.   Verbal or written reprimand;
      2.   Placing the offending employee on a corrective action plan for a
period of time to be identified;
      3.   Delay in pay increases or promotions;
      4.   Suspending the offending employee from work without pay;
      5.   Demotion; or
      6.   Immediate termination.
Further, each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline
imposed by the Village shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed
by a State ethics commission or from any fines or penalties imposed by a court
of law or a State or Federal agency.
   (J)   Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment
Allegations:    
      1.   No Village official or employee shall take any retaliatory action
against any Village employee due to a Village employee's:
         (a)   Disclosing or threatening to disclose any violation of this
policy;
         (b)   Providing information related to or testifying before any public
body conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of
this policy; or
         (c)   Assisting or participating in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
      2.   For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any Village employee that is
taken in retaliation for a Village employee's involvement in protected activity
pursuant to this policy.
      3.   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. Further, any witness will be
protected from retaliation.
      4.   Additionally, in relation to sexual harassment, Illinois law
provides protections to persons making a report under this policy or to any
person who assists or participates in the investigation of an alleged violation
of this policy. As set forth in the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15) and the
Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), such persons are provided
protections as whistleblowers from retaliatory action such as reprimand,
discharge, suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs
in retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
         (a)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a
public body an activity, policy, or practice of any municipal officer or other
employee that the employee reasonably believes is in violation of this policy
or other law, rule, or regulation;
         (c)   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of this
policy or other law, rule, or regulation by any municipal officer or other
employee; or
         (c)   Assists or participates in any proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy or the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
      5.   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer
may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a State or federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or federal law, rule, or regulation. (740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
      6.   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is
a civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire,
to retaliate against a person because he/she has opposed that which he/she
reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment,
because he/she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois
Human Rights Act.
      7.   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR (312-814-6200)
or EEOC (800-669-4000), may file a retaliation charge - due within one hundred
and eighty (180) days (IDHR) or three hundred (300) days (EEOC) of the alleged
retaliation.
   (K)   Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report: A false report is a
report of sexual harassment made by an accuser using the sexual harassment
report to accomplish some end other than stopping sexual harassment or
retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is not a report
made in good faith. Given the seriousness of the consequences for the accused,
a false or frivolous report of sexual harassment is a severe offense that can
itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who intentionally makes a
false report alleging a violation of any provision of this policy shall be
subject to discipline or discharge as provided in this policy. Further, this
provision covers any false report of harassment, not just sexual harassment.
   (L)   Education/Training:
      1.   Education and training for Village employees are critical to the
success of the Village's policy against harassment and discrimination. The
policy set forth in this Section
1-7-23 of the Village Code will be distributed to current employees, recently
hired employee, and all elected and appointed officials of the Village. All
employees and all elected and appointed Village officials are required to read
and sign a receipt of the Village's policy set forth in this Section
1-7-23 of the Village Code. In addition, employees will receive annual training
regarding this policy.
      2.   The training shall include, at a minimum, the following: (i) the
definition and a description of sexual harassment, unlawful discrimination, and
harassment, including examples of each; (ii) details on how an individual can
report an allegation of sexual harassment, unlawful discrimination, or
harassment, including options for making a confidential report to a supervisor
or the Department of Human Rights; (iii) the definition and description of
retaliation for reporting sexual harassment, unlawful discrimination, or
harassment allegations utilizing examples, including availability of
whistleblower protections under the Workplace Transparency Act, the
Whistleblower Act, and the Illinois Human Rights Act; and (iv) the consequences
of a violation of the prohibition on sexual harassment, unlawful
discrimination, and harassment and the consequences for knowingly making a
false report. All newly hired employees and all elected and appointed Village
officials will complete an initial harassment and discrimination prevention
training program within 30 days after commencement of employment with the
Village or becoming an elected or appointed Village employee.
      3.   Additionally, all supervisory employees will participate in training
sessions so that they understand their responsibilities under this policy and
complaint procedure. Such training will explain the types of conduct that
violate the Village's policy, the seriousness of the policy, the
responsibilities of supervisors when they learn of alleged harassment or
discrimination, and the prohibition against retaliation. (Ord. 2017-13, 12-18-
2017; amd. Ord. 2020-08, 6-22-2020)
1-7-24: DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY:
   (A)   Generally: The Village is committed to programs that promote safety in
the workplace, employee health and well- being, and citizens' confidence.
Employee involvement with drugs and alcohol can adversely affect job
performance and employee morale, jeopardize employee safety, and undermine
citizens' confidence. The Village's goal, therefore, and the purpose of this
section, is to establish and maintain a healthy and efficient work force free
from the effects of drug and alcohol abuse. Consistent with this goal and
commitment, and in response to the requirements of the Drug- Free Workplace Act
1 , as amended, the Village has developed this section regarding the use, sale,
possession, and distribution of controlled substances, including cannabis, and
alcohol by its employees.
   (B)   Testing Process:
      1.   Testing Circumstances:
         (a)   Pre-Employment: Applicants for Village positions will be tested
for drugs before they are employed. Employment is contingent upon a negative
test result.
         (b)   Reasonable Suspicion:
            (1)   A covered employee may be tested for alcohol and/or drugs
whenever there is reason to believe that the employee has violated the
prohibitions of this section, or is impaired by any drug or alcohol. A Village
representative's determination that a reason to believe exists will be based on
specific observations concerning the appearance, behavior, speech, or body
odors of the employee. A registered qualifying user of medical cannabis under
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act must first be given
a reasonable opportunity to contest the basis of the suspected impairment
before being subject to discipline based on a reasonable suspicion of
impairment.
            (2)   The Village representative's basis for ordering a drug/
alcohol test shall be documented. The document must be completed and signed by
the Village representative within two (2) hours of the observed behavior, or
before the results of the test are released, whichever is later, unless
circumstances preclude it. The supervisor, Village official, or his designee,
shall arrange transportation of the employee to the testing facility.
            (3)   An employee directed to complete a test will immediately
report for testing upon receipt of this direction by the Village. Covered
employees may not be returned to the performance of safety sensitive functions
until cleared by a negative reasonable suspicion test.
         (c)   Post-Accident:
            (1)   As soon as practicable following an accident involving any
motor vehicle or in which there is an injury or damage to any property from the
accident while on duty, the covered employee will be tested both for alcohol
and drugs. As soon as practicable following the accident, the covered employee
must contact his/her supervisor to explain that he/she was involved in an
accident while on duty. The employee must inform his/her supervisor if any type
of alcohol or drug tests was/were administered after the accident. The
supervisor shall arrange with a testing facility an appointment for the
employee to be tested for whichever tests have not been administered
immediately upon the employee's return. A covered employee subject to post-
accident testing must not use alcohol for eight (8) hours following the
accident or until he/she undergoes an alcohol test, whichever occurs first, and
shall not take any drug until a test is performed, unless medically essential.
            (2)   A covered employee subject to post-accident testing shall
remain readily available for testing or will be deemed by the Village to have
refused to submit to testing.
            (3)   Any refusal to complete a test when directed will be deemed
insubordination and disciplined in accordance with the terms of this section
accordingly.
         (d)   Functional Impairment: Employees must notify their supervisors
if they are using a substance, either administered by a physician or over the
counter, which may impair their ability to function on duty.
         (e)   Random Testing: Any employees required to be tested on a random
basis pursuant to law or regulations shall be tested, as required.
         (f)   Testing Facility: All specimen samples for required tests will
be collected at an approved testing facility.
      2.   Test Protocols:
         (a)   Alcohol: The alcohol test will be conducted using an evidential
breath testing device (EBTD) or any other DHHS approved testing method. The
alcohol test is generally a two- part process; a screening test and a
confirmation test. If the screening test results in a negative reading, no
further tests are required. However, a positive result on a screening test will
require a confirmation test 15 - 20 minutes later. No adverse action will be
taken against an employee without a positive confirmation test. The testing
methods or devices set forth herein shall not apply where the employee is
tested by any police agency incident to any traffic stop or at a hospital or
medical facility where the employee is taken after the accident. A reading of a
blood alcohol content (BAC) of less than .041 shall be considered a negative
reading for alcohol use, except that the CDL provisions and BAC levels shall
apply to any employee required to hold a CDL for their position with the
Village.
         (b)   Drugs: The drug test will be urine test or any other DHHS
approved testing method and will include, without limitations the following
drugs: amphetamines, cannabinoids (marijuana), phencyclidine (PCP), cocaine,
and opiates. Split-sample, hair-sample, or blood-sample collection techniques
will be used. When the test of the primary specimen is negative, the laboratory
disposes of the sample. When the test of the primary specimen is confirmed
positive, the laboratory continues to hold the remaining sample to ensure that
it remains available for a second test. The Medical Review Officer at the
testing laboratory (MRO) or the Village will notify each employee who has a
confirmed positive test that the employee has seventy two (72) hours in which
to request a test of the remaining sample. The employee will pay the cost of
testing the remaining sample.
         (c)   Prescription Drugs: At the time of the testing, the employee
shall notify the testing facility of any prescription drugs that the employee
is taking and shall provide a copy of said prescriptions to the testing
facility within twenty four (24) hours of testing.
      3.   Test Results:
         (a)   Alcohol tests are read at the testing facility and are normally
immediately available to the employee. Supervisors will be notified by phone of
the test results. The testing facility will forward the follow-up test result
written confirmation to the Village representative or designee. The results of
drug tests will not be available until the completion of the testing and
evaluation process.
         (b)   The Village will make transportation arrangements to and from
the testing facility for all employees directed for testing.
         (c)   The MRO or Village representative should work directly with the
employee to ascertain if there was a legitimate reason for the positive test
prior to the test results being considered and reported to the supervisor as
positive.
      4.   Record Keeping: The Village President or Village Clerk will prepare
and maintain records of the alcohol and drug testing program; access to these
records will be controlled and held in a confidential manner with the
employee's records.
         (a)   A covered employee is entitled, upon written request, to obtain
copies of or have distributed any records pertaining to him/her related to the
Alcohol and Drug Testing Program.
         (b)   Records will be made available to a subsequent employer upon
receipt of a written request from a covered or previously covered employee.
      5.   Cost Of Testing: Except as indicated above, the Village shall pay
all costs of testing for drugs and/or alcohol required by this section. If any
employee requests a re-test of a sample in order to challenge the results, the
employee shall pay all costs of the re-test.
   (C)   Rehabilitation: An employee, who, for the first time, is subject to
discipline for being under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs, or
abusing prescription drugs, after employer mandated testing, may elect to
participate in a residential or out-patient rehabilitation program. In such
cases, the severity of the disciplinary action taken under this section will
take into account the employee's effort at rehabilitation, as well as his/her
offense. An employee who elects to participate in a rehabilitation program must
provide the Village with written evidence of successful completion of the
program and evidence from an aftercare treatment facility or continued
participation in any recommended treatment.
   (D)   Employee Assistance Program: The Village encourages any employee who
feels he or she has a drug or alcohol problem to contact his or her immediate
supervisor for assistance. The Village will, at the employee's request, refer
him or her to the employee's designated healthcare provider for information or
professional assistance, which will be at the employee's expense over and above
any covered benefit amount. All communications will be strictly confidential.
Employees will not be subject to discipline for seeking such assistance prior
to detection. However, this will not thereafter excuse violation of this drug
and alcohol policy for which the employee is subject to discipline.
   (E)   Discipline And Discharge: Employees found to be under the influence of
illegal drugs in accordance with the testing procedure set forth in this
section for the first time may have their discharge suspended, subject to a
last chance agreement providing for a 30-day suspension without pay, if the
employee seeks treatment as provided in this section. Employees found to be
under the influence of illegal drugs in accordance with the testing procedures
set forth in this section a second time and those employees refusing to
participate in treatment programs as provided in this section, as well as those
employees who refuse to submit to testing, shall be immediately discharged.
Additionally, employees found to be intentionally tampering with, causing
another person to tamper with, substituting for, or causing another person to
substitute for an employee's urine, spit, blood, or hair specimen shall be
immediately discharged. Discipline for violations of the drug and alcohol
policy shall be governed solely by this section and any prior actions by this
board for discipline of such violations shall not be given any consideration by
the Village Board.
   (F)   Use, Possession, Transportation, Sale, Distribution: The use,
possession, sale, transportation, or distribution of controlled substances,
including cannabis, or alcohol by anyone while on Village property or on
Village business shall be cause for discharge. Controlled substances or alcohol
shall be taken into custody, and the appropriate law enforcement agencies will
be notified. For purposes of this section, the term "Village property" shall
include all land, buildings, structures, parking lots, and means of
transportation owned by or leased to the Village.
   (G)   Over-The-Counter Or Prescribed Medications: Employees who take over-
the-counter or prescribed medication are responsible for being aware of any
effect the medication may have on the performance of their duties and must
promptly report to their supervisors the use of medication likely to impair
their ability to do their jobs. An employee who fails to do so shall be subject
to disciplinary action, up to and including discharge. Moreover, employees who
take over-the- counter or prescribed medication contrary to doctor's
instructions shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including
discharge. (Ord. 2017-14, 12-18-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 30 ILCS 580/1-11.
CHAPTER 8
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-8-1: Seal Established
1-8-1: SEAL ESTABLISHED:
The Seal heretofore provided and used by the Village, which is in a circular
form, with the words, "The Corporate Seal" transversely across the interior
circle, and the words, "The Village of Roanoke, Illinois" in the outer circle,
shall be and the same is hereby declared and established to be, the Seal of the
Village, and shall be used as such Seal in all cases when, by law or ordinance,
it is necessary to use a seal. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 21)
CHAPTER 9
ELECTIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 2014-05, 6-16-2014)
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL CONDUCT
SECTION:
1-10-1: Definitions
1-10-2: Prohibited Political Activities
1-10-3: Gift Ban
1-10-4: Discipline Or Discharge
1-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
   CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in
section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
   COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
"compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4
of the election code 3 .
   EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village of Roanoke, Woodford County,
Illinois, whether on a full time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract,
whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with
regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not
include an independent contractor.
   EMPLOYER: The village of Roanoke, Woodford County, Illinois.
   GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance,
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created
by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: (A) Preparing for, organizing, or
participating in any political meeting, political rally, political
demonstration, or other political event.
   (B)   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   (C)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   (D)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   (E)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   (F)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   (G)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   (H)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   (I)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   (J)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   (K)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   (L)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   (M)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   (N)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   (O)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   (A)   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   (B)   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   (C)   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   (D)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 2004-
11, 4-19-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 2. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-10-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village of
Roanoke in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment,
or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal
time off).
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   (E)   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2004-11, 4-19-
2004)
1-10-3: GIFT BAN:
   (A)   Prohibition: Except as permitted by this section, no officer or
employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer
or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as
defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No
prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this
section.
   (B)   Exceptions: Subsection (A) of this section is not applicable to the
following:
      1.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
      2.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
      3.   Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code
or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
      4.   Educational materials and missions.
      5.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
      6.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
      7.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: a) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; b)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
      8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or b) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
      9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
      10.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this act, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
      11.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
      12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other.
   (C)   Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate
this chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to
its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 2004-11, 4-19-2004)
1-10-4: DISCIPLINE OR DISCHARGE:
In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, an officer or employee
who intentionally violates any provision of section
 1-10-2 or
1-10-3 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. 2004-11, 4-
19-2004)
CHAPTER 11
INVESTMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-11-1: Investments
1-11-2: Scope Of Policy
1-11-3: Objectives
1-11-4: Guidelines
1-11-5: Responsibility
1-11-6: Performance Measures
1-11-7: Periodic Review
1-11-8: Reporting
1-11-9: Investment Vehicles
1-11-10: Financial Institutions
1-11-11: Collateralization
1-11-12: Safekeeping Of Securities
1-11-13: Indemnification
1-11-14: Security Controls
1-11-15: The Corrupt Practices Act
1-11-16: Bonding
1-11-1: INVESTMENTS:
It is always prudent for any public unit to have an investment policy in place
for the purpose of safeguarding funds, equitably distributing the investments,
and maximizing income of the governmental unit. The following policy is hereby
promulgated for use by the village of Roanoke, Woodford County, Illinois. (Ord.
1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-2: SCOPE OF POLICY:
This investment policy applies to the investment activities of all funds under
the jurisdiction of the village of Roanoke. This investment policy will also
apply to any new funds or temporary funds placed under the jurisdiction of the
village of Roanoke. The Illinois state statutes will take precedence except
where this policy is more restrictive wherein this policy will take precedence.
(Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-3: OBJECTIVES:
The purpose of this investment policy is to establish cash management and
investment guidelines for the stewardship of public funds under the
jurisdiction of the village of Roanoke. The specific objectives of this policy
will be as follows:
   (A)   Safety: The security of moneys, whether on hand or invested, shall be
the primary concern of the chairman of the finance committee in selecting
depositories or investments.
   (B)   Liquidity: The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid
to meet all operating requirements, which might be reasonably anticipated.
   (C)   Return: The chairman of the finance committee shall seek to attain a
market average or better rate of return throughout budgetary and economic
cycles, taking into account risk, constraints, cash flow, and legal restriction
on investment.
   (D)   Local Considerations: The chairman of the finance committee shall have
preference to depositories located within the village of Roanoke provided that
the aforedescribed objectives are met, and such investments would be in
compliance with all other conditions and limitations of the investment policy;
however, the board of trustees of the village of Roanoke may approve qualified
depositories regardless of location. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-4: GUIDELINES:
To assist in attaining the stated objectives, the following guidelines shall be
observed:
   (A)   Investments shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure
preservation of capital in the overall portfolio.
   (B)   The portfolio should remain sufficiently liquid to meet operating
requirements, which may be reasonably anticipated.
   (C)   To maximize earnings, all funds shall be deposited/invested within two
(2) working days at prevailing rates or better. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-5: RESPONSIBILITY:
All investment of funds under the control of the chairman of the finance
committee is the direct responsibility of the chairman of the finance
committee. The chairman of the finance committee shall be responsible for all
transactions and shall establish a system of controls for all authorized
subordinates who are directly involved in the assistance of such investment
activities. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-6: PERFORMANCE MEASURES:
The use of interest-bearing checking accounts, savings accounts, certificates
of deposit, or other stable markets can be used to determine whether market
yields are being achieved on interest- bearing accounts, if any. (Ord. 1999-08,
12-20-1999)
1-11-7: PERIODIC REVIEW:
The chairman of the finance committee should establish annual independent
review for internal control, which assures compliance within the investment
policy. This will be accomplished with external auditors. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-
1999)
1-11-8: REPORTING:
All investment transactions shall be recorded by the chairman of the finance
committee or the chairman of the finance committee's staff. A report will be
generated monthly listing all active investments, location of investments,
maturity of investments, interest rate and other pertinent information deemed
necessary. This report will be submitted monthly to the village of Roanoke,
Woodford County, Illinois. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-9: INVESTMENT VEHICLES:
The village of Roanoke shall limit its investments to those allowed by law as
set out in 30 Illinois Compiled Statutes 235/2. A summary of allowable
securities follows:
   (A)   Notes, bonds, certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills, or other
securities, which are guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United
States of America.
   (B)   Bonds, notes, debentures, or other similar obligations of the United
States of America or its agencies.
   (C)   Interest-bearing accounts, certificates of deposit, or interest-
bearing time deposits or any other investment constituting direct obligations
of any bank as defined by the Illinois Banking Act. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-10: FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS:
The village of Roanoke, Woodford County, Illinois, will have the sole
responsibility to select which financial institutions will be depositories for
the village of Roanoke. The village of Roanoke will take into consideration
security, size, location, financial condition, service, fees, competitiveness,
and the community relations involvement of the financial institution when
choosing depositories. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-11: COLLATERALIZATION:
   (A)   Objective Of Safety: At all times in order to meet the objective of
safety of capital, the chairman of the finance committee will require deposits
in excess of the federally insured amount to be collateralized to the extent of
one hundred ten percent (110%) and evidenced by an approved written agreement.
   (B)   Eligible Collateral Instruments: Eligible collateral instruments and
collateral rates (market value divided by deposit) are as follows:
      1.   Negotiable obligations of the United States Government:   110%
      2.   Negotiable obligations of any agency or instrumentality of the
United States Government backed by the full faith and credit of the United
States Government:   110%
      3.   Negotiable obligations of the state of Illinois which are rated A or
better by Moodys or Standard and Poors:   110%
      4.   Negotiable obligations of the village of Roanoke, Woodford County,
Illinois, which are rated A or better by Moodys or Standard and Poors:   110%
   (C)   Maturity: Maturity of acceptable collateral shall not exceed one
hundred twenty (120) months.
   (D)   Ratio: The ratio of fair-market value of collateral to the amount of
funds secured shall be reviewed monthly and additional collateral will be
requested when the ratio declines below the level required.
   (E)   Safekeeping Of Collateral: Third party safekeeping is required for all
collateral. To accomplish this, the securities will be held at a safekeeping
depository as approved from time to time by the board of trustees of the
village of Roanoke.
Safekeeping will be documented by an approved written agreement. Substitution,
exchange or release of securities held in safekeeping may be done upon two (2)
days prior written notice to the chairman of the finance committee.
When collateral is extended, the chairman of the finance committee should
receive a copy of the financial institution's board minutes, indicating the
board of directors' approval. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-12: SAFEKEEPING OF SECURITIES:
Securities, unless held physically by the chairman of the finance committee,
require third party safekeeping. The chairman of the finance committee will
have the sole responsibility for selecting safekeeping agents. Safekeeping will
be documented by an approved written agreement. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-13: INDEMNIFICATION:
Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then
prevailing, which persons or prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in
the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment,
considering the probable safety of their capital as well as the possible income
to be derived.
In maintaining its investment portfolio, the chairman of the finance committee
shall avoid any transaction that might impair public confidence in the village
of Roanoke, Woodford County, Illinois.
The above standards are established as standards for professional
responsibility.
The chairman of the finance committee and his staff and employees of the
village of Roanoke, Woodford County, Illinois, acting in accordance with this
investment policy and procedures as have been or may be established and
exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal liability for an
individual security's credit risk or market changes. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-14: SECURITY CONTROLS:
Only the board of trustees of the village of Roanoke is authorized to establish
financial accounts for the office. At all times either the chairman of the
finance committee, singly or two (2), jointly, of two (2) or more signatories
as designated by the board of trustees of the village of Roanoke should be
authorized to sign on financial accounts of the office of the chairman of the
finance committee. Authorized signatories are not permitted to reconcile bank
accounts at any time. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-15: THE CORRUPT PRACTICES ACT:
The Illinois Compiled Statutes govern ethics. (Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
1-11-16: BONDING:
The chairman of the finance committee, and all employees shall be bonded for
the benefit of the village of Roanoke, Woodford County, Illinois, for an amount
determined to be reasonable. The surety shall be a corporate surety company.
(Ord. 1999-08, 12-20-1999)
CHAPTER 12
LOCAL TAXPAYERS' BILL OF RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SECTION:
1-12-1: Title
1-12-2: Scope
1-12-3: Definitions
1-12-4: Notices
1-12-5: Payment
1-12-6: Certain Credits And Refunds
1-12-7: Audit Procedure
1-12-8: Appeal
1-12-9: Hearing
1-12-10: Interest And Penalties
1-12-11: Abatement
1-12-12: Installment Contracts
1-12-13: Statute Of Limitations
1-12-14: Voluntary Disclosure
1-12-15: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
1-12-16: Lien Review Procedure
1-12-17: Application
1-12-18: Severability
1-12-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as the LOCAL TAXPAYERS' BILL
OF RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
   ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act" 1 .
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village president and board of trustees.
   HEARING OFFICER: An administrative individual appointed by the village
president with the advice and consent of the village board to conduct hearings
and to issue final determinations regarding the collection of all locally
imposed and administered taxes.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village president or the board of trustees or
other village official charged with the administration and collection of the
locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees, or agents
to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the
local tax administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the
authority to implement and give full effect to the terms of this chapter, but
shall not act in a manner inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Any tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village, not by any agency or
department of the state, and does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village other
than infrastructure maintenance fees.
   NOTICE: Any audit notice, collection notice, or other similar notice or
communication in connection with any tax locally imposed and administered by
the village.
   TAX ORDINANCE: Any ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
   VILLAGE: The village of Roanoke, Woodford County, Illinois. (Ord. 2002-02,
3-4-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
1-12-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing and mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to
the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit, or other scheduled act of the
local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
   (A)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
person(s) concerned at the person's last known address, or
   (B)   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-5: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-6: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared to have been invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
one year after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made.
The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-7: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for a proposed taxpayer audit regarding any locally imposed and
administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available by
the taxpayer for the auditor.
   (B)   The audit shall be conducted during normal business hours not less
than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is
given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agree to some other
convenient time.
   (C)   If the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not
agreeable to the taxpayer or if the taxpayer seeks an extension of time to have
the audit conducted, the taxpayer may request, prior to the scheduled audit,
another date and time for the audit which is within thirty (30) days after the
originally designated audit date and during normal business hours. The local
tax administrator shall confirm, in writing, the new audit date with the
taxpayer.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption, or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines that there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-8: APPEAL:
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund, and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit, or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-9: HEARING:
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section
1-12-8 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal. The taxpayer may request that a hearing officer conduct
the hearing rather than the local tax administrator.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
   (C)   At the hearing the local tax administrator or hearing officer shall
preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to
judicial proceedings shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator or
hearing officer shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with
a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-10: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment, or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax to be five
percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not be imposed
under this section if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling
ordinance. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-11: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty, or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-12: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) business days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local tax administrator, the installment contract may be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-13: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of
the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (B)   If any tax return is not filed, or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment was issued by the village
and the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the
statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   (C)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-14: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-
2002)
1-12-15: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-16: LIEN REVIEW PROCEDURE:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   (B)   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-17: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the village's tax ordinances. Except when specifically set forth in this
chapter that the other tax ordinance is controlling, to the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter
shall be controlling. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
1-12-18: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph, or provision of this chapter shall be held to be
invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of
such section, paragraph, or provision shall not affect any of the remaining
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-02, 3-4-2002)
CHAPTER 13
PAYMENT/REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAVEL EXPENSES
SECTION:
1-13-1: Definitions
1-13-2: Authorization
1-13-3: Reimbursable, Not Reimbursable Expenses
1-13-4: Travel Expense Reimbursement Request Form
1-13-5: Maximum Allowable Reimbursement
1-13-6: Requests Exceeding Maximum Allowable Reimbursement
1-13-7: Entertainment Expenses
1-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
   ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters,
circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
   PUBLIC BUSINESS: Means expenses incurred in the performance of a public
purpose which is required or useful for the benefit of the Village to carry out
the responsibilities of Village business.
   TRAVEL: Means any expenditure directly incident to official travel by
employees and officers of the Village or by wards or charges of the Village
involving reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies
providing transportation or related services. (Ord. 2017-02, 2-27-2017)
1-13-2: AUTHORIZATION:
The Village shall reimburse its employees and officers, pursuant to this
chapter, for travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred by its employees and
officers while conducting public business. Whenever travel for public business
is reasonably foreseeable, travel expense requests shall be submitted to the
Village Clerk prior to the date of travel in order to determine whether such
travel will result in a professional or Village benefit, and whether such
travel is financially feasible. Whenever travel for public business is not
reasonably foreseeable, travel expense requests shall be submitted to the
Village Clerk within seven (7) working days of the completion of such travel.
(Ord. 2017-02, 2-27-2017)
1-13-3: REIMBURSABLE, NOT REIMBURSABLE EXPENSES:
   (A)   Reimbursable Expenses: The Village shall reimburse its employees and
officers for the following travel expenses:
      1.   Transportation: Village owned vehicles shall be used whenever
possible and is the preferred form of transportation. Use of a privately owned
vehicle shall be reimbursed at the IRS approved mileage rate in effect on the
date of travel, and based upon the trip originating and ending at Village Hall,
plus tolls and parking. Prior to the date of travel by use of a privately owned
vehicle, the employee or officer must provide proof of a valid driver's license
issued by the State of Illinois and automobile insurance coverage in an amount
not less than that required by the Illinois Vehicle Code.
The actual cost for transportation by air or rail shall be reimbursable by the
Village, including parking fees, provided that such transportation is obtained
in the most economical manner and at the most economical rate available at the
time the transportation reservations are made. Whenever possible, employees and
officers, shall book reservations at least thirty (30) days in advance of the
date of travel.
The Village shall reimburse its employees and officers for the actual cost of
transportation, plus tips, within the destination location, including but not
limited to taxi fare, bus fare, and transportation network company fare (i.e.,
Uber and Lyft).
      2.   Lodging: The cost of overnight lodging shall only be reimbursed if
it is ninety (90) miles or more from the employee or officer's home. A Village
employee or officer shall only be reimbursed for a single occupancy room rate,
plus tips, unless a double occupancy room is of equal or lesser value or more
than one employee or officer is authorized for such lodging.
      3.   Meals: The cost of meals shall only be reimbursed if it is ninety
(90) miles or more from the employee or officer's home. The cost of such meals
shall be reimbursed at the IRS approved per diem rate(s) in effect on the date
of travel, plus tips. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village shall
reimburse its employees and officers for the cost of meal/banquet tickets for
conferences, seminars, training events, or other similar events if such costs
are separate from the event's registration fees and are directly related to
such event.
      4.   Registration Fees: Registration fees, dues, and other similar
expenses for conferences, seminars, meetings, and other similar events may be
prepaid by the Village upon approval by the Village President. If such fees are
not prepaid, the Village shall reimburse its employee or officer for the cost
of such registration fees. All such expenses, either prepaid or reimbursable,
shall be approved by submitting a Travel Expense Reimbursement Request Form
pursuant to section
 1-13-4 of this chapter.
      5.   Travel Advances: Advances for travel expenses may be provided to an
employee or officer of the Village upon approval by the Village President. Such
advances shall be approved by submitting a Travel Expense Reimbursement Request
Form pursuant to section
1-13-4 of this chapter.
   (B)   Not Reimbursable Expenses: The Village shall not reimburse its
employees and officers for the following expenses:
      1.   The additional cost of first class seating or accommodations for air
or rail transportation.
      2.   The additional cost of lodging above the single occupancy room rate,
except as otherwise provided herein.
      3.   Lodging and meals eaten at the home of friends or relatives if
lodging with friends or relatives.
      4.   Expenses of a personal nature and incurred for the amusement of the
employee or officer, such expenses as movie/theater tickets, magazines, bar
services, sightseeing fees/fares, hotel/motel pay per view television/movies,
telephone calls and other similar personal expenses.
      5.   Travel insurance premiums.
      6.   Meal expenses for anyone other than the employee or officer.
      7.   The cost of alcoholic beverages.
      8.   Entertainment expenses. (Ord. 2017-02, 2-27-2017)
1-13-4: TRAVEL EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT REQUEST FORM:
No payment or reimbursement of travel, meal, or lodging expenses incurred by a
Village employee or officer shall be made unless a Travel Expense Reimbursement
Request Form has been submitted and approved pursuant to this chapter. All
Reimbursement Request Forms shall be accompanied by itemized receipts or other
documentation that sufficiently support the amount of the claimed expense(s)
and was generated at or near the time when the travel expense was incurred, and
submitted to the Village Clerk. All documents and information submitted with
the form shall be subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act 1
. (Ord. 2017-02, 2-27-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1, et seq.
1-13-5: MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE REIMBURSEMENT:
Any Reimbursement Request Form submitted to the Village Clerk in accordance
with section
1-13-4 of this chapter for travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred by its
employees and officers in an amount less than or equal to five hundred dollars
($500.00) may be approved by the Village President. The costs for registration
fees, dues, and other similar expenses for conferences, seminars, or meetings
are not to be allocated toward this maximum allowable reimbursement amount, and
shall be approved under Village procedures separate from this section. (Ord.
2017-02, 2-27-2017)
1-13-6: REQUESTS EXCEEDING MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE REIMBURSEMENT:
Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of: a) any officer or employee of the
Village which exceeds the maximum reimbursement allowed under section
1-13-5 of this chapter, or b) any member of the Board of Trustees of the
Village, may only be approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the
Corporate Authorities of the Village. However, in the event of emergency or
other extraordinary circumstances, the Village President may approve more than
the maximum allowable expenses set forth above. (Ord. 2017-02, 2-27-2017)
1-13-7: ENTERTAINMENT EXPENSES:
The Village shall not reimburse any of its members of the Board of Trustees,
employees, or officers for any activities which would be considered
entertainment. Activities which would otherwise be considered entertainment,
but which are excluded from the prohibition on reimbursement due to being
ancillary to the purpose of the program or event, may be reimbursed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-02, 2-27-2017)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Board Of Health   1
Emergency Services And Disaster Agency   2
Fire Department (Rep. by Ord. 80-11, 6-16-1980)   3
Board Of Local Improvements   4
Ambulance Service   5
Community Development Committee   6
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
2-1-1: Appointment
2-1-2: Assistance Provided
2-1-1: APPOINTMENT:
There shall be appointed by the President of the Village Board and approved by
the Board of Trustees, a Board of Health in and for the Village, which said
Board of Health shall consist of three (3) members who shall hold their offices
until the end of the fiscal year in which they are appointed and until their
successors are duly appointed. The President may at any time for sufficient
cause, remove any member of said Board and appoint another for the unexpired
term of the member thereof. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 41)
2-1-2: ASSISTANCE PROVIDED:
The proper law enforcing official and the Street Commissioner shall assist the
Board of Health and render such service from time to time as said Board may
require of them in the due execution of their duties. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 41; amd.
Ord. 79-3, 5-7-79, eff. 5-8-79 at 6:00 A.M.)
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
2-2-1: Establishment
2-2-2: Coordinator
2-2-3: Functions
2-2-4: Service as Mobile Support Team
2-2-5: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
2-2-6: Emergency Action
2-2-7: Compensation
2-2-8: Reimbursement by State
2-2-9: Purchases and Expenditures
2-2-10: Oath
2-2-11: Office
2-2-12: Appropriation; Levy of Taxes
2-2-13: State ESDA Model Legislation Adopted
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Roanoke ESDA to prevent, minimize, repair and
alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack,
sabotage or other hostile action or from natural or man-made disaster, in
accordance with "The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975" 1 .
This ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members as may
be selected by the Coordinator.
 
Notes
1 1. S.H.A. 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
2-2-2: COORDINATOR:
The Coordinator of the Village ESDA shall be appointed by the Village President
and shall serve until removed by same.
The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction
and control of the Village President as provided by Statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
Coordinator, the Village President or any person designated by him shall be and
act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this Chapter.
2-2-3: FUNCTIONS:
The Village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the Village as shall
be prescribed in and by the State ESDA Plan and Program prepared by the
Governor and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate
limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other
political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided by "The State ESDA Act of 1975".
2-2-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the Village ESDA organization may be designated as
members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State ESDA as
provided by law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the Coordinator
of the Village ESDA organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a Village employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the Governor or the State Director, shall receive
the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from the State
reasonable compensation as provided by law.
2-2-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities
or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the Village President and by the State
Director of ESDA.
2-2-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State
of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the
Village ESDA to cooperate fully with the State ESDA and with the Governor in
the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
2-2-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if
called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the time
spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held. Members who are not such Village employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the Village
President.
2-2-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the State to the Village for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA, compensation
for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of
ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the State
incident to ESDA activities as provided by law.
2-2-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Village President may, on recommendation of the Village Coordinator of
ESDA, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the Village in a
position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any
nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety,
protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of
such disaster or from man-made or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Village Coordinator of ESDA
is authorized on behalf of the Village, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as authorized
by "The State ESDA Act of 1975", provided that, if the Village President meets
at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed
by that body.
2-2-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following
oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
"I,              do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend
and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and
the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and
facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or
purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties
upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do
not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am
affiliated with the Roanoke ESDA organization, I will not advocate nor become a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence."
2-2-11: OFFICE:
The Village President is authorized to designate space in a Village building or
elsewhere as may be provided for by the Village President for the Village ESDA
as its office.
2-2-12: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The Village President may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner
provided by law, and may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to
exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed
value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by
"The State ESDA Act of 1975"; however, that amount collectable under such levy
shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($.25) per capita. (Ord. 76-2, 1976)
2-2-13: STATE ESDA MODEL LEGISLATION ADOPTED:
The Village hereby adopts model legislation put forth by the State in providing
emergency services and disaster agency.
The Village adopts the entire model legislation insofar as that model
legislation is applicable to the Village. In any instance where the legislation
is not applicable to the Village, said section shall be taken into
consideration by all individuals providing services in emergency and disaster
situations for the Village and subject ultimately to the authority of the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
A copy of the model legislation recommended by the State is adopted by
reference a copy of which is on file in the office of the Village Clerk and
incorporated thereto and made a part of this Section. (Ord. 1981-5, 5-18-81)
CHAPTER 3
FIRE DEPARTMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 80-11, 6-16-1980)
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Board Created
2-4-1: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby created the Board of Local Improvements in and for the Village,
consisting of the President of the Board of Trustees, who shall act as
President of the Board of Local Improvements, and two (2) other members of the
Board of Trustees. (Ord. 169; 3-26-40)
CHAPTER 5
AMBULANCE SERVICE
SECTION:
2-5-1: Department Established
2-5-2: Object And Jurisdiction Of Department
2-5-3: Members; Compensation
2-5-4: Ambulance Chief; Department Officers; Powers And Duties
2-5-5: Meetings; Records Kept
2-5-6: Billing And Collection
2-5-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
The village shall maintain an ambulance service department, consisting of
volunteer members, an ambulance service chief, an assistant chief, and a
secretary. This department shall be known as the "Roanoke municipal ambulance
department". (Ord. 2015-03, 3-16-2015)
2-5-2: OBJECT AND JURISDICTION OF DEPARTMENT:
   (A)   The object of this department is to provide emergency medical services
to the general public in the village and in the Roanoke fire protection
district, as well as other areas designated by the village board.
   (B)   This department shall participate in any mutual aid agreements as
directed by the village board for the provision of emergency medical services
for the general public in the service area.
   (C)   This department shall provide emergency assistance as requested by
other agencies including fire, rescue, police and civil defense departments in
which the department can provide emergency medical services.
   (D)   This department shall be under the jurisdiction of its appointed
officers who shall in turn be governed by the village board and the village's
ambulance committee.
   (E)   The village board or the village's ambulance committee shall appoint a
privacy officer under HIPAA (the federal health insurance portability and
accountability act of 1996) to ensure the department's compliance with the
HIPAA privacy rules and regulations. (Ord. 2015-03, 3-16-2015)
2-5-3: MEMBERS; COMPENSATION:
   (A)   Enlisted Volunteer Membership Requirements: The members of the
department shall be eighteen (18) years of age or older at the time of
completion of any required training and related state certification who are
residents of the service area and who are in good standing and character and
good physical health. The total number of membership in the department shall be
set by the appointed officers of the department.
   (B)   Enlisted Volunteer Member Trainings: After an applicant to become an
enlisted volunteer member of the department has been chosen and voted upon by
the department membership and accepted onto the ambulance squad pursuant to the
department bylaws, said applicant will may be required to undergo proper EMT/
EMR training in order to be an active member of the ambulance department. If a
member's training is paid by the Village, as a condition for payment for EMT/
EMR classes by the Village, the person for whom the fees have been paid and who
has successfully completed the EMT/EMR class must give the village two (2)
years (24 months) of continuous service on the ambulance squad from the date of
passage of the EMT/EMR examinations. If the EMT/EMR quits or is suspended from
squad service before the completion of two (2) continuous years of service,
then the individual so suspended or who has quit must repay the village the
fees that were paid for the member's attendance and completion of EMT/EMR
classes. To that effect, before an EMT/EMR is reimbursed for said classes by
the village, the member will sign a statement stating that the member promises
to repay said fees subject to the conditions herein stated.
   (C)   Paid Staff: When authorized by the village board, the chief of the
department may hire paid department employees to provide services for the
department, including shift supervisors. These paid department employees shall
not be considered members of the department and will not be able to hold
position as a department officer, but shall have full voting rights.
   (D)   Payments: All salaries, pay scales, per diem rates, and rates for
services rendered by the department shall be set by the village board. No money
or other payment, gift, or reward of any type is to be accepted by any
ambulance department member or department employee, except for payment from the
village. Any monies, gifts, memorials, or other rewards given to the department
or to a department member or paid staff member are to be turned over to the
ambulance service chief, who in turn, shall provide such funds to the
department secretary for deposit in the proper department account. (Ord. 2015-
03, 3-16-2015; amd. Ord. 2021-04, 2-15-2021)
2-5-4: AMBULANCE CHIEF; DEPARTMENT OFFICERS; POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   Selection of Officers: Enlisted volunteer members of the Roanoke
municipal ambulance service department shall select nominees for the positions
of chief, assistant chief, and secretary of the ambulance department in
accordance with the department bylaws. At the first regular meeting of the
department in January of each year, the department shall select the nominees
for these positions in a manner as provided by department bylaws, which shall
be promptly forwarded to the village board for approval. The village board
retains full responsibility and discretion to confirm or reject the
department's nominees for these positions. Should the village board not confirm
the department's selection of any officer, the village board will so notify the
department, at which time the department shall select a new nominee for that
officer position. The new department officers shall take office at the first
meeting in February after their selection by the department members provided
that village board has confirmed such officers for their positions.
   (B)   Employee Hiring: The department officers shall interview and make
hiring recommendations for any paid staff members for the department, including
all full-time and part-time paid staff members. The department officers'
recommendation will be promptly presented to the department membership for a
vote in a manner consistent with department bylaws, and if approved at the
department membership meeting, the hiring recommendation will be forwarded to
the village board. At the next regularly scheduled village board meeting after
receipt of the department's recommendation, the Board shall approve (or not
approve) the department's hiring recommendation by simple majority vote of
those in attendance at the village board meeting. With regard to part-time
staff, the chief shall have the authority to hire part-time staff on a
temporary basis pending department and village board review and approval in
order to ensure the smooth operation of the department. The chief, in
coordination with the village's ambulance committee, shall determine the job
duties and responsibilities for each paid staff member who is hired by the
village when such staff member is not providing service for a call. The chief,
or his designee, shall coordinate the schedules of each paid staff member. The
chief shall also have the authority to discipline a paid staff member,
including a suspension without pay pending action by the village board, for
performance related issues. The village board shall retain the authority to
dismiss any paid staff member for overall staffing reasons, for performance
related issues, or for any other reasons related to the efficient operation of
the department. The discipline of a paid staff member may be appealed by the
member to the village's ambulance committee for their review in closed session
and final determination, except when the disciplinary measure consists of a
suspension without pay pending dismissal, the discipline shall be reviewed in
closed session directly by the village board.
   (C)   Other Appointments: The chief shall have the authority to appoint
other individuals deemed necessary for the operation of the department, who
shall be confirmed by the village's ambulance committee.
   (D)   Monthly Village Board Meetings: The chief, or his designee, shall
report to the village board at the first meeting of the month of the village
board. The chief, or his designee, shall report regarding department equipment
needs, member and staff training requirements or opportunities, and relations
with other ambulance services and municipalities, as called upon from time to
time to do by the village board.
   (E)   Department Expenditures: Proposals for any expenditure are to be
submitted to the village board through the village's ambulance committee,
except as to those department expenditures that can be approved by the
chairperson of the village's ambulance committee as provided under Section
1-5-1(D) of the Village Code.
   (F)   Removal of Officers: The village's ambulance committee can remove a
department officer from office, which may include dismissal from the
department, for violating department bylaws or department operational
regulations or standard operating procedures or for other just cause. Should
the ambulance committee seek such removal of an officer, the ambulance
committee chairperson or his designee shall serve written notice to the officer
of the reasons for removal, while providing the officer an opportunity for a
prompt hearing before the ambulance committee in closed session to review the
reasons for removal and to afford the officer an opportunity to provide a
response. The ambulance committee shall provide a written decision to the
officer within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the hearing. If the
officer seeks to appeal the decision of the ambulance committee, within ten
(10) days after receiving the written decision from the ambulance committee,
the officer shall submit a written request to the village board for an appeal
hearing in front of the village board to review the officer's removal. The
appeal hearing will be held in closed session, and the village board will
provide a final written decision to the officer within fifteen (15) days after
the conclusion of the appeal hearing. The officer shall have the right to
representation at any hearing under this provision. (Ord. 2015-03, 3-16-2015;
amd. Ord. 2021-04, 2-15-2021)
2-5-5: MEETINGS; RECORDS KEPT:
   (A)   Regular meetings of the department shall be held at times and dates
specified by the chief. Meetings are to be held at the Roanoke ambulance
department building or at a place specified by the chief. When such meetings
occur, the department secretary or another person in attendance at the meeting,
as designated by the chief, shall keep a record or minutes of said meeting,
which minutes shall be filed promptly with the village clerk after said
meeting.
   (B)   A regular meeting may be postponed or canceled by notice given by the
chief to the membership in advance of the meeting.
   (C)   A special meeting of the department may be called by the chief in
advance of the regular meeting date.
   (D)   All meetings shall be limited to only ambulance department members and
paid staff employees, members of the village's ambulance committee, and other
village board members. The only exception to this rule will be for persons
invited to present a program to the department, to visiting members of other
ambulance departments or to persons in the community who have a specific
question or comment to be made to the membership. Permission from an officer is
necessary to allow any exception to the attendance rule.
   (E)   The ambulance department shall establish, maintain, and follow a set
of bylaws, which shall be approved by the village board. A proposed amendment
to the bylaws may be initiated by any department officer or member in good
standing at a regular meeting of the department where a majority of members in
good standing are present. The village's ambulance committee may also submit a
proposed amendment, which shall be submitted to the department officers and
presented at the next regular meeting of the department where a majority of
members in good standing are present. The proposed amendment shall then be
discussed and tabled until the next department meeting at which a majority of
members in good standing are present, at which time when the proposed amendment
shall be voted on. Each member shall be notified at least three (3) days prior
to this meeting at which the proposal is to be voted upon by the department
membership. To be recommended, the proposed amendment must pass by a majority
of members present in good standing. The recommended amendment would then be
submitted to the village's ambulance committee, who shall submit the proposal
to the village board for approval. The village board must approve the bylaws
and any proposed amendment to the bylaws before the bylaws or the amendment
shall become effective.
   (F)   The department officers shall prepare and adopt operational
regulations or standard operating procedures for the department with the review
and advice of the department membership. Prior to adoption of the department
operational regulations or standard operating procedures or any revisions to
these regulations or procedures, the department officers shall submit their
proposal to the village's ambulance committee for review and concurrence.
Within forty-five (45) days after the ambulance committee is provided the
officer's proposal, the ambulance committee shall either:
      1.   Approve the proposal; or
      2.   Provide comment to the department regarding any required changes or
modifications to such proposals.
If the ambulance committee provides comments to the department, the department
may re-submit the proposal after taking into consideration the comments made by
the ambulance committee. The department operational regulations or standard
operating procedures or any revisions to these regulations or procedures shall
become effective upon approval by the village's ambulance committee, or if the
ambulance committee does not provide a response to the department within the
forty-five (45) day submission period, the proposed operational regulations or
standard operating procedures or revisions shall become effective at the
conclusion of the forty-five (45) day submission period. (Ord. 2015-03, 3-16-
2015; amd. Ord. 2021-04, 2-15-2021)
2-5-6: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
   (A)   Promptly after service is rendered by the Roanoke municipal ambulance
department to any person, a bill shall be sent to the person who received the
services (or the legally responsible party for such person) for the total cost
of the service rendered plus mileage charges as appropriate.
   (B)   The village board shall employ a billing service or a billing clerk to
collect these charges for services rendered by the department.
   (C)   If a billing clerk is employed to collect these charges for services
rendered by the department, the following additional provisions shall apply:
      1.   The person who received services (or the legally responsible party
for such person) shall pay the full amount of billed charges within forty five
(45) days after the date of the initial billing statement sent by the
department.
      2.   The village reserves the right to assess a late fee if the full
amount of the billed charges is not paid during this forty five (45) day
period. If payment is not made within the forty five (45) day period, a late
notice shall be promptly sent to the person who received the services (or the
legally responsible party for such person) providing an additional thirty (30)
days to make full payment plus payment of any late charges.
      3.   If full payment (plus any late charges) has not been received within
this additional thirty (30) day period after the late notice was sent, the
person who received the services (or the legally responsible party for such
person) shall be in violation of this section and shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 or
1-4-13 of this code. Each day that full payment is not received by the village
after this additional thirty (30) day period shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the village may institute legal action for the collection of
unpaid charges plus costs, which shall include payment of any attorney fees
expended by the village for the collection effort, under this section that
remain unpaid after the expiration of the additional thirty (30) day late
notice period, and such legal action shall be separate and independent of any
enforcement action taken by the village for a violation of this section.
      4.   All funds collected for services rendered by the department shall be
promptly delivered to the village collector for deposit in the appropriate
village fund. (Ord. 2015-03, 3-16-2015)
CHAPTER 6
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-6-1: Establishment
2-6-2: Purpose
2-6-3: Members; Appointment
2-6-4: Director
2-6-5: Meetings
2-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created and established the village of Roanoke community
development committee, which shall have the powers and responsibilities as set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-11, 7-20-2015)
2-6-2: PURPOSE:
The community development committee shall be charged with promoting the
economic growth and business development in the village of Roanoke, which shall
include recruiting community minded businesses and assisting existing
businesses. (Ord. 2015-11, 7-20-2015)
2-6-3: MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT:
   (A)   The community development committee shall have eight (8) to twelve
(12) members and consist of the following persons:
      1.   The village president;
      2.   One or two (2) village trustees;
      3.   The village clerk;
      4.   A representative from the Roanoke-Benson school district;
      5.   A pastor or religious leader;
      6.   At least one representative of the Roanoke business community; and
      7.   At least one village resident.
   (B)   With the consent of the village board, the village president shall
appoint the members of the community development committee who are not
specifically designated by position under this section. Members of the
community development committee who are not specifically designated by position
under this section shall serve three (3) year terms.
   (C)   The community development committee shall select one of its members as
the community development committee secretary, who will be charged with keeping
minutes of the community development committee meetings and maintaining all
records for the community development committee. (Ord. 2015-11, 7-20-2015)
2-6-4: DIRECTOR:
The village clerk shall be the director and serve as the primary contact person
for the community development committee. (Ord. 2015-11, 7-20-2015)
2-6-5: MEETINGS:
The community development committee shall establish an annual schedule of
meetings prior to each calendar year. The community development committee
director may call meetings on other dates as necessary to address community
development committee business. (Ord. 2015-11, 7-20-2015)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Licenses, General   1
Amusements   2
Billiard Halls; Shooting Galleries; Bowling Alleys   3
Alcoholic Liquor   4
Peddlers, Solicitors   5
Fire Insurance Companies   6
Contractors   7
Public Dances; Dance Halls   8
Taxicabs   9
Billposting   10
Auction Houses   11
Occupation Taxes   12
Cable Television Franchise   13
Coin Operated Games   14
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee   15
Cannabis Business Establishments   16
Licensed Video Gaming   17
CHAPTER 1
LICENSES, GENERAL
SECTION:
3-1-1: Licenses Subject To Code Provisions
3-1-2: Licenses Nontransferable
3-1-3: Term Of License
3-1-4: Day Defined
3-1-5: One Person, One Place
3-1-6: Application
3-1-7: Treasurer To Receive Money
3-1-8: Issuance Of License
3-1-9: Approve Bond; Question Of Issuance
3-1-10: Record Of Licenses
3-1-11: Display License
3-1-1: LICENSES SUBJECT TO CODE PROVISIONS:
All licenses which may be issued under any provisions of this code shall be
subject to all provisions of this code in force at the date of their issue, and
which shall be passed during the continuance of such license; and all licenses
so granted may be revoked by the board of trustees upon a satisfactory showing
that the party licensed has violated any provision of any code provision. (R.O.
1908, Ord. 4)
3-1-2: LICENSES NONTRANSFERABLE:
No license shall be transferable. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 4)
3-1-3: TERM OF LICENSE:
No license shall be issued for a longer period than one year, nor shall any
license, in any case, extend beyond the municipal year in which it shall be
granted; and such license shall date from the day of issuing thereof. No person
shall be deemed to be licensed until the license money has been fully paid, a
receipt given therefor, and the license issued. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 4)
3-1-4: DAY DEFINED:
The term "day" when applied to license, shall mean the time between the issuing
of the license and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight next following. (R.O. 1908,
Ord. 4)
3-1-5: ONE PERSON, ONE PLACE:
No person shall act under any license but the person to whom it is issued, nor
at any other place nor time than is specified in such license, without the
consent of the board of trustees certified upon such license. (R.O. 1908, Ord.
4)
3-1-6: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring a license shall make a written application to the village
clerk, stating the purpose for which the same is desired, for what length of
time, where his business is conducted and, if required by any code provision,
he shall file the required bond or bonds which shall be approved by the village
clerk before a license shall be issued; provided, license may be granted to
shooting clubs and owners of shooting galleries to discharge firearms within
the village limits, subject to such rules and regulations as may be ordered by
the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 2014-05, 6-16-2014)
3-1-7: TREASURER TO RECEIVE MONEY:
When all the requirements of section
3-1-6 of this chapter have been complied with the clerk shall issue an order to
the village treasurer, requiring him to receive the license fee, which order
shall state the name of the license, the purpose for which the license is
issued, the time, the amount and that the application has fully complied with
all provisions of this code pertaining to the subject matter for which the
license is issued. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 4)
3-1-8: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
All licenses shall be issued by the clerk, under the corporate seal, and shall
be signed by the president and clerk. Each license shall state the name of the
person licensed, for what purpose licensed, the place of business, the date of
the license, the amount paid therefor, and the time it shall expire. (R.O.
1908, Ord. 4)
3-1-9: APPROVE BOND; QUESTION OF ISSUANCE:
Before any license shall issue, the person desiring the same shall present to
the village treasurer the order required in section
3-1-7 of this chapter, and shall also pay to the treasurer the amount required
for such license, taking his receipt therefor. Upon the presentation of said
receipt to the clerk, he shall issue the license; provided, that when by any
provision of this code it shall be necessary for the president of the board of
trustees to approve any bond, or for the board of trustees to pass upon the
question of issuing any license, the clerk shall not issue the same until so
ordered by the president or board, which license shall be in substance as
follows:
State of Illinois, Woodford County,
Village of Roanoke,
To All Whom These Presents Shall Come, Greeting.
Know ye that                     , having made proper application, and having
in all respects complied with the Village Code provisions, therefore the said
           is hereby authorized and licensed to            at            in the
Village from              19          until              19        .
Nevertheless this license is granted upon the express conditions that if the
said              shall observe and obey all provisions of this Code which are
or may be in force regulating or relating to said business, then this license
shall be valid for that period; otherwise it may be revoked by the Board of
Trustees.
Witness our hands and the Seal of the Village at Roanoke, this                
day of                , A.D. 19        .
            
            President
   
Village Clerk
(R.O. 1908, Ord. 4)
3-1-10: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued which shall show the name
of the person, for what purpose licensed, the amount paid therefor, the place
of business, the date of license and time of its expiration. (R.O. 1908, Ord.
4)
3-1-11: DISPLAY LICENSE:
Every person licensed under any provisions of this code shall, upon demand,
show his license to the proper law enforcing officer at any time. Any person
neglecting or refusing so to do shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (R.O.
1908, Ord. 4; amd. Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-1979)
CHAPTER 2
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: License Required, Amusements
3-2-3: Fees, Amusements
3-2-4: Coin Operated Amusement Devices
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CIRCUS: Shall include every building, tent or enclosed space where feats of
horsemanship, acrobatic sports or animals are exhibited.
   SIDESHOW: Shall include every building, tent or enclosed space where any
feats or tricks of legerdemain are performed, or other amusement is made to
attract persons, or where money or other valuable thing is charged for
admission thereto, accompanying any circus. (1974 Code)
3-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, AMUSEMENTS:
No person shall within the limits of the village establish, keep or maintain
any public show, circus, exhibition, lecture, concert, theater or other place
of amusement, when money or any other thing of value is charged for admission
thereto, without first having obtained license therefor. Provided, that no
license shall be required when fairs, lectures, concerts or other exhibitions
are given for the benefit of some charitable, benevolent or religious purpose
or before any society of the village for the exclusive benefit of such society.
(1974 Code)
3-2-3: FEES, AMUSEMENTS:
 
For the exhibition of any circus           $5.00 per day, not to exceed $25.00
For all other exhibitions, lectures,
concerts, theaters or places of amusement,
where money or other valuable thing is     $2.00 per day, not to exceed $20.00
charged for admission thereto, not
otherwise provided for
 
(R.O. 1908, Ord. 4; amd. 1974 Code)
3-2-4: COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
   (A)   Definition: "Coin operated amusement device" as used in this section
shall mean and include any amusement machine or device operated by means of the
insertion of a coin, token or similar object, for the purpose of amusement or
skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term shall include
photoelectric amusement devices and instruments or combinations of instruments
consisting of a ray of light shooting device and a target equipped with a
photoelectric cell. The term does not include vending machines in which are not
incorporated gambling or amusement features, nor does the term include any coin
operated musical device.
   (B)   License Required: No person shall keep, use, operate or permit to be
kept, used or operated any coin operated amusement device without first having
obtained a license therefor as required by this section.
   (C)   Application: Application for license hereunder shall be made in
accordance with the general provisions relating to licenses and shall specify:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation,
partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses.
      2.   The number of coin operated amusement devices for which the
applicant seeks a license and a description of such device.
      3.   Evidence of the good character of the applicant and citizenship of
the United States Of America.
   (D)   Restrictions On Issuance: No license required by this section shall be
issued to:
      1.   An applicant who has presented or signed an application for such
license, knowing it to contain any false statement.
      2.   A person who is not of legal age. (1974 Code)
      3.   A person who is not of good moral character or reputation in the
community. It shall be the duty of the proper law enforcing officer to make or
cause to be made an investigation into the character of each applicant and to
report the results of such investigation to the village treasurer. (1974 Code;
amd. Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-1979)
      4.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
      5.   A firm or partnership, unless each of the members of such firm or
partnership is authorized to obtain a license under this section.
      6.   A corporation or club not authorized to do business in this state or
of which any officer or manager in control of the establishment would not be
eligible to obtain a license under this section.
      7.   A person who has previously had a license issued under this section,
which has been revoked for good cause.
      8.   A person who, at time of application for renewal of any license
issued under this section, would not be eligible for such license upon first
application.
   (E)   License Nontransferable: Licenses issued under this section shall be
nonassignable and nontransferable.
   (F)   Display: The licensee shall display such license prominently on or
close by each machine licensed. Each machine owned by a licensee shall also
display prominently and legibly the name and address of the owner thereof. It
shall be unlawful to locate, maintain or operate any coin operated amusement
device which does not bear the name and address of the owner or for which no
license is displayed as required above.
   (G)   Gambling: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit the use
of any coin operated amusement device for gambling.
   (H)   Violation: If a coin operated amusement device is operated or is kept
for operation in any public place in the village in violation of any of the
provisions of this section, the owner or licensee of such device and also the
proprietor of the establishment in which such device is located shall, each of
them separately, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as in this
code provided. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 3
BILLIARD HALLS; SHOOTING GALLERIES; BOWLING ALLEYS
SECTION:
3-3-1: License Required
3-3-2: Fees
3-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   No person shall, for his gain or profit, keep or maintain any
billiard, or pool table, bowling alley, shooting gallery or other mechanical
contrivance used for the purpose of playing at any game without first obtaining
a license therefor; provided, that this Section shall not be construed to allow
any gambling of any kind.
   (B)   Teen or Recreation Centers:
      1.   Must be licensed.
      2.   The building must be sanitary, conform to building, plumbing and
electrical codes of the Village.
      3.   Hours the Center is open may be regulated by the Village Board as it
from time to time deems advisable, but in no case shall minors be permitted to
remain on the premises after curfew hours.
3-3-2: FEES:
The license fee for any establishment licensed under the provisions of this
Chapter shall be two dollars ($2.00) per establishment. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Liquor Control Commissioner; Powers
3-4-3: Liquor Control Commissioner; Compensation
3-4-4: License Required
3-4-5: Applications
3-4-6: Background Investigation
3-4-7: Restriction On Licenses
3-4-8: Classification; Fees
3-4-9: Limitation Of Number Of Licenses
3-4-10: Term; Prorating Fee
3-4-11: Privilege Granted By License; Nature As To Property; Transfer Of
License; Tax Delinquencies
3-4-12: Violation Of Tax Acts; Refusal, Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-4-13: Books And Records Available For Investigation And Control; Maintenance
3-4-14: Sale Near Churches, Schools, And Hospitals
3-4-15: Peddling
3-4-16: License To Be Posted
3-4-17: Change Or Enlargement Of Location
3-4-18: Employees
3-4-19: Restricted Areas
3-4-20: Hours Of Operation
3-4-21: View From Street
3-4-22: Bond; Filing Of, Condition; Forfeiture
3-4-23: Prohibited Sales
3-4-24: Persons Under Twenty One; Other Prohibitions; Exceptions
3-4-25: Gambling; Disorderly Conduct
3-4-26: Revocation; Suspension; Fines; Notice; Hearing
3-4-27: Granting Licenses After Revocation; Waiting Period; Discretion
3-4-28: Nudity On The Premises Where Alcoholic Liquor Is Offered For Sale
3-4-29: Sexual Conduct Prohibited
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires the following terms as used in this
chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
   ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
reflected or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol produced in accordance with acts of congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one
percent (0.5%), or less, of alcohol by volume.
   BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
   CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or a space in a building, of such extent and character as may be
suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation
of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen
and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of
servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for
its members and their guests; provided, that such club files with the local
liquor control commissioner at the time of its application for a license under
this chapter two (2) copies of a list of names and residences of its members,
and similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional
member his name and address; and, provided further, that its affairs and
management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or
similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no member
or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or
indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits
from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of
the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary
as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board
of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
   DEVIATE SEXUAL CONDUCT: Any act of sexual gratification involving the sex
organs of one person and the mouth or anus of another.
   MASTURBATION: The act of inducing sexual excitement or gratification by
self-manipulation of the sex organs.
   RETAILER: A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use
or consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SALE: Any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and includes and
means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent,
servant, or employee.
   SELL AT RETAIL: "Sell at retail" and "sale at retail" refer to and mean
sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SEXUAL INTERCOURSE: Occurs when there is any penetration of the female sex
organ by the male sex organ.
   SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whisky,
gin, or other spirituous liquors when rectified, blended, or otherwise mixed
with alcohol or other substances.
   TO SELL: Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to
sell.
   WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-2: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER; POWERS:
The village president is hereby designated as the local liquor control
commissioner for the village. The local liquor control commissioner shall have
the duty to administer and enforce this chapter and the applicable provisions
of the Illinois liquor control act of 1934, and to notify the Illinois
secretary of state of any convictions for a violation of section 6-20 of the
Illinois liquor control act of 1934 or section
3-4-24 of this chapter. The local liquor control commissioner shall have the
following powers, functions and duties with respect to liquor licenses, other
than licenses to manufacturers, importing distributors, distributors, foreign
importers, nonresident dealers, nonbeverage users, brokers, railroads,
airplanes and boats:
   (A)   To grant and or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke
for cause all retail liquor dealer's licenses issued to persons for premises
within the village;
   (B)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed by the local liquor control commissioner or the
Illinois liquor control commission to determine whether any of the provisions
of this chapter or the Illinois liquor control act of 1934 or any rules or
regulations adopted by him or by the Illinois liquor control commission have
been or are being violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said
licensee in connection therewith;
   (C)   To notify the secretary of state where a club incorporated under the
general not for profit corporation act of 1986 or a foreign corporation
functioning as a club in the State of Illinois under a certificate of authority
issued under that Act has violated this chapter or the Illinois Liquor Control
Act of 1934 by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors without
a license;
   (D)   To receive complaint from any citizen within the Village that any of
the provisions of this chapter or the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, or
any rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto, have been or are being
violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided;
   (E)   To receive or authorize the Village Clerk to receive fees for a retail
liquor dealer's license and other fees required for the application process;
   (F)   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a
retail liquor dealer's license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon
whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner
hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books and
records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for
information in the performance of these duties, and for such purpose to issue
subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of the State of Illinois. (Ord.
2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-3: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER; COMPENSATION:
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall receive no compensation for
fulfilling the duties of Liquor Control Commissioner for the Village. This
compensation level shall not be increased or decreased during the fiscal year
for which the annual appropriation has been made. Further, this compensation
level shall not be increased or decreased during the Village President's term
of office, but may be increased or decreased for a future term of office for
the Village President if done so at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior
to the beginning of such future term. (Ord. 2015-18, 11-2-2015)
3-4-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the Village any
alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license or a
retailer's license issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, or in
violation of the terms of such license. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-5: APPLICATIONS:
   Application for a retail liquor dealer’s license shall be made to the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner in writing, signed by the applicant or by a duly
authorized agent if the application is submitted on behalf of a club or
corporation, and verified by oath or affidavit. All license and application
fees shall be paid to the Village Clerk at the time of application. In addition
to the above, any application for a retail liquor dealer’s license shall
contain the following information and statements under oath:
   (A)   Name, Age And Address:
      1.   For an individual person: name, age, and address of the applicant.
      2.   For a co-partnership or association: name of co-partnership or
association, business address, the names and addresses of all partners or
members and any other persons entitled to share in the profit thereof, and the
date of the formation of the co-partnership or association.
      3.   For a corporation or club: name of corporation or club, business
address, the date of incorporation, the object for which the corporation or
club was organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, the
name and address of any person who owns five percent (5%) or more of the shares
of stock of such corporation, and the name, age, and address of the manager of
the business premises; in the case of a foreign corporation, the state where it
was incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Business
Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in the State of Illinois.
   (B)   Character/Object Of The Business: The character of the business of the
applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was
formed.
   (C)   Length Of Time In Business/Business Name: The length of time the
applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a
corporation, the date on which its charter was issued; if the business will be
using an “assumed name”, the date of the filing of the “assumed name” of the
business with the County Clerk.
   (D)   ROT Registration Number: The applicant’s Retailers’ Occupation Tax
(ROT) registration number.
   (E)   Location/Right To Premises: The address and description of the
premises or place of business which is to be operated under the license; proof
of ownership of the premises, or proof of lease for the premises and the name
and address of the landlord if the premises of the business are leased. A
statement that the proposed location meets the location requirements and
limitations under section
3-4-14 of this chapter and is in compliance with the zoning regulations of the
Village, including the applicable off-street parking and loading requirements.
   (F)   Former Conviction Of Felony Or Other Applicable Offense: A statement
that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony, gambling offense,
pandering, or other offense opposed to decency or morality and is not otherwise
unqualified to receive a license by reason of any provision of this chapter,
the laws of the State of Illinois, or other ordinance of the Village.
   (G)   Suspension Or Revocation Of Previous Licenses: A statement whether a
previous license issued to the applicant by any state, or subdivision thereof,
or by the Federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor.
   (H)   No Violation Of Law Or Ordinances: A statement that, in the conduct of
his place of business, the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Illinois or the United States or any ordinance of the Village.
   (I)   Signature On Application: If the application is made on behalf of a
partnership, firm, association or club, or a corporation, then the application
shall be signed and sworn to by at least two (2) members of the partnership or
association, or the president and secretary of such corporation. If the
application is made by an individual, then the application shall be signed and
sworn by that individual.
   (J)   Public Official: If the applicant, or any other person set forth in
the application or otherwise directly involved in the business which is the
subject of the application, is a public official or law enforcement officer for
any public or governmental body, a description of the particulars thereof shall
be provided.
(Ord. 2017-05, 4-17-2017; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 12-4-2023)
3-4-6: BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION:
Upon the initial application for a retail liquor dealer's license by a new
applicant, each applicant for a license shall submit his or her fingerprints to
the Illinois Department of State Police in the form and manner prescribed by
the Illinois Department of State Police. Also, with any application renewal for
fiscal year 2004-2005 (in May 2004), the renewal applicant shall be required to
submit fingerprints under this section for a criminal history background
investigation during the renewal process.
These fingerprints shall be checked against the fingerprint records now and
hereafter filed in the Illinois Department of State Police and Federal Bureau
of Investigation criminal history databases. After receiving the criminal
history for the applicant from the Illinois Department of State Police, the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner may use such information to determine whether
the applicant qualifies for the issuance of a retail liquor dealer's license or
the renewal of a previously issued license under this chapter. The applicant
shall pay a fee in an amount as determined by the Illinois Department of State
Police, which shall then be forwarded to the Illinois Department of State
Police for the purposes of conducting this criminal history background
investigation. (Ord. 2004-18, 10-4-2004)
3-4-7: RESTRICTION ON LICENSES:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, no retail liquor dealer’s license
shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State
law, unless the Liquor Control Commissioner is able, after due consideration,
to determine that the person has been rehabilitated.
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   (C)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is the keeper
of a house of ill fame.
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   (E)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   (F)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon first application.
   (G)   A co-partnership, if any partners or members of the co-partnership
would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder.
   (H)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder.
   (I)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee, except that, in the case of a business operated as a corporation, the
manager of the business shall not be required to be a resident of the Village
but shall be required to reside within ten (10) miles from the Municipal
boundaries for the Village of Roanoke, Illinois, if the manager is not a
Village resident.
   (J)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
   (K)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued.
   (L)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of the Village
Liquor Control Commission, the President of the Village Board of Trustees, or
any member of the Village Board of Trustees; and no such official shall be
interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale
or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
   (M)   Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a State retail
liquor dealer’s license.
   (N)   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption
on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts set out in subsection (a) of section 6-21 of the
Liquor Control Act of 1934, found at 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et
seq., or any successor provision of State law.
   (O)   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation
Act of 1983 to transact business in Illinois.
   (P)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   (Q)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of section 28-1 of, or as proscribed
by section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, or as
proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
   (R)   A person or entity to whom a Federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the Federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a
license under the Illinois Raffles Act or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games
Act.
   A criminal conviction of a corporation is not grounds for the denial,
suspension, or revocation of a license applied for or held by the corporation
if the criminal conviction was not the result of a violation of any Federal or
State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
the offense that led to the conviction did not result in any financial gain to
the corporation and the corporation has terminated its relationship with each
director, officer, employee, or controlling shareholder whose actions directly
contributed to the conviction of the corporation. The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall determine if all provisions of this section have been met
before any action on the corporation’s license is initiated.
(Ord. 2017-05, 4-17-2017; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 12-4-2023)
3-4-8: CLASSIFICATION; FEES:
   (A)   Retail liquor dealer's license classifications and fees are hereby
established as follows:
 
Classification                                                          Fee
Class A: A Class A license shall authorize the sale at retail of all
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises described in the       $275.00
license.
Class B: A Class B license shall authorize the sale at retail of beer
and wine only, in original packages, for consumption off the premises
described in the license. The sale at retail of alcoholic liquor other  275.00
than beer and wine or the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises described in the license is strictly prohibited.
Class C (Club): A Class C license shall authorize the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor by a club for consumption on the club premises         75.00
described in the license.
Class D: A Class D license shall authorize the sale at retail of beer
and wine for consumption on the premises described in the license and   75.00
in connection with any other established business or function which
meets the approval of the Village Board.
Class E: A Class E license shall authorize the sale at retail of all
alcoholic liquor for consumption on or off the premises described in    275.00
the license.
Class F: A Class F license shall authorize the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor, including beer and wine, in original packages, for
consumption off the premises described in the license. The sale at      275.00
retail of any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises
described in the license is strictly prohibited.
 
Such fees shall be paid to the Village Clerk at the time of application, and
shall be forthwith turned over to the Village Treasurer. In the event the
license applied for is denied the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If
the license is granted then the fee shall be deposited in the General Corporate
Fund by proper action. (Ord. 2017-05, 4-17-2017)
   (B)   A subclass 1 special use license may be issued to a current retail
liquor dealer license holder to provide alcoholic liquor for on premises
consumption at the location of a public or private function or a public event
so designated by the Village's Liquor Control Commissioner, subject to the
following regulations:
      1.   The alcoholic liquor served at the location must be transferred from
the inventory of the retail licensed premises of the licensee;
      2.   The alcoholic liquor may be served indoors or outdoors but may not
be served prior to eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. or later than ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. on the dates designated in the license, except on Sundays when service
of alcoholic liquor cannot occur prior to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon;
      3.   The subclass 1 special use license may be granted for a time period
of a maximum of five (5) days. The venue for the special event must include
controlled access points, at least two (2) means of ingress and egress, and
have at least one person or employee from the license holder supervising the
area where the alcoholic liquor is served;
      4.   An applicant shall provide proof satisfactory to the Local Liquor
Commissioner that the applicant will provide dramshop liability insurance to
the maximum limits;
      5.   The subclass 1 special use license application must be submitted no
less than twenty one (21) days prior to the first day of the special event
covered by the special use license. No fee shall be required for a subclass 1
special use license; and
      6.   The applicant must obtain a special use permit from the Illinois
Liquor Control Commission and provide proof to the Village that the permit has
been obtained prior to any alcoholic liquor being served or consumed.
   (C)   A subclass 2 special use license may be issued to a current retail
liquor dealer license holder to provide samples of alcoholic liquor for on
premises consumption at the location of a public or private function or a
public event so designated by the Village's Liquor Control Commissioner,
subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Each sample shall consist of no more than one-fourth (1/4) ounce of
distilled spirits, one ounce of wine, or one ounce of beer. Licensee must
ensure that samples are consumed in the area immediately adjacent to the
licensee's service area of the sample;
      2.   Samples of alcoholic liquor may be served indoors or outdoors but
may not be served prior to eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. or later than eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M. on the dates designated in the special use license, except
on Sundays when service of alcoholic liquor cannot occur prior to twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon;
      3.   The subclass 2 special use license may be granted for a time period
of a maximum of five (5) days;
      4.   An applicant shall provide proof satisfactory to the Local Liquor
Commissioner that the applicant will provide dramshop liability insurance to
the maximum limits;
      5.   The subclass 2 special use license application must be submitted no
less than twenty one (21) days prior to the first day of the special event
covered by the special use license. No fee shall be required for a subclass 2
special use license; and
      6.   The applicant must comply with any applicable requirements or
permits required from the Illinois Liquor Control Commission in relation to
this type of product tasting or sampling and provide proof to the Village that
such compliance has been obtained prior to any alcoholic liquor being served or
consumed pursuant to this special use license. (Ord. 2015-17, 10-19-2015)
3-4-9: LIMITATION OF NUMBER OF LICENSES:
Except for Class D licenses, there shall be no more than eleven (11) liquor
licenses issued and outstanding at any one time. Such number of licenses shall
be applied to the respective classes as follows:
 
Class A 4
Class B 1
Class C 1
Class D As set by resolution of the Village Board
Class E 2
Class F 3
 
(Ord. 2017-07, 6-19-2017; amd. Ord. 2020-09, 10-5-2020; Ord. 2023-02, 2-20-
2023)
3-4-10: TERM; PRORATING FEE:
Except for temporary Class D licenses, all retail liquor dealers' licenses
shall be valid for a period of one year from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on
the first Monday of May of the year in which the license is issued to twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight on the first Monday of May of the following year,
unless suspended or revoked sooner as provided for in this chapter. If a retail
liquor dealer's license is issued at any time other than the first Monday in
May, the fee paid for the license shall be reduced in proportion to the full
calendar months which have expired since the first Monday in May prior to the
issuance of the license. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-11: PRIVILEGE GRANTED BY LICENSE; NATURE AS TO PROPERTY; TRANSFER OF
LICENSE; TAX DELINQUENCIES:
   (A)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed
one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and
shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntary
or involuntarily, or subject to be encumbered or hypothecated. Such license
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall
cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors or administrators
of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or
bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may
continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the
appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent
or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or
bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but not longer than six (6)
months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund
shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which
the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance
with the provisions of this subsection.
   (B)   Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided
the licensee is then qualified at the time of renewal to receive a license and
the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such
purpose; and provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for
shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the
Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within
the Village. No retail liquor dealer's license shall be renewed unless the
applicant provides documentation that any tax owed to the Village has been
satisfied by payment. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-12: VIOLATION OF TAX ACTS; REFUSAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   (A)   In addition to other grounds specified in this chapter, the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner, on complaint of the Illinois Department of
Revenue, shall refuse the issuance or renewal of a retail liquor dealer's
license, or suspend or revoke the license, of any person, for any of the
following violations of any tax act administered by the Illinois Department of
Revenue:
      1.   Failure to make a tax return.
      2.   The filing of a fraudulent return.
      3.   Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally determined
to be due.
      4.   Failure to keep books and records.
      5.   Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificates of
registration, if required.
      6.   Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the Illinois
department of revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax
liability.
   (B)   Upon receiving notice from the Illinois department of revenue that a
violation of any of subsections (A)1 through (A)6 of this section have been
corrected or otherwise resolved to the department's satisfaction, the local
liquor control commissioner may vacate an order of revocation. (Ord. 2004-09,
4-5-2004)
3-4-13: BOOKS AND RECORDS AVAILABLE FOR INVESTIGATION AND CONTROL; MAINTENANCE:
It shall be the duty of every licensee to make books and records available upon
reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and control by the Illinois
liquor control commission or the local liquor control commissioner. Such books
and records need not be maintained on the licensed premises, but must be
maintained in the state of Illinois; however, if access is available
electronically, the books and records may be maintained out of state. However,
all original invoices or copies thereof covering purchases of alcoholic liquor
must be retained on the licensed premises for a period of ninety (90) days
after such purchase, unless the Illinois liquor control commission has granted
a waiver in response to a written request in cases where records are kept at a
central business location within the state of Illinois or in cases where books
and records that are available electronically are maintained out of state.
(Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-14: SALE NEAR CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, AND HOSPITALS:
   (A)   No retail liquor dealer's license shall be issued for the sale at
retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church,
school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, or home for aged
or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children, provided, that
this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service,
regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where
sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on; nor to the
renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises
within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school where the church or
school has been established within such one hundred feet (100') since the
issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of one
hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used
for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a retail liquor
dealer's license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor incidental to a
restaurant if: 1) the primary business of the restaurant consists of the sale
of food where the sale of liquor is incidental to the sale of food and the
applicant is a completely new owner of the restaurant, 2) the immediately prior
owner or operator of the premises where the restaurant is located operated the
premises as a restaurant and held a valid retail license authorizing the sale
of alcoholic liquor at the restaurant for at least part of the twenty four (24)
months before the change of ownership, and 3) the restaurant is located seventy
five (75) or more feet from a school.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a retail liquor
dealer's license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic
liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on
the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale
or consumption of alcoholic liquors. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-15: PEDDLING:
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the corporate limits of the
village. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-16: LICENSE TO BE POSTED:
Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
immediately shall post the license so issued in a conspicuous place on the
premises licensed, and shall keep said license so posted during all of the time
said license is in force. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-17: CHANGE OR ENLARGEMENT OF LOCATION:
A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only
to the premises described in the application and license, and only one location
shall be so described in each license. After a license has been granted for
particular premises, such location may be changed or enlarged only upon the
written permission to make such change issued by the local liquor control
commissioner and endorsed upon the license. No change of location shall be
permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor under the laws of this state and the provisions of this
code, and the person requesting the change files with the state liquor control
commission and the local liquor control commissioner a written request in
writing and a statement under oath which shall show that the premises to which
the change is to be made comply in all respects with the requirements of state
law and the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-18: EMPLOYEES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier
of, any infectious or communicable disease, contained in the list of infectious
and communicable diseases published annually by the U.S. secretary of health
and human services, in a capacity that such person may transmit the infectious
or communicable disease through the handling, preparation or distribution of
food or alcoholic liquor; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is
afflicted with, or a carrier of, any such disease to work in a capacity where
the disease may be transmitted through the handling, preparation or
distribution of food or liquor.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to permit any person under the age of twenty one
(21) in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor to serve,
mix, dispense or sell alcoholic liquor or to be otherwise involved in the
handling of such alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-19: RESTRICTED AREAS:
No person shall be granted a retail liquor dealer's license to sell alcoholic
liquor on any property outside the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2004-
09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-20: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The closing hours for all locations in the village that sell or offer for sale
at retail any alcoholic liquor shall be as follows:
   Sunday nights, twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
   Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday nights, one o'clock (1:00) A.M. (the
following morning).
   Friday and Saturday nights, two o'clock (2:00) A.M. (the following morning).
The local liquor control commissioner, with the consent of the village board,
is hereby authorized to extend to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the closing hours on
New Year's Eve, Labor Day and such other special holidays as the village board
may approve by resolution.
All locations in the village that sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor, having an appropriate liquor license, in good standing with
the state of Illinois and village of Roanoke liquor commissions, will be
permitted to begin serving alcoholic beverages and selling package liquor at
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sundays and at six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on weekdays.
This provision shall apply to all of the premises licensed. Hours specified
herein shall mean either Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time,
whichever is being observed within the village. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-21: VIEW FROM STREET:
In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the
premises is licensed, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing
shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises
nor inside such premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of
such licensed premises from the street or sidewalk at all times. (Ord. 2004-09,
4-5-2004)
3-4-22: BOND; FILING OF, CONDITION; FORFEITURE:
Each person desiring a retail dealer's liquor license under this chapter, shall
execute a penal bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with at
least two (2) personal securities or a solvent surety company licensed to do
business in the state of Illinois, to be approved by the president and board of
trustees. Said bond shall be filed with the president at the same time the
application is presented, and shall be conditioned for the faithful observance
by the licensee of the provisions of this chapter and of the laws of the state
of Illinois and of the United States of America, applying to the sale and
possession of alcoholic liquor. If a licensee shall be convicted of the
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the Illinois liquor
control act of 1934, or his license shall be revoked and no appeal is taken
from said order of revocation or any appeal taken therefrom is decided
adversely to the licensee, said bond shall thereupon be forfeited to the
village. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-23: PROHIBITED SALES:
   (A)   1.   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to sell, give, or
deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
or to any intoxicated person. No person, after purchasing or otherwise
obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor
to another person under the age of twenty one (21) years, except in the
performance of a religious ceremony or service. If a licensee or officer,
associate, agent, or employee of the licensee is prosecuted under this
subsection (A) for selling, giving, or delivering alcoholic liquor to a person
under the age of twenty one (21) years, the person under twenty one (21) years
of age who attempted to buy or receive the alcoholic liquor may be prosecuted
pursuant to section
3-4-24 of this chapter, unless the person under twenty one (21) years of age
was acting under the authority of a law enforcement agency, the Illinois liquor
control commission, or the local liquor control commissioner pursuant to a plan
or action to investigate, patrol, or conduct any similar enforcement action.
      2.   For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any
licensee, or his agent or employee shall refuse to sell, deliver, or serve
alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of twenty
one (21) years, if requested by the licensee, agent, employee, or
representative.
However, no agent or employee of the licensee shall be disciplined or
discharged for selling or furnishing liquor to a person under twenty one (21)
years of age if the agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing
liquor to a person under twenty one (21) years of age, adequate written
evidence of age and identity of the person issued by a federal, state, county
or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not
limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate
issued under the federal selective service act, or an identification card
issued to a member of the armed forces. This paragraph, however, shall not
apply if the agent or employee accepted the written evidence knowing it to be
false or fraudulent.
Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a document
issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government, or subdivision or
agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's
license, a registration certificate issued under the federal selective service
act, or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. Proof
that the defendant-licensee, or his employee or agent demanded, was shown and
reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any transaction forbidden by
this section is an affirmative defense in any criminal prosecution therefor or
to any proceedings for the suspension or revocation of any license based
thereon. It shall not, however, be an affirmative defense if the agent or
employee accepted the written evidence knowing it to be false or fraudulent. If
a false or fraudulent Illinois driver's license or Illinois identification card
is presented by a person less than twenty one (21) years of age to a licensee
or the licensee's agent or employee for the purpose of ordering, purchasing,
attempting to purchase, or otherwise obtaining or attempting to obtain the
serving of any alcoholic beverage, the law enforcement officer or agency
investigating the incident shall, upon the conviction of the person who
presented the fraudulent license or identification, make a report of the matter
to the secretary of state on a form provided by the secretary of state.
   (B)   A licensee or an officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or
employee of a licensee may sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to a person
under the age of twenty one (21) years or authorize the sale, gift, or delivery
of alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of twenty one (21) years pursuant
to a plan or action to investigate, patrol, or otherwise conduct a "sting
operation" or enforcement action against a person employed by the licensee or
on any licensed premises if the licensee or officer, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of the licensee provides written notice, at
least fourteen (14) days before the "sting operation" or enforcement action to
the local liquor control commissioner. Notice provided under this section shall
be valid for a "sting operation" or enforcement action conducted within sixty
(60) days of the provision of that notice. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-24: PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE; OTHER PROHIBITIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor, or consume or have
alcoholic liquor in his possession. If a licensee or his or her agents or
employees believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of any
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the age of the prospective recipient,
he or she shall, before making such sale or delivery demand presentation of
some form of positive identification containing proof of age. This subsection
does not apply to possession by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years
making a delivery of alcoholic liquor in pursuance of the order of his or her
parent.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish to any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years any false or fraudulent written,
printed, or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person, or
sell, give or furnish to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
evidence of age and identification of any other person.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to transfer, alter, or deface an identification
card or obtain an identification card by means of false information. It shall
be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to possess
any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity that is false,
fraudulent, or not actually his or her own. It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years to present or offer to any licensee, his
agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and
identity that is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own for the
purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring
or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic beverage.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit his or her
residence to be used by an invitee of the parent's child or the guardian's
ward, if the invitee is under the age of twenty one (21), in a manner that
constitutes a violation of this section. A parent or guardian is deemed to have
permitted his or her residence to be used in violation of this subsection if he
or she knowingly authorizes, enables, or permits such use to occur by failing
to control access to either the residence or the alcoholic liquor maintained in
the residence.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to rent a hotel or motel room from
the proprietor or agent thereof for the purpose of or with the knowledge that
such room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons
under the age of twenty one (21) years.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have alcoholic liquor in his or
her possession on public school district property on school days or at events
on public school district property when children are present, unless the
alcoholic liquor: 1) is in the original container with the seal unbroken and is
in the possession of a person who is not otherwise legally prohibited from
possessing the alcoholic liquor or 2) is in the possession of a person in or
for the performance of a religious service or ceremony authorized by the school
board.
   (G)   The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under twenty
one (21) years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious
service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under twenty one (21) years
of age under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent or
those persons standing in loco parentis of such person under twenty one (21)
years of age in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this section. (Ord.
2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-25: GAMBLING; DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
No gambling shall be permitted and no gambling device shall be kept in any
premises licensed hereunder. No riotous, disorderly, indecent, or offensive
conduct of any kind shall be allowed in or about said premises. (Ord. 2004-09,
4-5-2004)
3-4-26: REVOCATION; SUSPENSION; FINES; NOTICE; HEARING:
   (A)   The local liquor control commissioner may revoke or suspend any retail
liquor dealer's license for any violation of this chapter. In addition to the
suspension, the local liquor control commissioner may levy a fine on the
licensee for such violations of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first
violation within a twelve (12) month period, one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) for a second violation within a twelve (12) month period, and two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent violation
within a twelve (12) month period. Each day on which a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee
during the period of his license. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into
the general corporate fund of the village treasury.
   (B)   No retail liquor dealer's license shall be revoked or suspended and no
licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the local liquor
control commissioner with a three (3) day written notice to the licensee
affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend the charges against
him. All hearings shall be open to the public, and the local liquor control
commissioner shall reduce all evidence to writing and shall maintain an
official record of the proceedings. If the local liquor control commissioner
has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed
premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, he may, upon
the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and
without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than
seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that
period, except that if the licensee is also engaged in the conduct of another
business or businesses on the licensed premises such order shall not be
applicable to the other business or businesses. If the local liquor control
commissioner determines after the hearing that the license should be revoked or
suspended or that the licensee should be fined, he shall within five (5) days
after the hearing state the reason or reasons for such determination in a
written order, and either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension, or
that the license has been revoked, and shall serve a copy of such order within
the five (5) days upon the licensee. (Ord. 2014-05, 6-16-2014)
3-4-27: GRANTING LICENSES AFTER REVOCATION; WAITING PERIOD; DISCRETION:
   (A)   When any retail liquor dealer's license has been revoked for any
cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period of one year
thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling alcoholic liquor in the
premises described in the revoked license unless the revocation order has been
vacated or unless the revocation order was entered as to the licensee only.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a retail liquor
dealer's license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor incidental to a
restaurant if: 1) the primary business of the restaurant consists of the sale
of food where the sale of liquor is incidental to the sale of food and the
applicant is a completely new owner of the restaurant, 2) the immediately prior
owner or operator of the premises where the restaurant is located operated the
premises as a restaurant and held a valid retail liquor dealer's license
authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at the restaurant for at least part of
the twenty four (24) months before the change of ownership, and 3) the
restaurant is located seventy five (75) or more feet from a school. (Ord. 2004-
09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-28: NUDITY ON THE PREMISES WHERE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IS OFFERED FOR SALE:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent or employee or
manager operating a licensed establishment at which alcoholic liquor is offered
for sale for consumption on the licensed premises:
      1.   To permit any female person, while on the premises of said
establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human breast at or
below the areola thereof.
      2.   To permit any female person, while on the premises of said
establishment to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the
appearance of or simulate such portions of the human female breast as described
in subsection (A)1 of this section.
      3.   To permit any person while on the premises of said establishment to
expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal
cleft or cleavage.
      4.   To permit any person, while on the premises of said establishment,
to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or
simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, anal cleft or cleavage.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of
an establishment located within the village, at which alcoholic liquor is
offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view that
area of the human female breast at or below the areola thereof, or to employ
any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance or simulate
such areas of the female breast as described herein.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of an
establishment located within the village, at which alcoholic liquor is offered
for sale for consumption on the premises, to expose to public view his or her
genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage, or to employ
any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate
the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage.
   (D)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be
guilty of an offense against the village punishable as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
3-4-29: SEXUAL CONDUCT PROHIBITED:
The following conduct on premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises is prohibited:
   (A)   The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse,
masturbation or deviate sexual conduct.
   (B)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
genitals, buttocks or female breast.
   (C)   The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts set forth in
subsections (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent, employee or manager
to suffer or permit any person or persons to perform any of the acts set forth
in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.
   (E)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be
guilty of an offense against the village punishable as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2004-09, 4-5-2004)
CHAPTER 5
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: License And Pass Required
3-5-3: Application; Fee; License And Pass
3-5-4: Entrance Upon Private Residence
3-5-5: Location Restrictions
3-5-6: Exemption From License And Pass Requirements
3-5-7: Restriction On Time; Solicitors
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as
set forth herein:
   BROKER: Any person, whether or not the person is an employee of another
person, who takes orders or subscriptions, while traveling house to house or
from place to place in, along or upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places within the village, for future delivery of tangible personal
property or services by a seller, at retail, whether to regular customers or
not, regardless of whether or not such person collects payment for such
property or services at the time of such transaction, but who does not make
delivery of such property or perform such service at that time.
   HAWKER: A peddler who exhibits goods, wares, or merchandise for sale or who
publicly calls out by any means that such goods, wares, or merchandise are for
sale or will be for sale.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT: Any person, whether or not the person is an employee of
another person, who on real property in which he does not hold a fee simple,
ownership, or leasehold interest establishes a display, exhibition or sales
facility for the purpose of selling, offering or displaying for sale and
immediate delivery, or taking orders or subscriptions for the future delivery
of tangible personal property at retail shall be considered an itinerant
merchant for purposes of this chapter if:
   (A)   The display, exhibition or sales facility is established with the
intent that such display, exhibition or sales facility will remain in operation
for a period of less than six (6) months; or
   (B)   The display, exhibition or sales facility is established with the
intent that its operation will be interrupted for a period of more than ninety
(90) days in any calendar year.
   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: Any bona fide charitable, educational, fraternal,
labor, religious or veterans' organization that operates without profit to its
members and which has been in existence continuously for a period of thirty
(30) days or more immediately before conducting business in village limits.
   PEDDLER: Any person, whether or not the person is an employee of another
person, who directly or indirectly sells or offers for sale, barter or exchange
any farm produce, vegetables, dairy products, meat, fish, foods of any kind or
other goods, wares or merchandise of any kind, at retail, making delivery of
said goods at the time of sale regardless of whether or not such person
collects payment at the time of sale, all while traveling from place to place
in, along and upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places within
the city, or while operating from one or more locations outside of a totally
enclosed permanent structure.
   RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by
one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
   SOLICITOR: Any person, including brokers, hawkers, and peddlers, who engages
in any one or more of the following activities on an uninvited, door to door
basis in residential areas that consist of any one or more residences:
   (A)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or
   (B)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind or character; or
   (C)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
   (D)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable, religious,
political or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project; or
   (E)   Seeking to proselytize beliefs by any charitable, religious, political
or nonprofit association, organization, corporation, or project. (Ord. 2007-01,
1-2-2007)
3-5-2: LICENSE AND PASS REQUIRED:
No peddler, hawker, broker, or itinerant merchant shall transact business or
sell or attempt to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise or
any article or thing of value within the village without first having obtained
a license and a "pass" certificate therefor as provided herein. (Ord. 2007-01,
1-2-2007)
3-5-3: APPLICATION; FEE; LICENSE AND PASS:
Any person seeking a license under this chapter shall make an application for
the license to the village clerk on a form provided by the village that
includes the name, permanent address, and phone number of the applicant, the
nature of the applicant's business, the proposed hours of operation and dates
of operation for conducting business in the village, and the name, address, and
phone number of the applicant's employer or principal corporation or firm for
whom the applicant is working. At the time of making such application, the
applicant shall also submit payment in cash to the village clerk a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per day for each day that such applicant shall be conducting
business in the village.
Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee payment, the village
clerk shall issue a license to the applicant. The village clerk shall also
issue a "pass" certificate to the applicant, which shall be openly and publicly
displayed by the applicant whenever the applicant is conducting business in the
village. If applicant does not openly and publicly display the pass certificate
while conducting business in the village, the applicant will be in violation of
this section. All persons representing any applicant must possess and display a
separate pass certificate issued to each individual on behalf of the applicant.
If an applicant business or entity requests a pass certificate for more than
one person who will be representing that particular business or entity, a fee
of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid in cash to the village clerk for
each additional pass certificate issued for that business or entity.
If the village is prohibited by any federal or state law from requiring a
person to obtain a license to conduct business within the village as covered by
this chapter or collecting a fee for such license, a person must still register
with the village and obtain a "pass" certificate to conduct such business
within the village. (Ord. 2009-09, 7-20-2009)
3-5-4: ENTRANCE UPON PRIVATE RESIDENCE:
No person, regardless of whether such person has a valid license and pass
issued under this chapter, shall enter upon or remain upon the premises of a
private residence in the village in disregard of the express written or oral
declaration of the owner or occupant of said private residence, and no person
conducting business within the guidelines set forth in this chapter shall enter
into a private residence without the express permission of the owner or
occupant. Any conduct in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-2-2007)
3-5-5: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No person, regardless of whether such person has a valid license and pass
issued under this chapter, shall for the purpose of dispensing or displaying
any goods, wares, foodstuff or other merchandise or tangible personal property
of any nature whatsoever: a) erect or place any temporary or permanent stand,
cart, wagon or other structure or vehicle upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
other location owned or maintained by the village or on private property
without the express permission of the owner or occupant of the property; or b)
go upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other place owned or maintained by the
village while making any noise, blowing any horn or using any like device to
call attention to his goods, wares, foodstuff, or other merchandise. (Ord.
2007-01, 1-2-2007)
3-5-6: EXEMPTION FROM LICENSE AND PASS REQUIREMENTS:
The following persons shall be exempt from the application, license, and pass
requirements of this chapter:
   (A)   Prior Invitation: Any person who, for the purpose of selling or taking
orders for the sale of merchandise or services, has been previously invited by
the occupant of a residence to call thereon.
   (B)   Nonprofit Organization: Any person selling, peddling, soliciting or
taking orders for any goods or services not prohibited by law on behalf of a
nonprofit organization sponsored by or participated in by a local chapter of
such organization or by a national nonprofit organization that is properly
registered with the state of Illinois as a nonprofit organization.
   (C)   Celebration: Any person selling, peddling, soliciting or taking orders
for any goods or services not prohibited by law while conducting business as a
part of the annual Roanoke Festival or other similar community celebration
activity.
   (D)   Farmers Or Gardeners: Any person who sells the produce of his own
farm, vineyard, orchard or garden, provided he does not obstruct streets,
sidewalks or other public places within the city; provided, however, that
nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize the sale of alcoholic,
spirituous, malt or other intoxicating liquors or peddling of any kind
whatsoever in any public place or park.
   (E)   Newspaper Vendors: Any person who peddles newspapers. (Ord. 2007-01,
1-2-2007)
3-5-7: RESTRICTION ON TIME; SOLICITORS:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
solicitor, regardless of whether such person has a valid license and pass
issued under this chapter, to go upon any residential premises and ring the
doorbell upon or near any door of such residence located thereon, or rap or
knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to
attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of
soliciting as herein defined, on Monday through Saturday prior to eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., or at any time on Sunday. (Ord.
2014-05, 6-16-2014)
CHAPTER 6
FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
SECTION:
3-6-1: Compliance With Chapter
3-6-2: Tax Imposed
3-6-3: Agent To Report
3-6-4: Action To Recover Tax
3-6-5: Company In Default
3-6-1: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
It shall be unlawful for any corporation or association, not incorporated under
the laws of the state of Illinois, to engage in the village in effecting fire
insurance or to transact any business of fire insurance in the village, while
in default by not fully complying with any of the requirements of this chapter
and until such requirements shall have been fully complied with, but this
provision shall not relieve any company, corporation or association from the
payment of any risk that may be undertaken in violation of this chapter. (Ord.
166, 1-3-1939)
3-6-2: TAX IMPOSED:
Any such corporation, company or association not incorporated under the laws of
the state of Illinois which is engaged in the village in effecting fire
insurance, shall pay the village treasurer, for the maintenance, use and
benefit of the fire department of the village, a sum of money equal in amount
to two percent (2%) per annum of the gross receipts received as premiums upon
fire insurance policies by any and all agents of such corporation, company or
association, during the year ending on July 1 in each year, for any insurance
effected or agreed to be effected on property located in the village by or with
such corporation, company or association during such period. (Ord. 166, 1-3-
1939)
3-6-3: AGENT TO REPORT:
Every person acting in the village as agent for or on behalf of any such
corporation, company or association shall, on or before July 15 of each and
every year, render the village clerk a full, true and just account verified by
his oath, of all premiums upon fire insurance policies which during the year
ending July 1 preceding such report shall have been received by him, or by some
other person for him, in his behalf of any such corporation, company or
association on property located in the village. Such agent shall also at the
time of rendering the aforesaid report, pay to the village treasurer, the sum
of money for which the company, corporation or association represented by him
is chargeable by virtue of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 166, 1-3-1939)
3-6-4: ACTION TO RECOVER TAX:
The sum of money for which such company, corporation or association is so
chargeable may be recovered of it, or its agents or agent, by an action in the
name of and for the use of the village as for money had and received. Nothing
in this section shall be held to exempt any person, corporation, company or
association from indictment and conviction under the provisions of an act
entitled "an act to enable cities, towns and villages organized under any
general or special law, to levy and collect a tax or license fee from foreign
insurance companies for the benefit of organized fire departments", in force
July 1, 1895 1 . (Ord. 166, 1-3-1939)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.
3-6-5: COMPANY IN DEFAULT:
No insurance agent in the village shall have any insurance business or dealings
with any company, association or corporation not incorporated under the laws of
this state, which shall be in default for not reporting or making payments as
hereinbefore provided until it shall have complied with all the requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 166, 1-3-1939)
CHAPTER 7
CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-7-1: License; Sewer Hookup
3-7-2: General Liability Insurance
3-7-3: Workers' Compensation Insurance
3-7-4: Contract Bid Specifications
3-7-1: LICENSE; SEWER HOOKUP:
   (A)   License Required: Every contractor seeking to construct sewer hookups
in the village shall first make an application to the village clerk and obtain
a contractor's license therefor from the village clerk.
   (B)   Fee: The village clerk shall collect from each applicant the sum of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) with such application.
   (C)   Bond: Before any contractor is issued a sewer hookup contractor's
license, the contractor shall give to the village a bond in the amount of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for faithful performance.
   (D)   Insurance Coverage: Prior to performing any services in the village or
constructing any sewer hookups, such contractor shall also give evidence to the
village clerk of insurance coverage as required under the provisions of this
chapter.
   (E)   Materials And Construction: Every contractor shall construct sewer
hookups in accordance with the standards and specifications set forth in title
7, chapter 2 of this code; title 8, chapter 5 of this code; and other relevant
provisions of this code.
   (F)   Term: A contractor's license issued under this section shall be valid
for a twelve (12) month period and must be renewed if services are to be
provided after the expiration of this twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 2014-05,
6-16-2014)
3-7-2: GENERAL LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   (A)   Any contractor or subcontractor who agrees to perform any services for
the village shall carry and maintain general liability insurance in an amount
not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence with
an aggregate limit not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). If the
contractor or subcontractor is to perform any service whereby the contractor or
subcontractor, including their employees or agents, will be using a motor
vehicle in any aspect of performing the contracted service for the village, the
contractor or subcontractor shall also carry and maintain separate automobile
(vehicle) liability insurance coverage in an amount not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit (per accident).
   (B)   Any contractor or subcontractor performing services for the village
shall provide the necessary certificates of insurance in the general
commercially accepted format as proof of carrying and maintaining the required
general liability insurance limits and automobile liability insurance limits as
set forth in this section. The certificates of insurance shall be provided to
the village clerk at the village hall before the contractor begins any work for
the village. The certificate of insurance shall include a clause that any and
all such contractors doing business in the village under that certificate waive
their subrogation rights in favor of the village. Furthermore, the village
shall be listed as an additional insured under the contractor's and
subcontractor's general liability insurance coverage, which shall be listed on
the certificate of insurance provided to the village. Also, the contractor or
subcontractor shall ensure that the insurance company or carrier providing its
coverage will notify the village if the insurance coverage for the contractor
or subcontractor is revoked, canceled, or otherwise terminated during the
period when the contractor or subcontractor is performing services for the
village.
   (C)   Contractors shall ensure that any subcontractors used by the
contractor carry and maintain general liability insurance to the limits as
provided herein and otherwise comply with the requirements of this section. The
contractor shall be responsible for providing its subcontractor's certificates
of insurance to the village clerk.
   (D)   Contractors or subcontractors doing business with the village on a
regular or on call basis shall annually file certificates of insurance with the
village and shall ensure that such insurance coverage is maintained throughout
the following twelve (12) month period. These certificates of insurance shall
be provided every year to the village clerk at the village hall on or before
the beginning of the village's fiscal year, which is May 1.
   (E)   The village board may adjust the amounts of required general liability
insurance provided herein for an individual contract, which includes the waiver
of this entire section or any requirements of this section, but may only do so
by proper passage of a formal resolution or ordinance by a majority vote of the
village board that addresses the individual contract. However, if the bid
specifications for a public works project require general insurance limits at a
higher level than required by this section, then this section shall impose such
higher general insurance limits set forth in the bid specifications to such
public works contract, rather than the limits set forth in this section.
   (F)   The insurance coverage requirements set forth in this section and
section
3-7-3 of this chapter shall also apply to contractors, and their
subcontractors, performing services at special events for the village or on
village property, including parades on the village streets, events where
alcoholic beverages are served, the annual Roanoke Festival, and the annual
fireworks show. If the sponsoring party for the special event is not the
village, then the sponsoring party shall also be required to comply with the
insurance coverage requirements set forth in this section and section
3-7-3 of this chapter. Based upon the nature of the special event, the village
board shall retain the discretion to increase or otherwise modify the insurance
coverage requirements for the particular special event. (Ord. 2005-08, 1-3-
2006)
3-7-3: WORKERS' COMPENSATION INSURANCE:
   (A)   Any contractor or subcontractor who agrees to perform any services for
the village shall carry and maintain workers' compensation insurance coverage
meeting the statutory limits required under Illinois law. This workers'
compensation insurance coverage shall be required for all contractors or
subcontractors, including contractors or subcontractors that are sole
proprietors or individual business owners that do not employ any workers to
perform services for the village. Any contractor or subcontractor performing
services for the village shall provide proof of the required workers'
compensation insurance coverage by including this coverage on the certificate
of insurance that is provided to the village as evidence of required insurance
coverage under section
3-7-2 of this chapter. The certificate of insurance shall expressly provide
that any and all contractors doing business in the village under that
certificate have the coverage required under this section for anyone doing work
on a village project as described herein, including sole proprietors or
individual business owners.
   (B)   Contractors shall ensure that any subcontractors used by the
contractor carry and maintain workers' compensation insurance as provided
herein and otherwise comply with the requirements of this section. The
contractor shall be responsible for providing its subcontractor's certificates
of insurance evidencing workers' compensation insurance coverage to the village
clerk.
   (C)   Contractors or subcontractors doing business with the village on a
regular or on call basis, shall provide proof of workers' compensation
insurance coverage with their annually filed certificates of insurance as
required under section
3-7-2 of this chapter.
   (D)   The village board may waive the requirements of this section for an
individual contract, but may only do so by proper passage of a formal
resolution or ordinance by a majority vote of the village board that addresses
the individual contract. (Ord. 2005-08, 1-3-2006)
3-7-4: CONTRACT BID SPECIFICATIONS:
When bid specifications or documents are issued for projects requiring services
to be performed by a contractor or subcontractor, village officials shall
include the insurance coverage requirements set forth in sections
3-7-2 and
3-7-3 of this chapter in the bid specifications or documents. If different
insurance coverage requirements than the requirements set forth in sections
3-7-2 and
3-7-3 of this chapter are approved by the village board or if a public works
project requires a higher level of insurance coverage, such insurance coverage
requirements shall be set forth in the bid specifications or documents.
However, if insurance coverage requirements are omitted from the bid
specifications or documents, the contractor awarded the contract by the
village, and any subcontractors doing work under the contract, shall still be
required to comply with all requirements of sections
3-7-2 and
3-7-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-08, 1-3-2006)
CHAPTER 8
PUBLIC DANCES; DANCE HALLS
SECTION:
3-8-1: License Required
3-8-2: Fee
3-8-3: Revocation
3-8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall have, hold, carry on, conduct or maintain any public dance, or
keep and maintain any hall, room or place for public dances, within the limits
of the village without first having obtained a license for the same. (R.O.
1908, Ord. 32)
3-8-2: FEE:
Any person desiring to obtain a license for a public dance for which admission
is charged shall first pay the village treasurer the sum of three dollars
($3.00) per dance. The license fee must be paid in advance of issuing the
license; provided that, no license shall be granted for the purpose of having,
holding, carrying on or maintaining dances in any building wherein intoxicating
liquors are sold or in any building adjacent thereto and connected therewith by
hallway, covered way, opposite doors with connected sidewalk or in any other
manner. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 32; amd. 1974 Code; Ord. 75-6, 5-19-1975)
3-8-3: REVOCATION:
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the
president or board of trustees of the village when such dances or places where
dances are being held hereunder are not being conducted according to law or the
provisions of this code. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 32)
CHAPTER 9
TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-9-1: License Required
3-9-2: Fee
3-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a taxicab or omnibus for the transportation of persons
within the limits of the village without first having obtained a license for
the same. (Ord. 295, 3-2-1959)
3-9-2: FEE:
Any person desiring to obtain a license for the operation of a taxicab or
omnibus for the transportation of persons shall first pay to the village clerk
the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), which sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) is
hereby fixed as the amount to be charged for a license to operate such taxicab
or omnibus for the transportation of persons, payable May 1 in each year. (Ord.
2014-05, 6-16-2014)
CHAPTER 10
BILLPOSTING
SECTION:
3-10-1: License Required
3-10-2: License Term; Fee
3-10-3: Revocation
3-10-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to print, post, paint, nail or otherwise
affix any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind in the
village except as otherwise provided herein upon any curbstone, flagstone or
any other part of any sidewalk or pavement or upon any tree, electric light
pole, telephone pole, telegraph pole, bulletin board, fence or hydrant or upon
any private door, walk, gate or fence without the written consent of the
president of the village or the owner of said private walk, door, gate or
fence, and not then unless the person so doing shall have first obtained from
the village clerk a license provided for in this chapter duly signed by the
president and village clerk and having affixed thereto the seal of the village.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall in any way restrain or limit the right
of any person to post notices of public sales or such legal notices as may be
required by this code or by the statutes of the state of Illinois or notices
required to be posted by any order of any court in the state, nor shall it
restrict or limit the owner or lessee of any permanent building in his bona
fide use of the said premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or peddle any handbills,
circulars or like advertisements on the streets, alleys or public grounds of
the village without having first obtained from the clerk a proper license
signed by the president and clerk and having affixed thereto the seal of the
village. (Ord. 92, 10-2-1916)
3-10-2: LICENSE TERM; FEE:
Licenses under this chapter shall be granted for a period of one year upon the
payment to the clerk of an annual fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and no
person shall be deemed duly licensed until he shall have paid said amount as
above provided and shall have received a proper license duly signed by the
president and clerk, and with the seal of the village attached thereto. (Ord.
2014-05, 6-16-2014)
3-10-3: REVOCATION:
It shall be the duty of the president of the village to revoke the license of
any billposter or bill peddler who shall have been found guilty of a violation
of this chapter. (Ord. 92, 10-2-1916)
CHAPTER 11
AUCTION HOUSES
SECTION:
3-11-1: License Required
3-11-2: Fee
3-11-3: One Person
3-11-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, his agent or servant shall establish, keep or maintain an auction
house within the village, or sell property of any kind at any place within the
village at auction, or sell property by calling out a price, and so proceeding
until the article or articles are sold at a higher or lower price than that
originally called, within the village, without first having obtained a license
therefor from the village. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 33)
3-11-2: FEE:
There shall be charged and collected for each and every license issued under
the provisions of this chapter, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day;
provided, that a license may be granted and issued under the provisions of this
chapter for the period of one month for the sum of one thousand two hundred
dollars ($1,200.00), payable in advance. (Ord. 2014-05, 6-16-2014)
3-11-3: ONE PERSON:
No license issued under this chapter shall authorize more than one person to
sell under it; and every license for an auction house shall describe such house
and its location, and shall not authorize the licensee to keep an auction, or
to sell at auction at any other place or house than the place or house
described in said license. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 33)
CHAPTER 12
OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-12-1: Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-12-2: Service Occupation Tax
3-12-1: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the Village at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this Section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file on or
before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department
of Revenue required by Section Three of "An Act in Relation to a Tax upon
Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to
Purchasers for Use or Consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (Ord. 69-7; 8-
4-69)
3-12-2: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the Municipality in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost
price of all tangible personal property transferred by servicemen either in the
form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident
to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for Municipal Service
Occupation Tax for the benefit of this Municipality shall file, on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of
Revenue, required by 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/901 of the "Service
Occupation Tax Act".
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Ord. 69-8; 8-4-69)
CHAPTER 13
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
SECTION:
3-13-1: Purpose
3-13-2: Definitions
3-13-3: Acceptance; Effective Date
3-13-4: Term Of Franchise
3-13-5: Revocation Of Franchise And Other Penalties
3-13-6: Transfer Of Cable Television System
3-13-7: Authority Granted By The Franchise
3-13-8: Franchise Fee
3-13-9: Limitations Of Franchise
3-13-10: Additional Village Rights In Franchise
3-13-11: Service Area
3-13-12: Time For Providing Service
3-13-13: Condition Of Use Of Streets
3-13-14: System Design And Channel Capacity
3-13-15: Interconnection
3-13-16: Service To Government Buildings
3-13-17: Parental Control Devices
3-13-18: Construction Standards
3-13-19: Operational Standards And Performance Monitoring
3-13-20: Rates And Charges
3-13-21: Rights Of Individuals
3-13-22: Liability And Indemnification
3-13-23: Insurance
3-13-24: Filing And Communications With Regulatory Agencies
3-13-25: Reports
3-13-26: Franchise Renewal
3-13-27: Franchise Required
3-13-28: Unauthorized Connections Or Modifications
3-13-29: Notice
3-13-30: Severability
3-13-31: State Franchise Holder
3-13-1: PURPOSE:
The village of Roanoke finds that the continued development of cable
communication has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the
citizens of the village, and, because of the complex and rapidly changing
technology associated with cable communications, the village further finds that
the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by
establishing and maintaining regulatory powers which should be vested in the
village or such village officials as the village shall designate. It is the
intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the
means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these
matters. Further, it is recognized that cable communications systems have the
capacity to provide not only entertainment and information services to the
county's residents, but can provide additional services.
For these purposes, the following goals underlie the provisions contained
herein:
   (A)   Where economically reasonable, cable television services should be
made available to all village residents.
   (B)   The system should be capable of accommodating both the present and
reasonably foreseeable future cable television needs of the citizens of the
village. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the
context, the words and phrases defined in this section shall have the following
meanings when used in this chapter:
   CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, as amended, 47 USC
section 521 et seq.
   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE: The provision of television reception,
communications and/or entertainment services for direct or indirect
compensation, or as otherwise provided by this chapter, and distributing the
same over a cable television system.
   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM: A facility consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable television service to multiple
subscribers within a community, not including a facility or combination of
facilities that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more
television broadcast stations, or a facility or combination of facilities that
serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common
ownership, control or management, unless such facility or facilities use any
public right of way or public utility easement.
   CHANNEL: A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum (or any other
means of transmission, including, but not limited to, optical fibers) which is
capable of carrying the equivalent of one 6-megahertz television broadcast
signal and includes uses of all or any portion of such band of frequencies.
   COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER: All subscribers not defined as either residential or
noncommercial.
   FCC: The federal communications commission.
   FRANCHISE: The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this chapter to
construct, operate, and maintain a cable television system along the public
rights of way within all of the village. Any such authorization, in whatever
form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the
privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the village as
required by other ordinances and laws of the village.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contract entered into between the village and the
grantee pursuant to this chapter, containing additional provisions of the
franchise granted.
   GRANTEE: The person, partnership, firm, or corporation to whom a
"franchise", as herein defined, is granted by the village council under this
chapter and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person, firm,
or corporation.
   GROSS REVENUES: The following types of revenue received by a grantee
directly from the operations of a cable television system in the village.
Regular subscriber service fees, per channel pay services, leased channel
revenues, converter and remote control rental revenues.
   NONCOMMERCIAL: Any public, educational or governmental institution.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or
organization of any kind.
   RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER: A subscriber who receives cable television service
in a single-family home or in an individual dwelling unit of a multiple
dwelling, where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business
trade or profession.
   SERVICE AREA: The geographical area within the incorporated limits of the
village as now exist or hereafter are expanded.
   STATE FRANCHISE HOLDER: A holder of a franchise issued by the state of
Illinois to a cable and video provider pursuant to the state franchise law. For
a state franchise holder, "gross revenues" shall be defined as provided under
the state franchise law.
   STATE FRANCHISE LAW: The Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007 1
, as may be amended from time to time.
   STREET(S): The surface of and the space above and below any publicly owned
or maintained property or right of way, street, road, highway, freeway, land,
path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive, now or hereafter existing as
such within the village.
   SUBSCRIBER: Any person or entity lawfully receiving any portion of the cable
television service of a grantee pursuant to this chapter.
   VILLAGE: The village of Roanoke.
   VILLAGE COUNCIL: The village council of the village of Roanoke, state of
Illinois. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995; amd. Ord. 2014-09, 12-2-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/21-101 et seq.
3-13-3: ACCEPTANCE; EFFECTIVE DATE:
   (A)   Within thirty (30) days after final action granting a franchise, which
shall be done by resolution of the village council, the grantee shall file with
the village clerk a written acceptance acknowledged before a notary public of
the conditions required for the franchise. Such acceptance shall acknowledge
that the grantee agrees to be bound by and to comply with the provisions of
this chapter, the franchise agreement (if any) and applicable law and shall be
in such form and content as to be satisfactory to and approved by the village
attorney. If such acceptance is not filed within said time, then the franchise
so awarded may be deemed void and of no further force and effect and the offer
of franchise so awarded to grantee may stand revoked, at the option of the
village.
   (B)   Concurrently with the filing of the written acceptance, the grantee
shall file with the village clerk the bond and insurance certificate required
by this chapter.
   (C)   The effective date of the franchise shall be the first day of the
first month next following the date on which the grantee files the acceptance,
bond and insurance certificate as required herein; provided, however, if any of
the material required to be filed with the acceptance or the acceptance itself
is defective or fails to meet with approval, the franchise shall not be
effective until such defect is cured, or such approval is obtained. (Ord. 1995-
2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-4: TERM OF FRANCHISE:
The duration of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall not be more
than fifteen (15) years from the effective date. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-5: REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE AND OTHER PENALTIES:
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, the village reserves the
right to revoke, at any time, any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all
rights and privileges associated therewith in the event that:
      1.   Grantee has not substantially complied with a material provision of
this chapter, the franchise agreement, or of any supplemental written agreement
entered into by and between the village and the grantee; or
      2.   Grantee has made a material false statement in the application for
the franchise, knowing it to be false, or grantee commits a fraud in its
conduct or relations under the franchise with the village; or
      3.   Grantee becomes insolvent, enters into receivership or liquidation,
files for bankruptcy or assignment for benefit of creditors, is unable to pay
its debts as they mature, unless the grantee is in due process of contesting
such debts; or
      4.   Grantee fails to comply with any final federal or state judgment
arising directly from the exercise of the grantee's rights under its franchise;
or
      5.   Grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the
bond and insurance policies required by this chapter; or
      6.   Grantee assigns, sells or transfers its title or interest in its
franchise without the consent of the village council.
   (B)   In the event that the village shall make a preliminary decision to
revoke a franchise granted hereunder, it shall give the grantee a minimum of
sixty (60) days' written notice of its intention to terminate and stipulate the
cause. A public hearing shall be scheduled for the end of said sixty (60) day
period. If during said period, the cause shall be cured to the satisfaction of
the village, the village shall declare the notice to be null and void. If the
cause is not cured to the satisfaction of the village, before a franchise may
be terminated, the grantee must be provided with an opportunity to be heard
before the village council in a public hearing in accordance with due process
procedures. After the public hearing, if the village determines that the
franchise should be terminated, it shall issue a written decision containing
its findings of fact and stating the specific grounds for termination. The
decision to terminate a franchise shall be subject to judicial review as
provided by law.
   (C)   A grantee shall not be declared in default or be subject to any
sanction under any provision of this chapter in any case where the action
justifying such sanction is without the grantee's knowledge or authorization or
outside its control. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-6: TRANSFER OF CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM:
   (A)   No transfer of control of the cable television system other than a pro
forma transfer to a parent or a wholly owned subsidiary corporation, or to a
partnership with the same general partner as grantee, or hypothecation as the
result of a commercial loan shall take place, whether by force or voluntary
sale, lease, assignment, foreclosure, attachment, merger, or any other form of
disposition, without prior notice to and approval by the village council, which
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The notice shall include full
identifying particulars of the proposed transaction. For the purpose of
determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition
of control, the village may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective
controlling party and the grantee shall assist the village in any such inquiry.
The village shall have ninety (90) days within which to approve or disapprove,
by resolution, the proposed transfer of control. If the village fails to act
within said ninety (90) day period, the application to transfer control or
assign the franchise shall be deemed to be granted.
   (B)   Approval of such transfer shall be expressly conditioned upon full
compliance with the material terms of the franchise and this chapter. The
transferee shall agree in writing to comply with all provisions of this chapter
and the franchise agreement.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the term "control" is not limited to
majority stock ownership, but includes actual working control in whatever
manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has
occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or
group of affiliated persons of twenty five percent (25%) of the voting shares
of the grantee. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-7: AUTHORITY GRANTED BY THE FRANCHISE:
   (A)   The grantee of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter or to a state franchise holder shall, subject to the conditions
and restrictions set out in this chapter, be authorized to construct or have
constructed, operate, and maintain a cable television system, and to engage in
the business of providing "cable television service" in the village as defined
herein and in the franchise and for that purpose to erect, install, construct,
repair, replace, reconstruct and maintain such poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the
cable television system; provided, however, that before any pole, wire, or
other thing mentioned above which is necessary and appurtenant to the cable
television system is placed on or within any street, the required permits to do
so must be obtained by the grantee from the village. It shall be unlawful for
any telephone, telegraph, or power company, or any other public utility company
or person, to lease or otherwise make available to any person, any poles,
lines, facilities, equipment, or other property for use in connection with the
operation of a cable television system or the provision of cable television
service, unless such other person holds a valid franchise granted pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter or is a state franchise holder.
   (B)   The authority granted to a grantee pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter is not and shall not be deemed to be an exclusive right or permission.
The village expressly reserves the right to grant one or more nonexclusive
franchises to operate a cable television system to other persons for the entire
franchise area at any time under the same substantive terms and conditions as
apply to the existing grantee. No such additional franchise granted by the
village shall in any way affect the obligations of any other grantee.
   (C)   If the village grants an additional franchise under this chapter which
contains terms deemed more favorable by any existing grantee, said existing
grantee may elect to incorporate said terms or provisions into its existing
franchise upon notice to the village. (Ord. 2014-09, 12-2-2014)
3-13-8: FRANCHISE FEE:
   (A)   Because the village finds that the administration of a franchise
granted pursuant to this chapter imposes upon the village additional regulatory
responsibility and expense, a grantee of any franchise hereunder shall pay to
the village, within ninety (90) days after the end of its fiscal year, an
annual sum equal to five percent (5.0%) of its gross revenues. This fee shall
be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or may be required hereafter
to be paid pursuant to any federal, state, or local law. This fee shall be
deemed to reimburse the village for all costs of regulating the cable
television system of the grantee and shall cover the expense of all regulatory
requirements including, but not limited to, any performance testing required by
the village under the terms of this chapter and any renewal or transfer
procedures arising hereunder.
   (B)   Acceptance of payments hereunder shall not be construed as a release
or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the village may have for further
or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any
other obligations hereunder. (Ord. 2015-14, 9-21-2015)
3-13-9: LIMITATIONS OF FRANCHISE:
   (A)   In addition to the limitations otherwise herein appearing, the
franchise is subject to the limitation that the grantee shall at all times
during the life of any franchise hereunder be subject to the lawful exercise of
its police power by the village and other duly authorized regulatory state and
federal bodies and shall comply with any and all ordinances which the village
has adopted or shall adopt applying to the public generally and shall be
subject to all laws of the state of Illinois and the United States.
   (B)   Time shall be of the essence in any franchise granted hereunder. The
grantee shall not be relieved of its obligations to comply promptly with a
provision of this chapter by the failure of the village to enforce compliance.
Failure of the village to enforce any breach by the grantee shall not
constitute a waiver by the village.
   (C)   Any poles, cable, electronic equipment or other appurtenances of the
grantee to be installed in, under, over, along, across or upon a street shall
be so located so as to cause minimum interference with the public use of the
streets and to cause minimum interference with the rights of other users of the
streets or of property owners who adjoin any of the streets.
   (D)   In the event of disturbance of any street, other public property, or
private property by the grantee, it shall, at its own expense and using
reasonable efforts, replace and restore property to the condition existing
before the work was done.
   (E)   Grantee shall contract, maintain and operate the cable television
system so as to cause minimum inconvenience to the general public. All
excavations shall be properly guarded and protected. All excavations shall be
filled and the surface restored promptly after completion of the work at the
grantee's sole cost and expense. The grantee shall at all times comply with all
excavation ordinances of the village.
   (F)   The grantee shall, upon reasonable notice from any person holding a
building moving permit issued by the village, temporarily alter its facilities
to permit the moving of such building. The actual cost of such altering shall
be borne by the person requesting the altering and the grantee shall have the
right to request payment in advance. For the provisions of this subsection,
"reasonable notice" shall be construed to mean at least seventy two (72) hours
prior to the move.
   (G)   If, at any time, in case of fire or disaster in the village it shall
become necessary in the judgment of the village manager or the chief of the
fire department or their designee to cut or move any of the wires, cable
amplifiers, appliances, or appurtenances thereto of the grantee, such cutting
or moving may be done and any repairs rendered necessary thereby shall be made
by the grantee at no expense to the village. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-10: ADDITIONAL VILLAGE RIGHTS IN FRANCHISE:
   (A)   The village reserves the right upon reasonable notice to require the
grantee at his expense to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or
remove from the streets any property of the grantee by reason of traffic
conditions, public safety, street construction or excavation, change or
establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes,
power or communication lines, tracts, or other types of structure or
improvements by governmental agencies. "Reasonable notice" for this subsection
shall be construed to mean at least thirty (30) days, except in the case of
emergencies, where no specific notice period shall be required.
   (B)   In the event of the failure by the grantee to complete any work
required by subsection (A) of this section or any work required by village law
or ordinance within the time established, the village may cause such work to be
done and the grantee shall reimburse the village the reasonable costs thereof
within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such cost.
   (C)   The village reserves the right, in the event of an emergency or
disaster, to require the grantee to make available to the village, upon
request, grantee's audio override, if any, and community channel, if any, at no
cost, for emergency use during such emergency or disaster period.
   (D)   The village reserves the right during the life of any franchise
hereunder to inspect, upon reasonable notice, at all reasonable hours, the
grantee's contracts and engineering records dealing with gross revenue and
technical service provided by grantee, provided that information pertaining to
service to individual subscribers will be available pursuant to section 631 of
the cable act.
   (E)   The Village reserves the right during the life of any franchise
granted hereunder, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles or in
the conduits of a grantee any wire and pole fixtures necessary for Municipal
networks such as police and fire, on the condition that such installations and
maintenance thereof do not interfere with the operations of the grantee.
   (F)   The Village reserves the right during the life of any franchise
granted hereunder, to reasonably inspect all construction or installation work
performed subject to the provisions of the Ordinance to ensure compliance with
the terms of the Ordinance. At its own expense, the Village may also perform
measurements upon and randomly inspect any portion of a grantee's system to
ensure compliance with the technical standards under which the grantee is
authorized to operate, provided that such measurement or inspection does not
interfere with the operation of the cable television system.
   (G)   At any time during the term of the franchise, and upon thirty (30)
days' written notice to grantee, the Village reserves the right to hold a
public hearing for the expressed purpose of reviewing the general and specific
performance of the grantee with regard to all franchise provisions contained
herein or in any franchise agreement issued hereunder.
   (H)   Any right or power in or duty impressed upon any officer, employee,
department, or board of the Village shall be subject to transfer by the Village
Council by law to any other officer, employee, department or board of the
Village. The Village reserves all rights not specifically granted herein, and
the enumeration of the rights herein shall not be construed to be a limitation
of any right or power the Village may otherwise have. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-11: SERVICE AREA:
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of subsection (B) below, the grantee of any
franchise hereunder shall offer cable television service to all potential
residential subscribers who are located within the Village limits as of the
effective date of the franchise. Subject to the provisions of subsection (B) of
this Section, the grantee shall offer cable television service to all potential
residential subscribers within any area described in any annexation ordinance
passed after the passage of this Ordinance, within one year of the effective
date of the said annexation ordinance.
   (B)   The grantee of any franchise hereunder shall offer cable television
service to all potential residential subscribers located within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of the grantee's feeder cable where there exists a minimum
density of thirty five (35) dwelling units per mile. The grantee may elect, but
has no obligation, to offer cable television service to areas not meeting the
above standard.
   (C)   In the event the continued use of a street is denied for any
reasonable reason related to public health, safety or welfare, the grantee will
make every reasonable effort to provide residential service over alternate
routes. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-12: TIME FOR PROVIDING SERVICE:
Unless otherwise authorized by the Village Council, all areas meeting the
requirements of Section
3-13-11 of this Chapter subsequent to the effective date of a franchise granted
pursuant to this Chapter shall be offered cable television service within
twelve (12) months of the effective date of the annexation. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-
1995)
3-13-13: CONDITION OF USE OF STREETS:
   (A)   The poles used for a distribution system shall be, to the extent
possible, those erected and maintained by either a power company or a telephone
company, or both. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, no
poles except replacements for existing poles shall be erected by or for the
grantee, in any street, except when necessary to service a subscriber. Any
poles, wires, cable or other facilities to be constructed or installed by
grantee on or within the streets shall be constructed or installed only at such
locations and depths and in such a manner as to comply with all State statutes
and rules and regulations of the State of Illinois, the Village, and any other
agency of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   The installation of trunk and distribution lines, including service
drops to subscribers, shall be made underground in areas where both telephone
and power lines are underground or are placed underground and the service poles
are removed. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-14: SYSTEM DESIGN AND CHANNEL CAPACITY:
The cable television system shall be constructed and operated in a manner as
set forth in this Chapter. The cable television system shall have a capacity of
at least 300 MHz bandwidth and shall be constructed and operated in a manner as
set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-15: INTERCONNECTION:
Where economically reasonable and technically possible, the grantee may connect
its system with other cable systems adjoining it so as to provide the widest
possible combination of programming in the most efficient manner. (Ord. 1995-2,
5-1-1995)
3-13-16: SERVICE TO GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS:
The grantee shall, upon written request therefor, provide and furnish without
charge to all public educational institutions and governmental buildings within
the service area and within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the grantee's
existing distribution cable, one service outlet. The institutions shall be
entitled to receive, free of charge, the grantee's basic cable television
service. Service installations to additional outlets of all public educational
and governmental buildings shall be charged at the rate set by applicable law.
(Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-17: PARENTAL CONTROL DEVICES:
The grantee shall at all times have available parental control devices for the
purpose of controlling premium television programming on individual subscriber
television sets. The grantee shall have the right to charge reasonable fees for
the use of such devices. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-18: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain the cable
television system in a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances,
construction standards, governmental requirements and the construction and
operational standards contained in this Chapter and any franchise agreement.
   (B)   All installation and maintenance of electronic equipment shall be of a
permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the applicable
sections of the National Electric Safety Code, the National Electrical Code of
the National Bureau of Fire Underwriters and all State and local codes where
applicable.
   (C)   Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted,
erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations
of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable local or State
codes and regulations.
   (D)   All construction methods and standards shall conform to standard
industry practices at the time of construction, and as specified herein and in
any franchise agreement.
   (E)   Any contractor used by a grantee for construction, installation,
operation, maintenance, or repair of system equipment must be properly licensed
under the laws of the state to which the contractor is licensed, and all local
ordinances.
   (F)   The Village does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps showing the
horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In public rights of
way, where necessary, the locations shall be verified by excavation. (Ord.
1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-19: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS AND PERFORMANCE MONITORING:
   (A)   The cable television system shall be operated in compliance with the
service standards established by the National Cable Television Association.
   (B)   The grantee shall put, keep and maintain all parts of the system in
good condition throughout the entire franchise term.
   (C)   The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such
interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur
during periods of minimum system use.
      1.   Service repair response time to a subscriber outage call shall not
exceed forty eight (48) hours, except on weekends and holidays or in
circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the grantee; and
      2.   Trained technicians shall respond on a twenty four (24) hour day,
seven (7) days a week basis whenever ten (10) or more verifiable subscriber
complaints of outage are received.
      3.   The grantee shall have a local, publicly listed telephone number.
The grantee shall provide the means to accept complaint calls twenty four (24)
hours a day, seven (7) days a week. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-20: RATES AND CHARGES:
Grantee shall file with the Village schedules which shall describe all services
offered, all rates and charges of any kind, and all terms and conditions
relating thereto. Grantee shall have the right to pass through to its
subscribers all taxes and fees related to the provision of cable television
service and grantee shall have the right to itemize all such taxes and fees on
the customer bills. The Village Council reserves the right and authority to
comment, whether publicly or in private, regarding grantee's schedule of rates
and charges. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-21: RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS:
   (A)   The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers or other users, or any citizen on the basis of
race, color, religion, national origin, sex or sexual orientation. The grantee
shall comply at all times with all other applicable Federal, State and local
laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination.
   (B)   Grantee shall comply with the individual privacy provisions contained
in the Cable Act. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-22: LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   (A)   The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify,
defend and save harmless the Village, its officers, councils, commissions, and
employees against any and all actions, liability, judgments, executions, claims
or demands whatsoever by others, including, but not limited to, copyright
infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation or operation
or maintenance of the cable television system authorized herein, whether or not
any act of omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
Chapter and any franchise granted hereunder. Grantee shall further indemnify
and save the Village harmless against all liabilities to others arising out of
such construction, operation and maintenance, including, but not limited to,
any liability for damages by reason of, or arising out of, any failure by the
grantee to secure licenses from the owners, authorized distributors or
licensees of programs to be transmitted or distributed by the grantee, and
against any loss, cost, expense, and damages resulting therefrom, including
reasonable attorney fees, arising out of the grantee's exercise or enjoyment of
this franchise, irrespective of the amount of any comprehensive liability
policy required hereunder.
   (B)   The foregoing liability and indemnity obligations of the grantee
pursuant to this Section shall not apply to damages occasioned by acts of the
Village, its agents or employees, nor shall it be deemed a waiver of any
defense of contributory negligence which the grantee may assert against the
Village, its agents or employees. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-23: INSURANCE:
   (A)   At the time of filing written acceptance of the franchise, the grantee
shall file with the Village Clerk certificates of insurance for the following:
      1.   A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy,
indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the Village, its officers,
councils, commissioners, agents or employees from any and all claims by any
person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons
occasioned by the operations of the grantee under the franchise granted
hereunder with a minimum liability of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for personal injury or death to any one person and five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injury or death to two (2) or more
persons in any one occurrence. Renewal certificates of such insurance shall be
promptly forwarded to the Village Clerk as such renewals are made, and such
insurance shall be constantly kept in force and effect during the term of this
franchise.
      2.   Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving
harmless the Village, its officers, councils, commissions, agents, and
employees from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for property
damage occasioned by the operation of a grantee under the franchise granted
hereunder with a minimum liability of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for property damage to any one person and five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage to two (2) or more persons in any one
occurrence.
   (B)   Such insurance as provided for in this Section shall be provided at
the grantee's sole cost and expense and be kept in full force and effect by the
grantee during the existence of the franchise and until after the removal of
all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors
and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the cable television
system as defined in the franchise.
   (C)   All of the foregoing insurance contracts shall be issued and
maintained by companies authorized to do business in the state of Illinois and
they shall require thirty (30) days' written notice of any cancellation or
reduction in coverage to both the village and the grantee herein. (Ord. 1995-2,
5-1-1995)
3-13-24: FILING AND COMMUNICATIONS WITH REGULATORY AGENCIES:
The grantee shall maintain copies of all petitions, applications and
communications relative to any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter
transmitted by the grantee to, or received by the grantee from all federal and
state regulatory commissions or agencies having competent jurisdiction to
regulate the operations of any cable television system authorized hereunder.
Said copies shall be available for inspection by the village during regular
business hours of the grantee. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-25: REPORTS:
The grantee shall file annually with the village manager not later than four
(4) months after the end of its fiscal year during which it accepted a
franchise hereunder and within four (4) months after the end of each subsequent
fiscal year, a letter containing the amount of the gross revenues for the
previous fiscal year certified by the grantee's controller or chief financial
officer. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-26: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
Upon completion of the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter,
the procedures for franchise renewals as established by the cable act will
apply. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-2-1995)
3-13-27: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or maintain a cable
television system in the village unless such person or the person for whom such
action is being taken shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a
valid franchise granted pursuant to this chapter or is a state franchise
holder. It shall also be unlawful for any person to provide cable television
service in the village unless such person shall have first obtained and shall
currently hold a valid franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter or is a state franchise holder. All franchises granted by the village
pursuant to this chapter shall contain the same substantive terms and
conditions. (Ord. 2014-09, 12-2-2014)
3-13-28: UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS OR MODIFICATIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person without the expressed consent of
the grantee, to make any connection, extension, or division whether physically,
acoustically, inductively, electronically, or otherwise with or to any segment
of the cable television system for any purpose whatsoever.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully interfere with,
tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage any part, segment, or content of a
franchised cable television system for any purpose whatsoever.
   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating this section may be assessed a
fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or sentenced to thirty (30) days in
jail, or both. (Ord. 2014-05, 6-16-2014)
3-13-29: NOTICE:
Whenever, under the terms of the franchise, either party shall be required or
permitted to give notice to the other, such notice shall be in writing and, if
to be served on the village, it shall be delivered either by first class U.S.
mail or by handing such notice to the village manager at the village municipal
offices, and, if to the grantee, then by delivering by first class U.S. mail or
by handing such notice to such officer at such address as the grantee shall
from time to time direct. The original name and address of the officer on
behalf of the grantee shall be included in the grantee's acceptance of the
franchise. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-30: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is held invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the
validity of the remainder of this chapter, and any portions in conflict are
hereby repealed. (Ord. 1995-2, 5-1-1995)
3-13-31: STATE FRANCHISE HOLDER:
   (A)   Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed: As provided under the state
franchise law, the village imposes a fee upon a state franchise holder
providing cable and video services within the village in the amount of five
percent (5.0%) of the state franchise holder's gross revenues from providing
such services within the village.
   (B)   Notice To Village: The state franchise holder shall notify the village
at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the state franchise holder
begins to offer cable service or video service in the village.
   (C)   Payment Of Provider Fee: The state franchise holder shall be liable
for and pay the service provider fee to the village as provided in this
section. The state franchise holder's liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of
the ordinance adopting these provisions of the village code imposing this
service provider fee upon the state franchise holder, which shall be sent to
the state franchise holder by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the state franchise holder's application notice sent to the village pursuant to
state franchise law.
   (D)   Payment Date: The state franchise holder shall make payments of the
service provider fee to the village on a quarterly basis, making such quarterly
payments no later than forty five (45) days after the close of the respective
calendar quarter. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis
for the state franchise holder's calculation of the fee.
   (E)   Credit For Other Payment: A franchise holder that elects to terminate
an existing franchise agreement with the village pursuant to the state
franchise law with credit for paid franchise fees under a village franchise
issued pursuant to this chapter may deduct the amount of such credit from the
service provider fee that service provider owes the village upon becoming a
state franchise holder.
   (F)   Construction Standards: A state franchise holder shall comply with all
provisions in section
3-13-18 of this chapter regarding construction standards and underground
cabling.
   (G)   Telephone Service: A state franchise holder shall continue to comply
with the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax and any other
tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the state franchise
holder. Also, a state franchise holder shall continue to be obligated for
payment of any local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
   (H)   Public Benefit Obligation: A state franchise holder shall provide a
free service line and free basic service to all current and future public
buildings within their service territory within the village, including, but not
limited to, village hall and any public schools or public libraries located
within the village. Each local unit of government shall bear the costs of any
inside wiring or video equipment costs not ordinarily provided as part of the
state franchise holder basic offering.
   (I)   Audit Requirement: A state franchise holder shall comply with the same
requirements imposed by the village on other cable service or video service
providers that are providing such services within the village to audit the
state franchise holder's books and records and to recalculate any amounts
determined to be payable to the village. Before conducting an audit, the
village will notify the state franchise holder of the requirements imposed on
other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of the
service provider's books and records. If the village has no local franchises,
the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village pursuant to the
local government taxpayers' bill of rights act 1  as adopted in title 1,
chapter 12 of this code. No acceptance of amounts remitted by a state franchise
holder shall be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct. Any
additional amount due after an audit shall be paid by the state franchise
holder within thirty (30) days after the village's invoice for the sum. (Ord.
2014-09, 12-2-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 14
COIN-OPERATED GAMES
SECTION:
3-14-1: License Required
3-14-2: Annual License Fee
3-14-3: Hours of Operation
3-14-4: Gambling Prohibited
3-14-5: Minors Restricted Certain Hours
3-14-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person or private club shall operate or maintain a facility or dwelling open
to the public in which there are offered to the public three (3) or more coin-
operated electronic gaming machines, without first having obtained a license
therefor; applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the office
of the Village Clerk and shall state thereon the intended location of the place
of business and the number of such coin-operated electronic gaming devices to
be used.
3-14-2: ANNUAL LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for such license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00)
per year, per device.
3-14-3: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No coin-operated electronic gaming device shall operate between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. weekdays and one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. weekends and holidays, unless
otherwise specified in writing by the Board of Trustees of the Village. At all
times, a qualified person twenty one (21) years of age or more must be in
attendance to supervise the operation of the aforementioned licensed, coin-
operated electronic gaming devices.
3-14-4: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble, bet or permit any form of
gambling or betting in such a facility offering such gaming devices.
3-14-5: MINORS RESTRICTED CERTAIN HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for a proprietor, manager, supervisor or his designated
representatives to knowingly permit students (through grade 12) to play where
such equipment has been licensed during hours that school is in session. School
in session shall be defined as one hour prior to class starting time and one-
half (1/2) hour after dismissal of the last class of the day.
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to enforce the provisions of
this Section by appropriate verbal and/or written notice to the students who
are in violation of this provision. Noncompliance of the provisions of this
Section can result in the immediate suspension of license or the closing of
that portion of the establishment housing the electronic coin-operated gaming
devices. (Ord. 82-7, 10-4-82)
CHAPTER 15
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
SECTION:
3-15-1: Definitions
3-15-2: Registration Of Telecommunications Providers
3-15-3: Fee Imposed
3-15-4: Collection, Enforcement, And Administration
3-15-5: Compliance With Other Laws
3-15-6: Existing Franchises And Licenses
3-15-7: Penalties
3-15-8: Enforcement
3-15-9: Waiver And Fee Implementation
3-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act
or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the Village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the Village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel
provided within the Village. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under: 1) the fee imposed by this Chapter, 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, 3)
amounts collected under section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 4) the
tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, 5) 911 surcharges, or 6)
the tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
Village;
   (C)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time- sharing agreement;
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the Village;
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
   (G)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin- operated telecommunications
devices; or
   (I)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the Village.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any Municipal street, alley, water or public right of
way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the Village has acquired the right and authority to locate or
permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal Village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include Village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right of way.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this State.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, where the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to- ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: (A) Any telecommunications retailer; and
   (B)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail
as defined in this Section. The Village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction
of the Village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the Village.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 United States Code
section 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile
radio services, and paging services. (Ord. 1998-11, 12-7-1998)
3-15-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
   (A)   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this Chapter shall
register with the Village within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this Chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on
a form to be provided by the Village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection
3-15-4(C) of this Chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this Section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the Village
pursuant to subsection (A) of this Section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection
3-15-4(C) of this Chapter, as the case may be, to the Village within thirty
(30) days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information
provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most
recent return on file with the Village. (Ord. 1998-11, 12-7-1998)
3-15-3: FEE IMPOSED:
   (A)   A Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent
(1.0%) of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to
service addresses within the Village for telecommunications originating or
received in the Village.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this Chapter, the Village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights of way within the Village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Chapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   The Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this Chapter shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in Section
3-15-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1998-11, 12-7-1998)
3-15-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the Village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the Village Board of Trustees, the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the Village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to
the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent
(2%) of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the Municipal infrastructure fee to the Village shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village Board of
Trustees, which shall contain such information as the Village Board of Trustees
may reasonably require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this Chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village. The charge imposed under subsection
(A) of this Section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this Chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the Village Board of Trustees may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to
offset a claim of underpayment made by the Village within the applicable
statutory period of limitations, and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment
made by the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory
period of limitations.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this Chapter by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      1.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
      2.   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
      3.   "Gross charges" for the purposes of the municipal telecommunications
tax as prescribed in section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
      4.   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
   (G)   The Village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this Chapter
to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to
the Village for the Village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of
the amount of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the Village by
the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the Village plus five percent
(5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any
costs incurred by the Village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to
exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in
an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the Village within twenty one (21) days
after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
   (H)   The Village Board of Trustees or its designee, may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this Chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time
to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to Section
3-15-2 of this Chapter of such regulations. (Ord. 1998-11, 12-7-1998)
3-15-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes; and
   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as
provided; and
   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over, or within the rights of way. (Ord.
1998-11, 12-7-1998)
3-15-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the Village entered into before the effective date of this
Chapter regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according
to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived. (Ord. 1998-11, 12-7-1998)
3-15-7: PENALTIES:
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord.
1998-11, 12-7-1998)
3-15-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1998-11, 12-7-1998)
3-15-9: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
   (A)   The Village hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation
that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the Village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing Village franchise,
license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the
time the Village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee.
This waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure
maintenance fee provided for in this Chapter is subject to being lawfully
imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the
telecommunications retailer from the customer.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
Village has a franchise.
   (C)   The Village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
Chapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not
less than ninety (90) days after the Village provides written notice by
certified mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the Village has an
existing franchise, license, or similar agreement that the Village waives all
compensation under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement
during such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected
by the retailer and remitted to the Village. The infrastructure maintenance fee
shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as
established in the preceding sentence. (Ord. 1998-11, 12-7-1998)
CHAPTER 16
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-16-1: Definitions
3-16-2: Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
3-16-3: Public Nuisance Declared
3-16-4: Penalty
3-16-5: Severability
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
                                        A cultivation center, craft grower,
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             processing organization, infuser
ESTABLISHMENT:                          organization, dispensing organization,
                                        or transporting organization.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                        cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization,
                                        per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
                                        Act, as amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, process, transport, and
                                        perform necessary activities to provide
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  cannabis and cannabis-infused products
                                        to licensed cannabis business
                                        establishments, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, as amended from
                                        time-to-time, and regulations
                                        promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ORGANIZATION or DISPENSARY:             cannabis-infused products, cannabis
                                        seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, as amended from
                                        time-to-time, and regulations
                                        promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
or INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, as amended from
                                        time-to-time, and regulations
                                        promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
                                        compounds to produce cannabis
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
ORGANIZATION or PROCESSOR:              cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, as amended from time-to-
                                        time, and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         establishment or a community college
ORGANIZATION or TRANSPORTER:            licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, as amended from time-to-
                                        time, and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        Any person, firm, corporation,
                                        association, club, society or other
PERSON:                                 organization, including any owner,
                                        manager, proprietor, employee,
                                        volunteer, or agent. (Ord. 2019-11, 9-
                                        3-2019)
 
3-16-2: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   The following Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments are
prohibited within the Village. No person shall locate, operate, own, or allow
to be operated, or aide, abet, or assist in the operation any of the following
cannabis related business establishments within the Village:
Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower
Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center
Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization or Dispensary
Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser
Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor
Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter
   (B)   No retail or service business, private club, or other similar
organization shall permit the on-site use of cannabis at their location or on
their premises in the Village. (Ord. 2019-11, 9-3-2019)
3-16-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Operation of any prohibited Cannabis Business Establishment within the Village
in violation of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord. 2019-11,
9-3-2019)
3-16-4: PENALTY:
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day a
violation is committed or permitted to continue under this Chapter shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord.
2019-11, 9-3-2019)
3-16-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this Chapter, or the application of any provision of this
Chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall
not affect other provisions of this Chapter, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Chapter. (Ord. 2019-
11, 9-3-2019)
CHAPTER 17
LICENSED VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
3-17-1: Licensed Video Gaming Exemption
3-17-2: Definitions
3-17-3: Video Gaming Terminal Permit Sticker
3-17-4: Regulations Governing Establishment And Terminal Operators
3-17-5: Inspection Of Premises
3-17-6: Revocation/Suspension Of License And Permit Sticker
3-17-7: Seizure Of Unlawful Video Gaming Terminals
3-17-8: Penalties
3-17-1: LICENSED VIDEO GAMING EXEMPTION:
The prohibitions under any provision of the Village Code that may reference or
govern gambling or gaming shall not apply to any video gaming terminal that has
a valid video gaming terminal permit sticker and is in full compliance with the
other provisions of this Chapter 17 of Title 3 of the Village Code. (Ord. 2023-
04, 4-3-2023)
3-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                       As used in this Chapter of the Village Code, means the
ACT:                   Video Gaming Act found at 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., as from
                       time to time amended.
                       Any business licensed by the State to have or operate a
                       Video Gaming Terminal in the Village of Roanoke,
ESTABLISHMENT:         including any licensed fraternal establishment, licensed
                       truck stop establishment, and licensed large truck stop
                       establishment, as these terms are defined under the Act.
                       An individual, partnership, corporation or limited
                       liability company that is licensed under the Act and
TERMINAL OPERATOR:     that owns, services, and maintains video gaming
                       terminals located within the corporate limits of the
                       Village.
                       This definition shall have the same meaning ascribed to
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: such term by the Act, as amended from time to time.
                       (Ord. 2023-04, 4-3-2023)
 
3-17-3: VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL PERMIT STICKER:
In order for a video gaming terminal to be operated by an establishment or by a
terminal operator, the establishment and terminal operator are required to
obtain an annual video gaming terminal permit sticker from the Village for each
video gaming terminal located on its premises by submitting a written
application, on a form provided by the Village to the President or the party
designated by him/her. Each video gaming terminal permit sticker issued by the
Village shall expire April 30, next, after date of issue, with an annual fee of
one-hundred dollars ($100.00) per video gaming terminal payable in full at the
time the application is filed with the Village. The cost of this fee shall be
shared equally between the terminal operator and the establishment where the
video gaming terminals are operated. (Ord. 2023-04, 4-3-2023)
3-17-4: REGULATIONS GOVERNING ESTABLISHMENT AND TERMINAL OPERATORS:
The following regulations apply to all establishment and terminal operators
operating a video gaming terminal on its premises with a valid video gaming
terminal permit sticker for each of its video gaming terminals:
   (A)   No more than the State allowed maximum number of video gaming
terminals may be located on establishment premises.
   (B)   A valid Village video gaming terminal permit sticker shall be clearly
displayed at all times on each video gaming terminal.
   (C)   Other than having up to the State allowed maximum number of video
gaming terminals with valid video gaming terminal permit stickers, the
establishment and terminal operator are prohibited from having, anywhere on its
premises, an electronic video gaming machine that may be available to play or
simulate the play of poker, line up, blackjack, faro, roulette, craps, slots,
or any other card or dice game or other game of chance, or that is otherwise
akin to a gambling or gaming device, even if solely for amusement purposes.
   (D)   No establishment or terminal operator may cause or permit any person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years to use, play or operate a video gaming
terminal.
   (E)   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age may be within
ten feet (10') of the gaming device. The area must, at all times, be within the
view of at least one (1) employee who is at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
   (F)   No video gaming terminal may be played except during the legal hours
of operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the
establishment pursuant to this ordinance.
   (G)   The establishment and the terminal operator must fully comply with the
Act and all rules, regulations and restrictions imposed by the Illinois Gaming
Board.
   (H)   The establishment and the terminal operator must fully comply with all
other ordinances of the Village as well as federal and Illinois law and
regulations. (Ord. 2023-04, 4-3-2023)
3-17-5: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Every establishment where a video gaming terminal is kept shall be subject to
inspection by the Village President, designated law enforcement official, or
his/her authorized agents, at any time, to ensure compliance with the Village
Code. This includes all establishments applying for a video gaming terminal
permit sticker. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, resist, oppose
or attempt to hinder, resist or oppose the Village President, law enforcement
official, or his/her respective agents in the course of any inspection. (Ord.
2023-04, 4-3-2023)
3-17-6: REVOCATION/SUSPENSION OF PERMIT STICKER:
The Village may revoke or suspend any video gaming terminal permit sticker
issued by the Village if it determines that the establishment or the terminal
operator has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. No license shall
be so revoked or suspended, except after a public hearing before the Village
Board, with a three (3) day written notice to the establishment or terminal
operator (as applicable) affording the establishment or terminal operator an
opportunity to appear and defend. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
establishment that has its liquor license revoked or suspended by the Village
or by the Illinois State Liquor Commission, or has its video gaming license
revoked or suspended by the Illinois Gaming Board, shall automatically, without
a hearing before the Village Board, have all Village video gaming terminal
permit stickers revoked or suspended for the same time frame as its liquor and/
or Illinois Gaming Board gaming license is suspended, whichever the case may
be. (Ord. 2023-04, 4-3-2023)
3-17-7: SEIZURE OF UNLAWFUL VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS:
Every video gaming terminal that does not have a valid video gaming terminal
permit sticker or is otherwise unlawful shall be considered a gambling device
subject to seizure and shall be turned over to the Illinois Gaming Board, in
accordance with Board regulations and applicable law, unless otherwise ordered
by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2023-04, 4-3-2023)
3-17-8: PENALTIES:
Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter 17 of Title 3 of the Village
Code shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first
offense in any twelve (12) month period, and a fine of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for a second offense and each subsequent offense in a twelve
(12) month period. This penalty may be enforced by issuance of a "Notice of
Violation" for the fine amount, or by issuance of a "Notice to Appear." Each
day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. This monetary
penalty shall be in addition to any and all other remedies which may be
available to the Village under this Chapter 17 any other provision of the
Village Code or federal or Illinois law. (Ord. 2023-04, 4-3-2023)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Demolition Of Structures And Buildings   1
Moving Of Structures And Buildings   2
CHAPTER 1
DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Demolition Permit
4-1-2: Permit Application
4-1-3: Evidence Of Disconnection Of Utilities
4-1-4: Adequate Drainage For Demolition Sites
4-1-5: Fees For Demolition Permits
4-1-6: Required Bonding And Insurance
4-1-7: Required Safety Drawings And Specifications
4-1-8: Required Use Of Aprons And Canopies
4-1-9: Demolition Of Structures Having Common Or Party Walls
4-1-10: Predemolition Inspections Of Premises
4-1-11: Issuance Of Demolition Permit
4-1-12: Supervision And Inspection Of Demolition Site
4-1-13: Maintaining Property In Safe Condition
4-1-14: Closure Of Adjacent Streets Or Sidewalks
4-1-15: General Regulations Pertaining To Demolition Or Wrecking Activities
4-1-16: Demolition And Wrecking Prohibited At Night
4-1-17: Violation Penalty
4-1-18: Cost Schedule
4-1-1: DEMOLITION PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to demolish or wreck any
building or structure, or any structural part thereof, within the village,
without first obtaining a demolition permit from the director of inspections
for the village, or for any person or organization to otherwise violate any
provision of this chapter. The zoning officer for the village (see title 10 of
this code) is hereby designated as the "director of inspections" for the
village as used throughout this title. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-2: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Application for a permit to demolish or wreck any building or structure within
the village shall be made in writing by the owner or his agent, upon such
official village forms as may be furnished by the director of inspections. The
applicant shall file the appropriate forms with the director of inspections,
with copies to be filed with all utility companies serving the premises as well
as the owners or their agents of adjoining or neighboring properties. Such
application shall state the location and description of the building or
structure, the date when demolition is to commence, and the approximate length
of the time during which such demolition shall continue. If no new building is
to be erected on the site thereof, the statement of work to be done shall
include a description of the condition in which it is intended to leave the
site thereof. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire forty five
(45) days after the day of issuance, which may be extended an additional
fifteen (15) days upon a showing of good cause. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-3: EVIDENCE OF DISCONNECTION OF UTILITIES:
A permit to demolish, wreck or remove any building or structure or part thereof
shall not be issued by the village and shall not be valid until written
evidence has been submitted to the director of inspections, verifying that all
utility service connections and appurtenant equipment have been removed,
disconnected, sealed or plugged in a safe and appropriate manner. (Ord. 2003-
11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-4: ADEQUATE DRAINAGE FOR DEMOLITION SITES:
To prevent unsanitary and structurally unsound conditions, all structures or
buildings being demolished, wrecked or removed which have basements must have
all basement wall and floor surfaces cracked, broken and separated so as to
provide adequate drainage through and within the site. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-5: FEES FOR DEMOLITION PERMITS:
An applicant shall not be issued a demolition permit to demolish, wreck or
remove buildings, structures, or any part thereof unless and until a permit fee
has been paid to the director of inspections in accordance with the schedule
set forth in section
 4-1-18 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-6: REQUIRED BONDING AND INSURANCE:
Before any permit required by this chapter is issued granting authority to
wreck a building or structure, the person engaged in the work or wrecking the
same shall:
   (A)   File with the director of inspections a bond with sureties to be
approved by the director of inspections, to extend to and cover all such
demolition or wrecking operations carried on through permits obtained
thereunder by such person during any year beginning May 1 and ending April 30,
to indemnify, keep and save harmless the village against any loss, cost,
damage, expense, judgment or liability of any kind whatsoever which the village
may suffer, or which may accrue against, be charged to or be recovered from the
village, or any of its officials, from or by reason or on account of accidents
to persons or property during any such wrecking or demolition operations; and
from or by reason or on account of anything done under or by virtue of any
permit engaged for any such wrecking or demolition operations; and no permit
shall be issued for any wrecking work, except as hereinbefore otherwise
provided during such year until such bond is filed. Such bond shall be in the
sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and shall be conditioned upon
the performance of the work covered by the permit. There shall be an additional
bond filed in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon
the restoring and leveling of the premises upon which such wrecking or
demolition operations have been completed.
   (B)   File with the director of inspections a certificate or other verified
proof that the applicant carries liability insurance, in the amounts of at
least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person and three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence.
   (C)   File with the director of inspections a certificate indicating that
the applicant carries workers' compensation insurance covering all persons
working on the demolition job with the applicant, for the applicant, or on
behalf of the applicant.
In lieu of the bonds required in subsection (A) of this section, the applicant
may file with the director of inspections a bond for each permit sought, said
bond to be conditioned as the bonds in subsection (A) of this section. Said
bond shall be twice the full amount of the bid on the wrecking job, ten percent
(10%) in cash or its equivalent. This exception shall apply not more than once
per calendar year to any owner.
None of the bonds or insurances herein shall be required of the owner of
accessory buildings as described herein, when said owner is doing the
demolition of said accessory building himself; provided, said owner files with
the director of inspections a certificate or other verified proof that he
carries homeowners' liability insurance on said home in amounts not less than
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per person and one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per occurrence.
The director of inspections shall require before issuance of a permit such
additional bonds and insurance as may be necessary due to the ultrahazardous
nature of a particular wrecking or demolition operation. When determining
whether additional bonds and insurance will be necessary, the director of
inspections shall consider the following relevant factors:
   (A)   The existence of a common or party wall on the premises to be
demolished;
   (B)   The amount of traffic normally on the adjoining streets, alleys and
highways;
   (C)   The experience of the applicant and his employees in wrecking or
demolition operations;
   (D)   The length of time during which demolition or wrecking shall occur;
and
   (E)   Any other factors relevant to the hazard of that particular operation.
An overview of the bonding and insurance requirements is set forth in section
4-1-18 of this chapter. Should any conflict exist between this section and
section
4-1-18 of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall govern. (Ord.
2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-7: REQUIRED SAFETY DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Where the building or structure intended to be wrecked or demolished is over
four (4) stories or forty five feet (45') above the adjoining sidewalk grade,
the property owner, demolition contractor, or his agent shall submit
specifications and a drawing indicating fences, barricades, aprons, canopies
and other safeguards which are to be used in connection with the demolition or
wrecking operation. These specifications and drawings shall be approved by the
director of inspections before a permit is issued to wreck or demolish such
building or structure, and the safeguards provided within such drawings and
specifications shall be erected in strict compliance therewith. (Ord. 2003-11,
9-2-2003)
4-1-8: REQUIRED USE OF APRONS AND CANOPIES:
Whenever required by this chapter or the director of inspections, the
demolition contractor or wrecker shall construct one apron for each four (4)
stories above adjoining sidewalk grade or multistoried buildings; the lowest
apron shall be in the third story. Each and every canopy and every apron shall
be designed according to provisions to safely support a uniformly distributed
load of two hundred fifty (250) pounds per square foot. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-
2003)
4-1-9: DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES HAVING COMMON OR PARTY WALLS:
Before a permit is issued for the wrecking or demolition of a structure that
has one or more party walls in common with one or more buildings, the property
owner, demolition contractor, or wrecker shall deliver to the director of
inspections a certificate by a licensed architect or licensed structural
engineer to the effect that the adjoining premises do not require anchorage, or
if such certificate indicates that anchorage is necessary, the certificate
shall be accompanied by a drawing signed and sealed by such architect or
engineer and approved by the director of inspections indicating adequate
anchorage of floor and roof joists at not greater than ten foot (10') intervals
for each and every floor and roof resting on such party wall, and the adjoining
premises shall be anchored in strict compliance with such drawings. The written
consent of the owner of the adjoining premises permitting the anchorage shown
on such drawing shall also accompany the certificate. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-10: PREDEMOLITION INSPECTIONS OF PREMISES:
Before any demolition permit shall be issued, the director of inspections shall
inspect, or cause to be inspected, the premises where said demolition is to
occur, for the purpose of determining whether the planned measures for the
demolition are adequate so as not to endanger any utility systems,
installations or adjoining public or private properties. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-
2003)
4-1-11: ISSUANCE OF DEMOLITION PERMIT:
If the director of inspections finds that all the requirements of this chapter
are being complied with by the permit applicant, he shall approve the
application and issue a permit for such demolition or wrecking. Approval by the
director of inspections shall not relieve any party from complying with any
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-12: SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION OF DEMOLITION SITE:
Upon the issuance of the demolition permit required by this chapter, such
building or structure may be demolished, wrecked or torn down; provided all the
work done thereunder shall be subject to the supervision of and inspection by
the director of inspections to determine the progress of work or to determine
if safety hazards exist. No person shall prevent or inhibit the director of
inspections from gaining access to the demolition site or fail to follow the
reasonable directives of the director of inspections regarding potential safety
hazards. The director of inspections shall also inspect, or cause to be
inspected, the premises upon the completion of work. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-13: MAINTAINING PROPERTY IN SAFE CONDITION:
As a condition of the issuance of any demolition permit required by this
chapter, the applicant or the property owner shall provide a written guarantee
to the village that upon completion of demolition or wrecking activities, the
premises will be left in a proper and safe condition, and that said applicant
or property owner shall stand liable under their bond for any work done
pursuant to subsection (C) of this section.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, "proper and safe condition" means
that all debris is cleared away, that any excavation remaining is either filled
in and tamped down level with the final grade for the premises or surrounded by
a chainlink or masonry fence at least six feet (6') in height, if such property
is not to be put to immediate use. If the property is to be used for any
purpose within two (2) months after such demolition or wrecking and the
property is not brought to final grade, then adequate barricades, lighted at
night, shall be installed around the perimeter of such excavation during this
time period.
   (B)   Nothing in subsection (A) of this section shall be construed to permit
the maintenance of a public nuisance in permitting the excavations to be fenced
rather than filled. Village officials and the director of inspections retain
the power to require filling of excavations which become a threat to the public
health or safety. Upon receipt of written notice from village officials or the
director of inspections that an excavation must be filled because it presents a
threat to public health or safety, the applicant or property owner shall
immediately fill the excavation. Both the applicant and the property owner
shall be in violation of this provision until the excavation is properly filled
and made safe.
   (C)   If the premises are not cleared or put into a safe condition or work
commenced to do so within ten (10) days of the completion of the demolition or
wrecking, or within three (3) days after receiving notice under subsection (B)
of this section, the director of inspections shall authorize the work to be
done and expenses involved shall be chargeable to the posted bond.
The director of inspections shall inspect or cause to be inspected such
premises at least once daily during the period when such demolition or wrecking
continues. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-14: CLOSURE OF ADJACENT STREETS OR SIDEWALKS:
The director of inspections may grant permission to the demolition contractor
or property owner to occupy a roadway or sidewalk beyond the limits of the
premises undergoing demolition to include any adjacent roadway or sidewalk. The
demolition contractor or property owner shall obtain consent from the owner or
lessee of the adjacent property for closure of any sidewalks, unless the
director of inspections otherwise determines that closure of the sidewalk is
necessary for safety reasons. The director of inspections may approve the
closure of any roadway after consulting with village officials and the chief of
the Roanoke fire protection district. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-15: GENERAL REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO DEMOLITION OR WRECKING ACTIVITIES:
All operations of such demolition or wrecking shall be performed in a
workmanlike manner and with the least amount of noise possible. Care shall be
taken to protect neighboring structures with adequate shoring and whatever else
is necessary to protect such structures. Large signs stating "Wrecking and
Demolition Work in Progress -- No Trespassing" shall be erected on each side of
the building undergoing demolition that faces on a public street, alley or
sidewalk. Adequate protection shall be provided to prevent injury to any
village or public utility appurtenances on or near the premises subject to the
demolition process. It shall be the duty of all persons working at or
responsible for such demolition or wrecking to see that children are warned
away from such premises and are not permitted to play in or about the premises
subject to the demolition process or to frequent the structures undergoing
demolition. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-16: DEMOLITION AND WRECKING PROHIBITED AT NIGHT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the demolition of any building
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.;
provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
any work necessary at any time to prevent imminent injury to persons or
property, or any night work permitted or required by the director of
inspections to avoid potentially dangerous conditions for daytime traffic in
the vicinity of said building. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-17: VIOLATION PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and each day
that a violation continues shall be construed as a separate offense and
punished accordingly. The penalty herein provided shall be in addition to any
removal or destruction order that may be entered, or injunction issued. (Ord.
2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-1-18: COST SCHEDULE:
Permit fees, bonds, insurance and penalties:
   PERMIT FEES
      Amount      Type Of Structure
         $25.00   Nonresidential structures
         25.00   Residential structures
         -0-   Accessory building, 1 story in height and less than 200 square
feet in floor area
   BONDS
      Amount      Condition
         $100,000.00   Performance of demolition
         5,000.00   Restoration and leveling of property after demolition
   -OR-
Twice the full amount of the demolition job, 10 percent in cash or its
equivalent. This exception may be used by a property owner only once per
calendar year.
   -OR-
For the owner of an accessory building who is doing the demolition himself, a
certificate or other verified proof of the following homeowners' liability
insurance:
         $ 50,000.00   Per person
         100,000.00   Per occurrence
   LIABILITY INSURANCE
      Amount       Type
         $100,000.00   Per person
         300,000.00   Per occurrence
   WORKERS' COMPENSATION INSURANCE
Certificate indicating the permit applicant carries workers' compensation
insurance for all persons working on the demolition job with the applicant, for
the applicant, or on behalf of the applicant.
   VIOLATION PENALTY
$100.00 to $750.00 per each day of a violation of any provision of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
CHAPTER 2
MOVING OF STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-2-1: Moving Permit
4-2-2: Permit Application
4-2-3: Permit Fee
4-2-4: Bond Requirement
4-2-5: Performance Deposit Required
4-2-6: Issuance Of Permit
4-2-7: Supervision
4-2-8: Warning Lights And Signs Required
4-2-9: Cutting Of Wires
4-2-10: Fire Alarm Wires
4-2-11: General Moving Regulations
4-2-12: Violation Penalty
4-2-13: Cost Schedule
4-2-1: MOVING PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to move, or cause or permit to be moved,
any building or structure, on, through or over any street, alley, sidewalk or
other public place within the village without having first obtained a moving
permit. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-2-2: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Application for a permit to move any building or structure shall be made in
writing by the owner of the building or structure, the owner's agent, or
contractor, upon such forms as may be provided, to the director of inspections,
with copies to the village clerk, superintendent of streets, water and sewer
departments, any utility company serving the premises, and the owners or agents
of adjoining or neighboring premises.
Such application shall state the current location and description of the
building or structure, the date when moving is to commence, the proposed route
and the number of days that such building or structure shall occupy any portion
of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. Also, the application
shall include the owner's name and address and the name and address of the
party undertaking the moving. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-2-3: PERMIT FEE:
No permit to move any building or structure shall be issued unless and until a
fee shall have been paid to the director of inspections in the sum of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each day or fraction thereof that it is intended that the
building or structure shall occupy any portion of any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public place. An additional sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day
or fraction thereof over and above the time stated in such application, during
or on which any such building or structure shall occupy said public place shall
be paid to the director of inspections. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-2-4: BOND REQUIREMENT:
Before any permit to move any building or structure shall be issued, the person
engaged in the work of moving the same shall file with the director of
inspections a certificate bond, in an amount and conditioned as set forth in
section
4-2-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-2-5: PERFORMANCE DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
Before any permit to move any building or structure shall be issued, the person
engaged in the work of moving the building or structure shall deposit with the
director of inspections a sum of money as set forth in section
4-2-13 of this chapter, conditioned upon the safe condition of the premises
after removal of such building or structure as provided in section
4-2-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-2-6: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
If the director of inspections and the superintendent of streets, water and
sewer departments are satisfied that all provisions will be complied with, and
that all possible precautions will be taken by the applicant to prevent injury
to persons, vehicles or property, public or private, they shall approve the
application, and the director of inspections shall issue a permit for such
moving. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-2-7: SUPERVISION:
Upon issuance of the moving permit, such building or structure may be moved
upon the public ways; provided all work done thereunder shall be subject to the
supervision of the director of inspections. The director of inspections shall
inspect or cause to be inspected such operations at least once every two (2)
hours during the period when the moving is in progress. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-
2003)
4-2-8: WARNING LIGHTS AND SIGNS REQUIRED:
Whenever any street, alley or sidewalk is obstructed by any building or
structure being moved thereon, written warnings to that effect shall be placed
thereon by the persons engaged in the moving, adequate to warn vehicles and
persons entering that portion of the public way so obstructed.
Such persons engaged in the moving shall keep warning lanterns or lights upon
the building or structure after dusk and before dawn so as to warn any person
or vehicle against collision with the building or structure. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-
2-2003)
4-2-9: CUTTING OF WIRES:
Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with any wires or cables of a
public utility in the moving of any building or structure, the terms of any
special or franchise ordinance governing the wires or cables shall apply and
the bond therein specified shall be given. If no such terms apply, then the
director of inspections shall estimate the expense of cutting and repairing the
wires and the bond to be given to cover such expense. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-2-10: FIRE ALARM WIRES:
Whenever any such moving building or structure approaches any fire alarm wire
or pole which shall be endangered by the moving of such building or structure,
the mover shall notify the chief of the Roanoke fire protection district at
least six (6) hours before reaching such wire or pole so that they may be
removed or protected by the village or fire protection district authorities.
(Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-2-11: GENERAL MOVING REGULATIONS:
   (A)   All moving operations shall be performed in a workmanlike manner and
with the least amount of noise possible. In addition to other safety
requirements specified in this chapter, it shall be the duty of all persons
working at or responsible for such moving operations to see that all persons
and vehicles are warned and kept away from such building or structure, and at
such distance as to prevent injury.
   (B)   The person granted the moving permit, or his agent, shall give notice
to the chief of the Roanoke fire protection district, village clerk, Woodford
County sheriff's department, superintendents of streets, water and sewer
departments, and any public utilities involved, at least two (2) hours in
advance of the commencement of any moving operations. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-2-12: VIOLATION PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount
not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
4-2-13: COST SCHEDULE:
   PERMITS
      Amount      Term
      $50.00   For each full or partial day
   BONDS
      Amount      Type
      The same as set forth Certificate bond in section
4-1-18 of this title
   DEPOSIT
      Amount      Type
      The same as set forth in section
4-1-18 of this title   Performance - conditioned upon safe condition of the
property after removal of the building
   VIOLATION PENALTY
      Up to $750.00 for each day of the violation
   (Ord. 2003-11, 9-2-2003)
TITLE 5
FIRE REGULATIONS
General Fire Regulations   1
Fireworks and Explosives   2
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FIRE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Combustible Materials
5-1-2: Constructing Unsafe Structure
5-1-3: False Fire Alarm
5-1-4: Fire Lanes Designated
5-1-5: State Fire Marshal Regulations Adopted
5-1-1: COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS:
No person shall burn, or cause to be burned, any hay, straw or other
combustible material within any street, alley or other public place in the
Village without the permission of the President of the Board of Trustees, or
within twenty feet (20') of any house, barn, shed, fence or wooden buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully kindle or leave any fire, or to
deposit or use any dangerous, combustible or inflammable material or liquid or
substance in any such manner as to cause damage or injury to any building or
other property, or in such a manner as to endanger any buildings or other
property within the Village.
5-1-2: CONSTRUCTING UNSAFE STRUCTURE:
lt shall be unlawful for any person to construct or use in any dwelling, shed
or other building in the Village, any stove pipe, chimney, fireplace, flue,
oven, boiler or other apparatus or fixture used for or in connection with fire,
when the same shall be in an unsafe condition.
5-1-3: FALSE FIRE ALARM:
lt shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make false alarm of fire or
false cry for assistance, within the corporate limits of the Village. (R.O.
1908, Ord. 13)
5-1-4: FIRE LANES DESIGNATED:
The Board of Trustees of the Village and/or the committee designated by said
Village Board and the Chief of the Fire Department will meet and prescribe
certain areas to be designated as fire lane areas within the Village. Said fire
lane areas will be noted and mapped and said mapping will then be published in
the Roanoke Review, a local newspaper.
Appropriate signs will be posted along the designated streets informing the
public that these are emergency fire lane areas.
If at any time the fire lane areas are blocked in some way or fashion, the Fire
Chief, acting through the proper authorities of the Village, is empowered to
provide for the moving of any vehicles or other objects blocking such fire lane
areas at the expense of the owner of said blocking vehicles or objects. The
blocking objects will be moved and stored at the owner's expense at some place
designated by the proper Village authorities of the Village.
Anyone found to be violating this Section of the Village Code of the Village
will be guilty of a misdemeanor and cited as such. (Ord. 1979-9, 10-15-79)
5-1-5: STATE FIRE MARSHAL REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The President and Board of Trustees of the Village ordain that the regulations
of the State Fire Marshal pertaining to the storage of volatile materials and
all other items that may be pertinent to the Village and the residents of the
Village are adopted in their entirety as they currently exist and as they are
amended from time to time.
The Village Attorney is empowered and directed to stay abreast of such
regulations so that it can be determined if anyone is in violation of those
regulations from time to time, so that they can be appropriately notified to
comply with the State laws that are hereby adopted and made part of the Village
Code. (Ord. 1990-4, 5-7-90)
CHAPTER 2
FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Sale of Fireworks and Explosives
5-2-2: Set Off Fireworks, Explosives
5-2-1: SALE OF FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES:
The sale of commercially constructed fireworks and explosives of any nature
shall be forbidden within the boundaries of the Village, except as authorized
by the Village Board.
5-2-2: SET OFF FIREWORKS, EXPLOSIVES:
The firing of commercial or self-constructed fireworks, or the ignition of
explosives of any nature shall be forbidden within the Village limits, except
as authorized by the Village Board. (Ord. 152, 12-3-34)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Misdemeanors   1
Animals; Fowl (Rep. by Ord. 1985-6, 10-7-1985)   2
Dogs, Cats And Animals   3
Littering   4
CHAPTER 1
MISDEMEANORS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Advertisements
6-1-2: Aiding Escape
6-1-3: Annoying Persons On Streets
6-1-4: Assault Or Battery
6-1-5: Reserved
6-1-6: Disorderly Conduct
6-1-7: Disturbing Assemblages, Amusements
6-1-8: Disturbing The Peace
6-1-9: Drunkenness
6-1-10: Exhibit Animals
6-1-11: Fighting, Quarreling
6-1-12: Firearms
6-1-13: Furnishing Liquor To Prisoners
6-1-14: Gambling
6-1-15: Getting Upon Vehicles
6-1-16: Hindering Officers
6-1-17: House Of Ill Fame
6-1-18: Injuring Property
6-1-19: Killing, Injuring Certain Animals
6-1-20: Lewdness
6-1-21: Loitering
6-1-22: Noise Disturbance
6-1-23: Personating An Officer
6-1-24: Playing Ball In Streets
6-1-25: Spring Or Air Gun, Discharging
6-1-26: Throwing Missiles
6-1-27: Unlawful Assemblages
6-1-28: Vagrancy
6-1-29: Penalties
6-1-30: Trespassing
6-1-31: Curfew
6-1-32: Use Of Skateboards
6-1-33: Possession Of Tobacco Products By Minors
6-1-34: Dumping On Village Property
6-1-1: ADVERTISEMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stick, nail, paint, brand or stamp, or
in any other manner put upon any house, fence, wall, pavement or other public
or private place in the Village, any written, printed, painted or other
advertisement, bill, notice, sign or poster without having first obtained the
consent of the owner or occupant or officer having the control of any such
house, fence, wall, pavement or other public or private place. (R.O. 1908, Ord.
11)
6-1-2: AIDING ESCAPE:
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to aid, abet or encourage the
rescue or escape or attempt to escape from the calaboose, or from any officer
or person aiding him, of any person, or to attempt to supply or supply any such
person with any weapon or with any implement or means of escape or to aid, abet
or encourage any other person to perform any of the acts hereinbefore
mentioned. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-3: ANNOYING PERSONS ON STREETS:
No person shall pursue any amusement or exercise calculated to injure or annoy
any person passing along the street or sidewalk. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-4: ASSAULT OR BATTERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault and battery upon
another, or assault, strike or fight or challenge to fight another, or to be
guilty of any language, act or conduct calculated to provoke a breach of the
peace. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-5: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2016-10, 8-15-2016)
6-1-6: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace or be guilty of any
violent, tumultuous, offensive or disorderly conduct or offensive carriage.
(R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-7: DISTURBING ASSEMBLAGES, AMUSEMENTS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself in a disorderly
or riotous manner at any place or exhibition, amusement or entertainment, and
if any person belonging to or connected with any such show or exhibition shall
conduct himself in a riotous or disorderly manner, or cause any disturbance or
breach of the peace at the place of exhibition, the license of such show or
exhibition may be revoked or forfeited in the discretion of the President of
the Board of Trustees or any proper Village officer.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or heedlessly disturb
any lawful assembly of persons. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-8: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
Any two (2) or more persons who shall assemble for the purpose of disturbing
the peace, or of committing an unlawful act, and who shall not disperse when
commanded or requested by any peace officer, shall each severally be subject to
a penalty as provided for by section
1-4-1 of this code. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-9: DRUNKENNESS:
It shall be unlawful for any intoxicated person to be found in any street or in
any public place, or to be found disturbing the peace of the public, or of his
own or any other family, in any place. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-10: EXHIBIT ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the village limits to indecently
exhibit any stallion, bull, jackass or other animal in any public place, or to
let any such animal, except in an enclosed and covered place out of view, or to
let any such animal within ordinary hearing distance of any occupied dwelling
house, or to keep, stand or let any animal in such a place or in such a manner
as to disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or family. (R.O. 1908,
Ord. 39)
6-1-11: FIGHTING, QUARRELING:
Any two (2) or more persons who shall, by agreement, fight in any public or
private place, or who shall meet to do any unlawful act upon common cause of
quarrel, and make any advance toward it, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-12: FIREARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the village to fire or discharge any
firearm except in case of necessity, or in the performance of lawful duty.
(R.O. 1908, Ord. 13)
6-1-13: FURNISHING LIQUOR TO PRISONERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to procure for, furnish or convey to any
person confined in the village calaboose intoxicating or spirituous liquors.
(R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-14: GAMBLING:
   (A)   Gaming House: It shall be unlawful for any person to, in the village,
by himself, servant or other agent, keep, maintain or support any gaming house
or place used for the practice of gaming, or to knowingly suffer or permit any
premises used, owned or occupied by him or under his control to be used for any
such purpose.
It shall be further unlawful for any person to knowingly suffer or permit any
species of gambling for money or other thing of value, or any check or other
thing intended to represent the same, in any house or premises occupied by him,
or owned by him or under his control, or to keep or have in his possession any
gaming implements for the purpose of gaming therewith.
   (B)   Raffle, Lottery: It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner,
to gamble or raffle for money or other thing of value, or anything intended to
represent or representing money, or to conduct any lottery, or to dispose of,
for gain, any ticket, chance or share in any lottery, except that only state or
federal government lottery shall be exempt from these provisions. (R.O. 1908,
Ord. 11; amd. 1974 Code)
   (C)   Liquor Establishment: No retailer of liquors shall by himself, his
agent, servant or clerk suffer or permit any species of gaming in any part of
his premises, or in any place adjacent thereto under his control.
   (D)   Card Tables: No person shall be permitted to keep, have, exercise or
maintain any card table, dice, bagatelle or pigeonhole table, faro bank, or any
kind of gambling device at which or on which any game of chance is played for
any valuable thing, within the village, or the representative of any valuable
thing. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 7)
6-1-15: GETTING UPON VEHICLES:
No person shall get into or upon any wagon, carriage, sleigh or other vehicle
without the consent of the owner, nor shall otherwise in any way purposely
annoy or molest any person; and no person shall get upon or hold on to any car
or engine or tender while the same is in motion on any railroad in the village,
unless such person be in the employ of such railroad or a passenger thereon, or
has been invited to get thereon by some employee of such road. (R.O. 1908, Ord.
11)
6-1-16: HINDERING OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully delay, hinder or obstruct any
officer of the village, or any person aiding such officer, in the discharge of
any official duty, or to aid, abet or encourage any other person to perform any
of the acts above mentioned, or to neglect or refuse to obey any of the acts
above mentioned or to neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order or directions
of said officer. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-17: HOUSE OF ILL FAME:
   (A)   Maintaining House: It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of
keeping, maintaining or contributing directly or indirectly to the support of
any house of ill fame or house of assignation, or place used for the practice
of fornication or adultery within the village.
   (B)   Allow Use of Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly suffer or permit any premises occupied by him, or under his control,
within the Village, to be used as a house of ill-fame, or as a house of
assignation, or as a place for the practice of fornication or adultery.
   (C)   Inmates: It shall be unlawful for any person to be an occupant or
inmate of any house of ill-fame, or house of assignation, or any place used for
the practice of fornication or adultery within the Village.
   (D)   Visitors: It shall be unlawful for any person to be found in any house
of ill-fame or assignation or in any place used for the practice of fornication
or adultery within the Village.
   (E)   Witness, Juror: No person shall be subject to any penalty whatever for
or on account of any admission, evidence or testimony which he may make or give
as a witness in any court concerning his being an occupant or inmate or of
being found in any house of ill-fame, or house of assignation, or gaming house,
or place used for the practice of fornication or adultery.
In all cases arising under any subsection hereof, no person shall be a
competent juror unless he shall be a citizen of this State and a resident of
Woodford County.
   (F)   Reputation: In any case arising under any of the subsections hereof,
the fact that any house is a house of ill-fame or house of assignation, or that
any place is used for the practice of fornication or adultery, shall be
sufficiently proven by evidence that such is the general reputation of the
same. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 10)
   (G)   Right of Entry: The proper law enforcing officer is hereby authorized
to enter any house of ill-fame or house of assignation, or any place used for
the practice of fornication or adultery within the Village and to enter all
parts of the same at any time in the day or night by breaking inside doors, and
to arrest all the occupants or inmates thereof, and every person who shall be
found therein with or without process and detain them until they can be brought
before some competent court for trial. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 10; amd. Ord. 79-3, 5-
7-79, eff. 5-8-79 at 6:00 A.M.)
6-1-18: INJURING PROPERTY:
   (A)   Injure Electric Light Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to
wilfully or intentionally injure, remove, deface or in any way damage any
electric lamp, wire, pole or any article or thing belonging thereto, or any
other street lamps.
      The parents or guardian of any minor offender against the provisions of
this subsection shall be held liable for all damages sustained by reason of
such offending and costs of prosecution.
      All fines collected under the provisions of this subsection, after paying
for the property damaged or destroyed in violation of the same, shall be turned
into the Village Treasury. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 16)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the Village to be guilty of
defacing any building or buildings, fence, sign, tree, box, lamppost or other
property belonging to the Municipal corporation or any private corporation or
person, by cutting, breaking, daubing with paint or other substance, or by
hitching horses or other animals to, or to in any other manner deface, tear
down, injure or destroy the same.
6-1-19: KILLING, INJURING CERTAIN ANIMALS:
   (A)   Birds: It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to
shoot, injure or capture any bird, or to intentionally destroy or injure the
nest eggs of any bird. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
   (B)   Squirrels: No squirrel or squirrels shall be killed within the Village
at any season of the year. (Ord. 50, 8-3-08)
6-1-20: LEWDNESS:
   (A)   Indecent Language: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any
indecent, profane, vulgar or obscene language in any public place.
   (B)   Indecent Exposure: It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly,
purposely, make an indecent exposure of his or her person, or appear in any
indecent or lewd dress, or in a state of nudity, or to be guilty of any other
lewd or indecent act or behavior.
   (C)   Indecent Books, Statues: It shall be unlawful for any person to
exhibit, sell or offer to sell, any indecent, obscene or lewd book, picture,
statue or other like thing, or to exhibit or perform any indecent, lewd or
obscene play, exhibition or other representation.
   (D)   Obscene Markings: It shall be unlawful for any person, in any place
open to the public view, to write, mark, draw, cut or make any obscene, lewd or
indecent word, sentence, design or figure. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 10)
6-1-21: LOITERING:
All persons who shall loiter about any street corner or in the vicinity of any
church, place of amusement, hotel or other public place or about or in the
entrance leading to any public hall or building or any business house, thereby
obstructing any sidewalk or street or interfering with the public convenience
and who shall refuse or neglect to disperse when requested by any Village
officer, or the owner or occupant of the building or buildings adjacent, or
their agents, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11;
amd. 1974 Code)
6-1-22: NOISE DISTURBANCE:
   (A)   Definitions:
 
              Additional evidence of a different person or character to the
              same point. A complaint is said to be corroborated when it is
CORROBORATED: shown to correspond with the representation of another witness or
              to comport with some fact otherwise known or established related
              to the violation.
              Any sound made or caused to be made by a person or by an animal,
NOISE:        vehicle, mechanical device, or contrivance under a person's
              control.
 
   (B)   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be
emitted any noise in any manner that is unreasonably loud, unnecessary, and
disturbing or annoying.
   (C)   Interpretation: For the purposes of this section, noises occurring
between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. are
more unreasonable, disturbing, and unnecessary than noises occurring between
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. However, during
community events held in the Village, including swim meets and sporting events
held by community youth programs and festivities and firework shows held as
part of the 4th of July celebration, the nighttime hour shall be extended later
until the conclusion of that community event for sounds and noises created by
the particular community event. Additionally, repetitious sounds are more
unreasonable, disturbing, and unnecessary than intermittent sounds.
   (D)   First Complaint: Upon receipt of a complaint or observation of a
violation of this section, the person shall be notified of the violation and
served with a written copy of this section, and a record of such service shall
be maintained by village officials or the village's law enforcement agency.
This service may be obtained by personal service or by certified or registered
mail. If the person cannot be served or refuses service after a reasonable
attempt to do so, service can be obtained by regular mail or by posting the
violation notice and copy of this section on the front door of the person's
residence or building located on the property on which the violation has
occurred.
   (E)   Subsequent Violation: If, at any time within twelve (12) months of the
service described above, another such violation occurs and is complained of and
corroborated, the person may be issued a citation charging a violation of this
section. However, if a law enforcement officer witnesses or observes the
subsequent violation, such violation need not be complained of or corroborated
by another person. Additional notice shall not be required at any time during
the twelve (12) month period following the initial notice in order for a
subsequent violation or violations of this section to occur.
   (F)   Penalty: A person violating this section shall be fined not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each such offense. A person violating this section within twelve (12) months of
the first violation shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such offense. The
chairperson of the village's ordinance committee shall be permitted to issue
administrative citations for violations of this section under section
1-4-13 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each date
upon which a violation occurs. (Ord. 2005-06, 8-1-2005; amd. Ord. 2019-08, 8-
19-2019)
6-1-23: PERSONATING AN OFFICER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be an
officer of the village or to, without authority, exercise or attempt to
exercise any of the powers and duties of any village officer. (R.O. 1908, Ord.
11; amd. Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-1979)
6-1-24: PLAYING BALL IN STREETS:
No person shall throw or strike any baseball or missile of any kind in or about
the streets or alleys of the village, or shall play baseball or shinny or other
similar games, or shoot with bow and arrows, or rubber shooter, in or near any
street, alley or avenue of the village, or shall throw any snowball or other
missile, to the annoyance of any person in the village. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-25: SPRING OR AIR GUN, DISCHARGING:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the village to discharge any spring or
air gun of any kind. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 34)
It shall also be unlawful for any person on Sunday to disturb the peace or vex
or annoy any person or family or any religious assemblage. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 14)
6-1-26: THROWING MISSILES:
No person shall purposely or heedlessly cast or throw any stone or other
missile from or into any public place or at any person. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-27: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLAGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly suffer or permit any
assemblage for the purpose of disturbance of the peace or of committing any
unlawful act or breach of the peace or any riotous, offensive, tumultuous or
disorderly conduct, in or upon any premises owned or occupied by him or under
his control. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-28: VAGRANCY:
Any person able to work and maintain himself in any legitimate calling or
business, not having any visible means of support, who idly without employment,
loiters or strolls about idly, begging or frequenting gambling houses,
disorderly or bawdy houses or places where intoxicating liquors are sold, or
who shall otherwise lead an idle or dissolute course of life, or any person who
shall have in his possession any instrument used for counterfeiting or the
commission of a burglary, or for picking locks or pockets or other implement or
device used by cheats and swindlers without being able to give a good and
satisfactory account of his possession of the same or who shall trespass upon
private property in the nighttime or habitually sleeps in sheds or stables,
outhouses, barns, unoccupied dwelling houses or in the open air, without being
able to give a satisfactory account of himself and all habitual night walkers
or persons strolling or walking about the streets at late or unusual hours of
the night without being able to give a satisfactory account of themselves,
shall be deemed vagrants. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 11)
6-1-29: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter, as amended from time to time, shall be a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine or public service as set forth in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code as amended from time to time, by imprisonment
not to exceed six (6) months as authorized by the Illinois municipal code, or
by any combination of fine, public service, and imprisonment. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-
4-2002)
6-1-30: TRESPASSING:
   (A)   Village Lagoon:
      1.   There will be no trespassing at the village lagoon or any property
immediately confined by the fence around the village lagoon.
      2.   Appropriate signs stating "No Trespassing" will be placed in
locations around the lagoon in such a manner as to be immediately visible to
all the public.
      3.   Any disrepair or holes in the fence surrounding the lagoon and
barring access will be immediately repaired upon passage of this subsection
(A).
      4.   The fine for violating this trespassing ordinance will be fifty
dollars ($50.00) per offense. (Ord. 1991-7, 7-1-1991)
6-1-31: CURFEW:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor person under seventeen (17) years
of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or
highway at the following times unless accompanied or supervised by a parent,
legal guardian, or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of
age approved by a parent or legal guardian, or unless engaged in a business or
occupation which the laws of the state of Illinois authorize a person of less
than seventeen (17) years of age to perform:
      1.   Between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Saturday;
      2.   Between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Sunday; and
      3.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian, or other person
to knowingly permit any person in his custody or control to violate subsection
(A) of this section.
   (C)   A person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00). If an administrative citation is issued under the
administrative enforcement provisions set forth in section
1-4-13 of this code for a violation of this section, the administrative
enforcement citation shall impose a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the
violation of this section to be paid to the village of Roanoke. (Ord. 2003-10,
9-2-2003, eff. 10-3-2003)
6-1-32: USE OF SKATEBOARDS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or otherwise use a
skateboard on any public sidewalk or street located in the "restricted area",
as defined in subsection (B) of this section, in the village of Roanoke.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the "restricted area" is defined as
the area lying between the following streets in the village, including the duly
designated streets: (east of) Jefferson Street, (south of) Ann Street, (west
of) State Street, and (north of) Front Street/Route 116.
   (C)   A person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). If an administrative citation is issued under the administrative
enforcement provisions set forth in section
1-4-13 of this code for a violation of this section, the administrative
enforcement citation shall impose a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the
violation of this section to be paid to the village of Roanoke. Multiple
violations of this section under the administrative provisions of section
1-4-13 of this code shall carry a fine as designated in section
1-4-13 of this code. (Ord. 2003-14, 10-20-2003)
6-1-33: POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS:
   (A)   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this section:
   POSSESSION: To have upon one's person or have in close proximity to one's
person or in one's control.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Cigarettes, cigars, smokeless tobacco (which means tobacco
in any form which is suitable for dipping and/or chewing) or tobacco in any
other form.
   (B)   Delivery And Possession Of Tobacco Products:
      1.   Delivery Of Tobacco Products To Minors: It shall be unlawful for any
person, whether acting individually or acting through an owner, officer,
employee or agent, to sell, give, distribute, furnish, or deliver any tobacco
products in any form to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
      2.   Possession Of Tobacco Products By A Minor: No person under eighteen
(18) years of age shall have in his or her possession any tobacco product in
any of its forms. It shall not be a violation of this section for any such
person to have tobacco products in his or her possession while in the presence
of his or her parents or legal guardian, or in the performance of a religious
ceremony or while participating in any theatrical performance where possession
of a tobacco product is necessary.
   (C)   Penalties:
      1.   Delivery To A Minor: A person convicted of a violation of subsection
(B)1 of this section shall have committed a petty offense and shall be fined
not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). If an administrative citation is issued under the
administrative enforcement provisions set forth in section
1-4-13 of this code for a violation of this section, the administrative
enforcement citation shall impose a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a
first offense, four hundred dollars ($400.00) for the second offense in a
twelve (12) month period, and six hundred dollars ($600.00) for the third or
any subsequent offense in a twelve (12) month period.
      2.   Possession By A Minor: A person convicted of a violation of
subsection (B)2 of this section shall have committed a petty offense and shall
be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). If an administrative citation is issued under the
administrative enforcement provisions set forth in section
1-4-13 of this code for a violation of this section, the administrative
enforcement citation shall impose a fine of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for
the violation of this section to be paid to the village of Roanoke. Multiple
violations of this section under the administrative provisions of section
1-4-13 of this code shall carry a fine as designated in section
1-4-13 of this code.
      3.   Enhanced Penalty For Violations On School Grounds And Parks: If a
person is convicted of a violation of subsection (B)2 of this section while the
person is on the grounds or facilities comprising a park or school (including
school buses), or is within two hundred fifty feet (250') of such school or
park grounds, the person shall have committed a petty offense and shall be
fined not less than one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). If an administrative citation is issued
under the administrative enforcement provisions set forth in section
1-4-13 of this code for a violation of this section, the administrative
enforcement citation shall impose a fine of one hundred twenty five dollars
($125.00) for the violation of this section to be paid to the village of
Roanoke. Multiple violations of this section under the administrative
provisions of section
1-4-13 of this code shall carry a fine as designated in section
1-4-13 of this code. (Ord. 2006-08, 11-6-2006)
6-1-34: DUMPING ON VILLAGE PROPERTY:
   (A)   Dumping Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage,
refuse, ashes, or any unwanted item or unwanted material on any village
property or in any village receptacle at any time unless such person or entity
has express prior consent from the village to dump or place garbage, refuse,
ashes, or any unwanted item or unwanted materials on village property or in a
village receptacle.
   (B)   Recycling Receptacles: It shall be unlawful to dump or place any non-
recyclable items or materials, including garbage or refuse, in or adjacent to a
village recycling receptacle located on village property or the village right-
of-way or on the village property, village street, or village right-of-way
adjacent to or near the village recycling receptable. The village may use a
security camera or other electronic system to monitor the area around the
village recycling receptacle that records video or photographic evidence of
violations of this provision of section
6-1-34 of the village code. A “village recycling receptable” as used in this
section
6-1-34 of the village code includes a recycling receptacle owned or leased by
the village or placed on village property at the village’s request through a
contract for recycling or other village authorization.
   (C)   Signage: The Village shall post signage on or near village property or
village receptacles in a location that provides reasonable notice and warning
to violators and potential violators that dumping is prohibited on the property
or in the receptacle and that a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) will be imposed for any violations of this “no dumping" provision.
Further, if a video or electronic surveillance system is being used under
subpart (B) of this section
6-1-34 of the village code, the signage must also provide reasonable notice and
warning to violators that a video or other electronic surveillance system is
being used to monitor the area around the village recycling receptacle.
However, the violator's lack of knowledge or viewing of such signage shall not
be a defense to committing a violation of this section.
   (D)   Penalty: A person or entity violating this section shall be fined not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each such offense. A person
violating this section within twelve (12) months of the first violation shall
be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second offense and
not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each subsequent offense
in the twelve (12) month period. The chairperson of the village's ordinance
committee or any law enforcement officer shall be permitted to issue
administrative citations for violations of this section under section
1-4-13 of this code with a fine in the amount as set forth in this subpart (D)
of this section
6-1-34 of the village code as the minimum fine for the violation. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each date upon which a violation occurs.
In addition to any fine imposed for a violation of this section of the Village
Code, a person convicted of a violation of this section shall be required to
reimburse the Village for the reasonable cost of removal and disposal of the
garbage, refuse, ashes, unwanted item, or unwanted material dumped or placed on
village property or in a village receptacle in violation of this section. (Ord.
2020-05, 4-20-2020; amd. Ord. 2020-07, 6-1-2020; Ord. 2024-05, 7-15-2024)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMALS; FOWL
(Rep. by Ord. 1985-6, 10-7-1985)
CHAPTER 3
DOGS, CATS AND ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definition
6-3-2: Vaccination Against Rabies
6-3-3: Running At Large
6-3-4: Impounding And Destroying
6-3-5: Animals Creating A Disturbance
6-3-6: Dangerous, Mischievous Animals
6-3-7: Deliberate Violation For Purpose Of Impoundment
6-3-8: Vicious Dogs
6-3-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, the word "dog" shall be construed to include
animals of every kind and description of the canine species whatsoever from and
over three (3) months of age, and shall also include the female as well as the
male. For the purpose of this chapter, the word "cat" shall be construed to
include animals of every kind and description of the feline species whatsoever
from and over three (3) months of age and shall also include the female as well
as the male. The word "animal" used in this chapter shall include any other two
(2) or four (4) legged animal. (Ord. 1985-6, 10-7-1985)
6-3-2: VACCINATION AGAINST RABIES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, maintain or harbor a
dog, cat or other animal requiring rabies vaccination within the village
without first having said dog, cat or other animal vaccinated by a licensed
veterinarian against rabies, and it shall be the duty of every such person
owning, having charge of or control of any dog, cat or other animal requiring
rabies vaccination to have said dog, cat or other animal vaccinated against
rabies annually thereafter.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian vaccinating a dog,
cat or other animal requiring rabies vaccination against rabies to issue a
certificate showing the date of such vaccination, a description of the dog, cat
or other animal requiring rabies vaccination, and the name and address of the
owner thereof. Such certificates shall be in triplicate and be numbered in the
order issued. One copy of such certificate shall be retained by the
veterinarian, and two (2) copies shall be delivered to the owner. One copy of
said certificate shall be filed by the owner of the dog, cat or other animal
requiring rabies vaccination at the time said dog, cat or other animal is
registered and the other copy shall be retained by the owner of the dog, cat or
other animal. (Ord. 1985-6, 10-7-1985)
6-3-3: RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person keeping, maintaining or harboring a dog,
cat or any other animal to allow said dog, cat or other animal to run at large
at any time beyond the limits of the land of its owner, and upon the streets,
sidewalks or other public or private property. For the purpose of this section,
a dog, cat or other animal shall be considered not to be at large whenever said
dog, cat or other animal is under the control of a person by means of a leash,
chain, cord or rope of not more than ten feet (10') in length and of sufficient
strength to control said dog, cat or other animal. (Ord. 1985-6, 10-7-1985)
6-3-4: IMPOUNDING AND DESTROYING 1 :
Any dog, cat or other animal found in the village in violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be impounded by the animal control officer or anyone else
authorized by the president and board of trustees to perform such duties, and
placed or kept in a suitable place. The animal control officer or any police
officer or anyone else properly delegated by the village, may, following the
impounding of such dog, cat or other animal, notify the owner of the dog, cat
or other animal, or if the owner of the dog, cat or other animal is unknown,
said individual shall post written notices in at least three (3) public places
in the village describing the dog, cat or other animal and the place and time
of taking of said dog, cat or other animal. Unless the dog, cat or other animal
is redeemed and all charges paid, and the dog, cat or other animal is
registered and vaccinated as herein required, said dog, cat or other animal may
be sold or destroyed in the most humane manner possible after the expiration of
seven (7) days from the time said dog, cat or other animal is impounded or the
posting of notices aforesaid; provided, however, that any dog, cat or other
animal which appears to be suffering from rabies or affected with hydrophobia,
mange or other infectious, contagious or dangerous disease shall not be
released, but may be destroyed forthwith. Additionally, any animal impounded
under the terms of this provision, shall not be released until all fines and
other sums have been paid to the person designated to receive such sums by the
president and board of trustees of the village.
If a person claims an animal, be it a dog, cat or other animal, which has been
confined pursuant to the terms of this section, said person, shall be
responsible for all expenses for boarding as well as any vaccination or medical
treatment that is necessary for that animal, dog or cat. This applies to all
animals picked up pursuant to the terms of this section. The fine for the
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00)
for the first offense and twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the second offense
and every offense thereafter. (Ord. 1985-6, 10-7-1985)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  6-3-8 of this chapter.
6-3-5: ANIMALS CREATING A DISTURBANCE:
   (A)   Definitions:
   ANIMAL: Any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild, male and
female, singular and plural.
   CORROBORATED: Additional evidence of a different person or character to the
same point. A complaint is said to be corroborated when it is shown to
correspond with the representation of another witness or to comport with some
fact otherwise known or established related to the violation.
   OWNER OR KEEPER: Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who
has it in his care or control, or who knowingly permits such animal to remain
on property owned or controlled by him. If such animal is licensed, the person
last issued such license shall be presumed to be the owner of the animal and,
for the purposes of this section, if such person is a minor then the parent or
guardian with whom the child resides shall be considered to be the "owner or
keeper".
   (B)   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to be the owner or
keeper of any animal or animals which emit noises in such a manner that is
unreasonably loud, unnecessary, and disturbing or annoying.
   (C)   Interpretation: For the purposes of this section, noises occurring
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
are more unreasonable, disturbing, and unnecessary than noises occurring
between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. Additionally,
repetitious sounds are more unreasonable, disturbing, and unnecessary than
intermittent sounds.
   (D)   First Complaint: Upon receipt of a complaint or observation of a
violation of this section, the owner or keeper of the animal or animals shall
be notified of the violation and served with a written copy of this section,
and a record of such service shall be maintained by village officials or the
village's law enforcement agency. This service may be obtained by personal
service or by certified or registered mail. If the person cannot be served or
refuses service after a reasonable attempt to do so, service can be obtained by
regular mail or by posting the violation notice and copy of this section on the
front door of the person's residence or building located on the property on
which the violation has occurred.
   (E)   Subsequent Violation: If, at any time within twelve (12) months of the
service described above, another such violation occurs and is complained of and
corroborated, the person may be issued a citation charging a violation of this
section. However, if a law enforcement officer witnesses or observes the
subsequent violation, such violation need not be complained of or corroborated
by another person. Additional notice shall not be required at any time during
the twelve (12) month period following the initial notice in order for a
subsequent violation or violations of this section to occur.
   (F)   Penalty: A person violating this section shall be fined not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each such offense. A person violating this section within twelve (12) months of
the first violation shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such offense. The
chairperson of the village's ordinance committee shall be permitted to issue
administrative citations for violations of this section under section
1-4-13 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each date
upon which a violation occurs. (Ord. 2005-06, 8-1-2005)
6-3-6: DANGEROUS, MISCHIEVOUS ANIMALS:
Whoever knowingly suffers or permits any dangerous, unruly, or mischievous
animal owned or kept by him to go at large in the village to the danger,
annoyance, or damage of any person within the village shall be subject to a
penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense, and not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
subsequent offense. (Ord. 2005-06, 8-1-2005)
6-3-7: DELIBERATE VIOLATION FOR PURPOSE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
Whoever wilfully drives or entices any animal from beyond the inhabited part of
the village into the inhabited part of the village, or aids or abets the same,
or lets any animal out of any enclosure in which it may be confined, or aids or
abets in the letting out or escape thereof, in order to take up or impound the
same shall be subject to a penalty of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in each case. (Ord.
2005-06, 8-1-2005)
6-3-8: VICIOUS DOGS:
   (A)   Definition Of Vicious Dog: For the purposes of this chapter, "vicious
dog" is defined as:
      1.   Any individual dog that, without provocation, bites or attacks a
human being or domestic animal either on public or private property; or
      2.   Any individual dog that has a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury, or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or
      3.   Any individual dog that is owned or harbored primarily or in part
for the purpose of dogfighting or is trained for dogfighting; or
      4.   Any individual dog that has, upon two (2) separate occasions, when
either unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner or a member of its
owner's family, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approached any person in an
apparent attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks, any public grounds or
places, or private property not owned or controlled by the owner.
      5.   No dog shall be deemed "vicious" if it bites, attacks, or menaces a
trespasser on the property of its owner, anyone assaulting its owner, anyone
who has tormented or abused the dog or its offspring, or is a professionally
trained dog used for law enforcement or guard duties.
   (B)   Definition Of Owner: For the purposes of this chapter, "owner" is
defined as any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or
harbors an animal, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian.
   (C)   Possession Illegal: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep,
harbor, or in any way possess within the corporate limits of the village a
vicious dog, unless the dog is spayed or neutered, and unless the dog is
licensed and confined as provided by this chapter.
   (D)   Identification Of Vicious Dogs: Any law enforcement officer or animal
control officer employed by or under contract with the village or Woodford
County who suspects that a dog may be vicious within the meaning of this
section may conduct an investigation to determine whether or not the dog has
committed any act or displays any characteristics which qualify it as a vicious
dog. If upon the completion of such investigation the officer concludes that
the dog is a vicious dog, such officer shall issue a written notice of
determination which includes at least the following:
      1.   A description of the dog;
      2.   Information available concerning the ownership of the dog;
      3.   A statement or conclusion that the dog is a vicious dog within the
meaning of this section;
      4.   A description of the acts or characteristics which led the officer
to conclude that the dog is a vicious dog;
      5.   Notice to the owner that the vicious dog must be licensed and
confined in accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
      6.   Notice that the owner may appeal the determination of the officer to
the village president within seven (7) working days after the determination is
served upon the owner.
This notice of determination shall be served on the owner by certified mail
from the village clerk or the "code official" (as designated in section
7-4-13 of this code) to the last known address of the owner or by personal
service from the officer or any person authorized by law to make personal
service. If the owner cannot be served or refuses service after a reasonable
attempt to do so, service can be obtained by regular mail or by posting the
notice of determination on the front door of the owner's residence.
   (E)   Appeal Of A Determination That A Dog Is A Vicious Dog:
      1.   The owner may appeal the determination that the owner's dog is a
vicious dog. An appeal must be in writing and directed to the village
president, and it must be filed by the owner with the village clerk at the
village hall within seven (7) days after receipt of the notice of determination
which identifies the dog as a vicious dog. Should the owner fail to appeal the
determination within seven (7) days, the determination of the investigating
officer that the dog is a vicious dog shall become final. Upon receipt of an
appeal, the village president, or such person as the village president may
designate to act on the village president's behalf, shall convene a hearing for
the purpose of determining whether the dog in question is a vicious dog.
      2.   The hearing shall be held within no less than five (5) nor more than
ten (10) business days after the village president or his designee provides
written notice of the time, date and location of the hearing upon the owner at
the owner's last known address. The hearing shall be conducted informally and
shall remain open to the public. At the hearing, the owner shall have the
opportunity to present evidence to explain why the dog should not be declared a
vicious dog. The owner shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel
at the owner's expense. The officer who made the initial determination that the
dog is vicious, and any other persons having knowledge of the facts and
circumstances, may be heard by the village president or his designee. All
witnesses at the hearing shall be subject to cross examination by the owner,
village representatives, or either party's attorney. If an appeal has been
properly requested, the village president or his designee shall hold this
hearing and decide all issues related to the appeal regardless of whether the
owner appears at the hearing. Evidence regarding the determination of whether a
dog is a vicious dog may include any acts or incidents involving the dog after
the events that lead to the issuance of the notice of determination up to the
time of the hearing.
      3.   Within five (5) business days after the conclusion of the hearing,
the village president or his designee shall determine whether or not the dog is
a vicious dog within the meaning of this section. The village president or his
designee shall notify the owner in writing of its determination. The decision
of the village president or his designee shall be final.
      4.   If any officer of the village, including a law enforcement officer
or an animal control officer, determines that the public safety requires the
immediate impoundment of a dog as authorized by this section, the officer shall
within a reasonable time notify the owner of the facts and circumstances
relating to the impoundment. Upon receipt of such notification, the owner may
appeal the determination of the officer to the village president or his
designee in accordance with the procedures established hereinabove for the
identification of vicious dogs.
   (F)   Licensing Of Vicious Dogs:
      1.   No person shall possess any vicious dog within village limits
without having first obtained a license for the vicious dog from the village.
However, an owner may continue to possess a vicious dog without a license: a)
during the forty eight (48) hour period after the final determination has been
made that the dog is a vicious dog, and b) during the license application
process described in this subsection (F).
      2.   An application for a license to possess a vicious dog shall be filed
with the village clerk on a form prescribed and provided by the village and
shall be accompanied by all of the following:
         (a)   Verification of the identity of the owner and current address by
providing a photocopy of the owner's driver's license or state identification
card.
         (b)   Proof of ownership of the vicious dog.
         (c)   A copy of the current immunization and health record of the
vicious dog, including certification that the dog has received a rabies vaccine
and that the dog has been spayed or neutered, prepared by a veterinarian
licensed to practice in the state of Illinois.
         (d)   A certificate of insurance evidencing coverage in an amount not
less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), insuring said owner against any
claim, loss, damage or injury to persons, domestic animals, or property
resulting from the acts, whether intentional or unintentional, of the vicious
dog.
         (e)   Two (2) photographs of the vicious dog to be licensed taken not
less than one month before the date of the application. One photograph shall
provide a front view of the vicious dog and shall clearly show the face and
ears of the vicious dog. One photograph shall show a side view of the vicious
dog.
         (f)   A license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
         (g)   A license granted under this subsection (F) for a vicious dog
shall be nontransferable. Any change of owner shall require a new license for
the vicious dog.
      3.   Upon receipt of an application, village officials shall cause an
inspection of the premises on which the vicious dog shall be kept to determine
that all provisions of this section relating to confinement and posting of
signs have been complied with by the applicant. Upon completion of the
inspection, the village clerk shall be notified of the results of the
inspection.
      4.   Based upon the results of the inspection, the village clerk shall
notify the applicant of the approval or denial of the license. In the event
that the license is denied, the notification shall be provided in writing and
the reasons for such denial shall be stated. Upon denial, the owner of the
vicious dog shall remove the vicious dog from the corporate limits of the
village within forty eight (48) hours. Upon approval, the clerk shall issue a
license to the applicant.
   (G)   Reporting Requirements Of License: Any person holding a license
pursuant to this section shall report to the village's law enforcement agency
the incidence of any of the following events as provided herein:
      1.   The sale, barter, exchange, gift or death of any vicious dog shall
be reported to the village clerk within forty eight (48) hours.
      2.   The escape from confinement of any vicious dog shall be reported to
the village's law enforcement agency upon discovery of the escape.
      3.   The biting or nipping of any person or animal by a vicious dog shall
be reported to the village's law enforcement agency upon occurrence.
      4.   The birth of any offspring of a vicious dog shall be reported to the
village clerk within forty eight (48) hours of the birth of the offspring. The
license shall be immediately revoked until proof is provided that the vicious
dog has been spayed or neutered.
      5.   The permanent removal of any vicious dog from the corporate limits
of the village shall be reported within forty eight (48) hours of such removal
by surrender of the license of the owner to the clerk of the village.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the failure to report of any
incident required to be reported under this subsection shall be a violation of
this section.
   (H)   Revocation Of License: A license granted pursuant to this section
shall be automatically revoked upon the second violation by the licensee of any
provision of this section. In the event of a revocation of the license, the
license fee shall be retained by the village and the vicious dog must be
removed from the village within forty eight (48) hours.
   (I)   Confinement Of Vicious Dogs: No person shall possess any vicious dog
unless the vicious dog is confined in accordance with this section. No vicious
dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that
would allow the vicious dog to exit the structure on its own volition. No
vicious dog shall be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or
when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the
vicious dog from exiting the structure. The owner of a vicious dog shall keep
the dog securely confined at all times in a locked pen, locked fenced yard, or
other locked enclosure while on the premises of the owner. The owner shall
display in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his or her premises warning that
there is a vicious dog on the premises. This sign shall be visible and legible
from the road. When the vicious dog is off such premises, the owner shall keep
the dog:
      1.   On a leash or tether not more than five feet (5') long having a
minimum tensile strength of at least three hundred (300) pounds; or
      2.   In a locked pen, or other locked enclosure (i.e., car or truck).
   (J)   Impoundment Of Dogs: A dog shall be impounded for any grounds
enumerated in this subsection by any law enforcement officer or animal control
officer employed by or under contract with the village or Woodford County;
provided, however, that if any law enforcement officer or animal control
officer reasonably believes that such dog poses an immediate threat of severe
injury to any person or domestic animal, such officials are authorized to kill
such dog. Grounds for impoundment include:
      1.   The dog has previously been determined to be a "vicious dog"; and
         (a)   The vicious dog is not confined as provided by subsection (I) of
this section or is running at large; or
         (b)   The owner of a vicious dog has not obtained or applied for a
license within forty eight (48) hours of any determination under this section
that the dog is a vicious dog.
      2.   Whether or not the dog was previously determined to be a vicious
dog:
         (a)   Without provocation, the dog has attacked, bitten or killed a
domestic animal; or
         (b)   The dog was used or possessed for the purposes of dogfighting;
or
         (c)   Without provocation, the dog has attacked, bitten, or killed a
person.
Upon impoundment of a dog, the owner of the dog shall be served notice of
impoundment in the same manner as provided in subsection (D) of this section.
The notice will state whether the dog is subject to redemption or destruction.
The notice will state that all dogs subject to redemption and not redeemed
within fourteen (14) days are subject to destruction. If the dog is not subject
to redemption, the notice shall state that appeal or review of the proposed
destruction must be sought in the circuit court of Woodford County within
fourteen (14) days of receipt of the notice. If the dog is subject to
redemption, but the dog has not been previously determined to be a vicious dog,
notice shall also be given pursuant to subsection (D) of this section that the
dog has been determined to be a vicious dog. If the owner of a dog subject to
redemption appeals the determination that the dog is a vicious dog pursuant to
subsection (E) of this section, and the village president or his designee
determines that the dog is not a vicious dog, the dog shall be released to its
owner without cost, except that the cost of keeping the dog during impoundment
can be assessed to the owner of any dog, vicious or not, found running at
large. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to allow an owner to
appeal a determination that a dog is a vicious dog, if the dog was determined
to be vicious after a previous appeal, or if the owner previously failed to
file a timely appeal of a determination that the dog was a vicious dog.
   (K)   Redemption Of An Impounded Dog:
      1.   Unless a dog is ineligible for redemption under this subsection, an
owner of a vicious dog holding a license pursuant to this section may redeem an
impounded vicious dog subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Proof of a valid license issued by the village under subsection
(F) of this section; and
         (b)   Payment of all costs of keeping the vicious dog during the
period of impoundment.
      2.   If the owner of a dog otherwise subject to redemption fails to
redeem the impounded dog within fourteen (14) days of receiving notice of
impoundment, the dog shall be subject to destruction, provided no dog otherwise
subject to redemption shall be destroyed pending appeal, pursuant to subsection
(E) of this section, of a determination that the dog is a vicious dog. Nothing
in this subsection shall be construed to allow an owner to appeal a
determination that a dog is a vicious dog, if the dog was determined to be
vicious after a previous appeal, or if the owner previously failed to file a
timely appeal of a determination that the dog was a vicious dog.
      3.   An impounded dog shall not be subject to redemption, but shall be
subject to humane destruction, if:
         (a)   Whether or not the dog had previously been determined to be a
vicious dog, the dog causes severe injury, disfigurement or death in an
unprovoked attack on a person; or
         (b)   Subsequent to having been determined, pursuant to this section,
to be a vicious dog, the vicious dog has, without provocation, attacked or
bitten a person on one or more occasions; or
         (c)   Subsequent to having been determined, pursuant to this section,
to be a vicious dog, the vicious dog has, without provocation, killed a
domestic animal on one or more occasions; or
         (d)   Whether or not the dog had previously been determined to be a
vicious dog, the dog was used, with the knowledge or consent of its owner, for
dogfighting.
   (L)   Destruction Of Dogs: A dog that has been impounded, and: 1) has not
been redeemed by its owner, or 2) is not subject to redemption, shall be
destroyed in a humane fashion, no sooner than fourteen (14) days after its
owner has received actual notice of impoundment, provided:
      1.   If the dog is otherwise subject to redemption, and the owner is
appealing, pursuant to subsection (E) of this section a determination that the
dog is a vicious dog, the dog shall not be destroyed pending the appeal and
pending the licensing of the dog, if the dog is determined, after appeal, to be
a vicious dog requiring licensing; or
      2.   An appeal or request for review filed by the owner in the circuit
court of Woodford County shall immediately stay destruction of a dog not
subject to redemption pending a final court order; or
      3.   The village board, for compelling reasons and in its sole
discretion, can require that the vicious dog be placed with any not for profit
or charitable "no kill" shelter or dog rescue organization, provided said
organization agrees that the vicious dog shall not be sold, bartered, made
available for adoption, released or bred.
   (M)   Costs Of Impoundment And Destruction: Except as otherwise provided in
subsection (J) of this section, the owner shall be liable for all costs of
keeping the dog during any period of impoundment (including any period during
which destruction was stayed pending judicial review), all costs for humane
destruction of the dog, and all costs for the disposal or burial of the dog.
Costs of keeping the dog during a period of impoundment include shelter, food,
veterinary expenses, and other expenses necessitated by the seizure of the dog
for the protection of the public.
   (N)   Penalties: Upon conviction of a violation of any provision of this
section, the court shall assess a fine of not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). This penalty is
in addition to any other expenses that an owner may be required to pay under
this section for the impounding or destruction of a dog.
   (O)   Other Statutes And Ordinances: Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the village or law enforcement officials or animal control
officers to control, license, impound, or destroy dogs as otherwise provided by
any other ordinance or statute.
   (P)   Severability: If any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
section is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid by a
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this section. (Ord. 2006-09, 11-6-
2006)
CHAPTER 4
LITTERING
SECTION:
6-4-1: Scattering Litter
6-4-2: Attaching Advertising Matter to Fences or Posts
6-4-3: Deposit of Litter Within Village
6-4-4: Deposit of Litter on Private Property
6-4-1: SCATTERING LITTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or throw upon the public
thoroughfares, any handbills, posters, advertisements or papers. Nothing herein
shall be construed to authorize any person to obstruct the public thoroughfares
or create any nuisance therein. These provisions shall not interfere or prevent
the posting of notices required by law to be posted.
6-4-2: ATTACHING ADVERTISING MATTER TO FENCES OR POSTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack or otherwise attach
any notice or other advertising matter to any fence, wall or building or other
property until first obtaining the consent of the owner of such property. It
shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any
notices or advertising matter to any telegraph, telephone, electric or such
other pole.
6-4-3: DEPOSIT OF LITTER WITHIN VILLAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep or deposit dirt, trash or other
litter into any street or onto any sidewalk within the Village. It shall be
unlawful for any person to scatter papers or other material detrimental to the
order of the Village in the public parks, streets or on any sidewalk.
6-4-4: DEPOSIT OF LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any litter on any private lot or
premises whether such lot is owned by said person or another. All trash or
litter shall be placed in approved receptacles. (Ord. 74-11, 12-16-74)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Health And Sanitation   1
Use Of Public Sewers   2
Industrial Wastes   3
Private Property Maintenance   4
Plants And Weeds   5
Air Pollution   6
Dangerous Or Unsafe Buildings   7
CHAPTER 1
HEALTH AND SANITATION
SECTION:
7-1-1: Disposal Of Dead Animals
7-1-2: Slaughterhouses
7-1-3: Render Lard
7-1-4: Sale Of Diseased Animals
7-1-5: Care Of Fresh Meat
7-1-6: Weeds, Rubbish Accumulation
7-1-1: DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
   (A)   Leaving Dead Animal On Property: It shall be unlawful for any person
to deposit, throw, discharge, place or leave the dead body of any animal or an
nauseous, foul, offensive or putrid liquid or other substance likely to become
offensive or injurious to the health or comfort of any person residing within
the village. (R.O. 1940, Ord. 8)
   (B)   Burial Of Dead Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to bury or
cause to be buried any carcass of any animal anyplace within the village
limits, and any person so doing shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a
nuisance, shall be subject to penalty as provided for by section
1-4-1 of this code, and he shall immediately, upon such conviction, remove said
carcass from the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 98, 3-4-1918)
   (C)   Offensive Substances, Carcass: No person shall, in removing any dead
animal, excrement or other nauseous, offensive or putrid liquid or substance,
purposely or unnecessarily cause the same to be offensive or annoying to any
other person. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 8)
7-1-2: SLAUGHTERHOUSES:
Whenever within the village or within one-half (1/2) mile of the limits of the
same, any slaughterhouse or other building or enclosure used for the purpose of
slaughtering animals shall be or become foul or noisome so as to taint the air
within the village, the owner, keeper and user thereof shall be severally fined
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Should such slaughterhouse, building or enclosure so
continue foul and noisome for ten (10) days after the first conviction of
either owner, keeper or user, or upon the second conviction of either, then, in
either case, it shall be the duty of the proper law enforcing officer or the
street commissioner to notify such owner, keeper or user to forthwith remove
such slaughterhouse, building or enclosure and if said owner, keeper or user
shall not remove the same within three (3) days after such notification, then
the proper law enforcing officer or the street commissioner shall cause the
same to be removed and the costs of said removal may be recovered from such
owner, keeper or user or either of them by any appropriate action. (R.O. 1908,
Ord. 8; amd. Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-1979)
7-1-3: RENDER LARD:
No person shall, within the village, steam, boil or render any tainted lard,
tallow or fat or other animal substance so as to taint the air and render it
unwholesome or offensive. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 8)
7-1-4: SALE OF DISEASED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any sick or
diseased animal, poultry or fish or the flesh of any sick, diseased or
otherwise unwholesome dead animal, poultry or fish or any unsound or
unwholesome provisions or articles to be used for food or any adulterated or
pernicious milk, drink or liquors. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 8)
7-1-5: CARE OF FRESH MEAT:
Any person hauling meat or in any way carrying the same from one point to
another within the village shall keep the same entirely covered with a
material, the texture of which shall be sufficiently close to prevent any and
all flies and other insects from reaching or resting upon the same and keep and
prevent any and all dust and dirt from coming in contact with such meat while
being so carried or hauled. It is further ordained that such said material
covering meat as herein provided shall at all times be kept clean and free from
any rend or tears and subject to the inspection of the board of health at any
reasonable hour. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 44)
7-1-6: WEEDS, RUBBISH ACCUMULATION:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any
lot or tract of land within the corporate boundaries of the village to allow or
permit any noxious plants, weeds, rubbish or other accumulation of noxious
vegetation to grow, accumulate or decay thereon. (Ord. 189, 10-5-1942)
Any person, whether as owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant as aforesaid
who violates this section shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance; and notice
shall be given to such person by the proper law enforcing officer to remove or
abate the same and, unless such nuisance be removed or abated within forty
eight (48) hours after such notice, the person guilty of maintaining such a
nuisance as aforesaid shall be subject to penalty as provided for by section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 189, 10-5-1942; amd. Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-
1979)
CHAPTER 2
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Use Of Public Sewers Required
7-2-2: No Competing Sewer System
7-2-3: Building And Maintaining Sewers
7-2-4: Protection From Damage
7-2-5: Storm Water Drains
7-2-6: Violation
7-2-1: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited
in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the village, or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the village,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village, any sanitary sewage,
commercial or industrial wastes or other polluted solids and liquids except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this chapter.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the village and
abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the village, is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, within forty five (45) days after the date
of official notice to do so, at which time billing will begin whether
connection is made or not, and provided that said public sewer is within one
hundred feet (100') of the property line. (Ord. 1967-6, 6-13-1967)
7-2-2: NO COMPETING SEWER SYSTEM:
In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
the village, no other system of sanitary sewers may be constructed or operated
within the boundaries of the village. A "sanitary sewer system" is hereby
defined as a system serving two (2) or more individual users. (Ord. 1967-6, 6-
13-1967)
7-2-3: BUILDING AND MAINTAINING SEWERS:
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the village. There shall be two
(2) classes of building sewer permits:
      1.   For residential and commercial services, and
      2.   For service to establishments producing industrial waste.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the village. Permit applications shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the superintendent of the sewer system. A permit and inspection fee of
twenty dollars ($20.00) for a residential or commercial building sewer permit
shall be paid to the village treasurer at the time the application is filed.
   (B)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner or the personnel
installing the building sewer for said owner shall indemnify the village from
any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by said
installation. The owner installing said sewer system shall extend his sewer
line with the approval of the superintendent of the sewer system and at the
owner's own cost out to the village trunk sewer line. Under no occasion or
situation will the village be obligated to extend or maintain the sewer line
from the trunk to the property owner's property boundary at the cost of the
village. The village shall be responsible for maintaining a flow in the trunk
line between manholes; the property owner shall be responsible for maintaining
a flow between their property boundary and the trunk line.
   (C)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer. Other exceptions will be allowed only
by special permission granted by the superintendent of the sewer system.
   (D)   Old building sewers or portions thereof, may be used in connection
with the new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the
superintendent of the sewer system to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   The building sewer and fittings shall be constructed of PVC SDR 26.
All sewers shall be laid on suitable improved bed or cradle as approved by the
superintendent of the sewer system.
   (F)   All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. All
plumbing shall be done in accordance with and shall meet the requirements as
set forth by the current editions of the Illinois plumbing code and the
standard specifications for water and sewer main construction in Illinois
manuals.
   (G)   The size and slope of the building sewers shall be subject to the
approval of the superintendent of the sewer system, but in no event shall the
diameter be less than four inches (4"). The slope of such four inch (4") pipe
shall not be less than one-eighth inch (1/8") per foot. A slope of one-fourth
inch (1/4") per foot shall be used wherever practical.
   (H)   Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth shall be sufficient to
afford protection from frost. All excavations required for the installation of
a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
superintendent of the sewer system. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed
in accordance with ASTM specifications (designation 312) except that no
backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected by the
superintendent of the sewer system or his representative.
   (I)   In all the buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drains shall
be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. No
water operated sewage ejector shall be used.
   (J)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the "Y" branch designated for that property, if such branch is
available at a suitable location. Any connection not made at the designated "Y"
branch in the main sewer shall be made only as directed by the superintendent
of the sewer system.
   (K)   The applicant for the building sewer shall notify the superintendent
of the sewer system when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the superintendent of the sewer system or his representative.
   (L)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, curb and gutter, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory
to the village. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
   (M)   No one shall in any way excavate village property for any reason
without the specific written consent of the president of the village board, the
chairperson of the village's water and sewer committee, or the superintendent
of the sewer system. (Ord. 2004-13, 6-21-2004)
7-2-4: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the public sanitary sewerage system of the
village. Any person violating this provision shall be charged with the
commission of a misdemeanor and placed under arrest. (Ord. 1967-6, 6-13-1967)
7-2-5: STORM WATER DRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect, or cause to be connected any
sanitary sewer or other tile or drain carrying, or to carry, any sewage or
matter other than unpolluted water to the storm water sewers of the village,
and it shall be unlawful to make or cause to be made any sanitary sewer
connection with lateral storm water sewers which may be connected with said
storm water sewers. (Ord. 178, 1-6-1941)
7-2-6: VIOLATION:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
charged with the commission of a misdemeanor, shall be subject to penalty as
provided for by section
1-4-1 of this code, and shall become liable to the village for any expense,
loss, or damage sustained by the village by reason of such violation. (Ord.
1967-6, 6-13-1967)
CHAPTER 3
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
SECTION:
7-3-1: Prohibited Discharge
7-3-2: Obstructing Flow Of Sewage Works
7-3-3: Preliminary Treatment Of Wastes
7-3-4: Control Manhole
7-3-5: Interceptors
7-3-1: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface
water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters into the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 70-
5, 7-6-1970)
7-3-2: OBSTRUCTING FLOW OF SEWAGE WORKS:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public sewer, any
harmful waters or wastes, whether liquid, solid or gas, capable of causing
obstruction to the flow of the sewage works, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works. (Ord. 70-5, 7-6-1970)
7-3-3: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OF WASTES:
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having harmful or
objectionable characteristics shall be subject to the review and approval of
the village board, who may prescribe limits on the strength and character of
these waters and wastes. Where necessary, in the opinion of the village board,
the owner shall provide at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to treat these wastes prior to discharge to the public sewer. Plans,
specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
village board and of the state board of health, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. Where
preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense. (Ord. 70-5, 7-6-1970)
7-3-4: CONTROL MANHOLE:
When required by the village board, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install and maintain at his
expense a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation sampling and measurement of the wastes. All measurements, tests and
analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be determined in
accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage", and
shall be determined at the control manhole or upon suitable samples taken at
said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. (Ord.
70-5, 7-6-1970)
7-3-5: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
said inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amount, or any flammable wastes, sand and other
harmful ingredients except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. Where installed, they shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at
all times. (Ord. 70-5, 7-6-1970)
CHAPTER 4
PRIVATE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Uncovered Garbage
7-4-3: Windblown Refuse
7-4-4: Deposits On Street
7-4-5: Consent Of Owner
7-4-6: Disposal
7-4-7: Garbage Collection By Village; Fee
7-4-8: Containers
7-4-9: Duty To Collect
7-4-10: Separation
7-4-11: Prima Facie Evidence
7-4-12: Notice Of Violations; Removal; Liens
7-4-13: BOCA Property Maintenance Code
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the words enumerated herein shall have the following
meanings:
   ASHES: Residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.
   GARBAGE: Waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food; waste from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   REFUSE: Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture,
bedding; noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans,
metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass,
crockery, other mineral wastes; street rubbish, including, but not limited to,
street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt and contents of litter
receptacles. (Ord. 75-4, 5-5-1975)
7-4-2: UNCOVERED GARBAGE:
It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the village, any
garbage or other material subject to decay, other than leaves or grass,
excepting in a tightly covered container. (Ord. 75-4, 5-5-1975)
7-4-3: WINDBLOWN REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes or trash
of such nature that it can be blown away by the wind, anywhere in the village.
(Ord. 75-4, 5-5-1975)
7-4-4: DEPOSITS ON STREET:
It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle, any
garbage, refuse or ashes on any public street or alley in the village; provided
that this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse or
ashes in a container complying with the provisions of this chapter, preparatory
to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner provided
herein. (Ord. 75-4, 5-5-1975)
7-4-5: CONSENT OF OWNER:
It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage, refuse or ashes on any
premises in the village without the consent of the owner of such premises.
(Ord. 75-4, 5-5-1975)
7-4-6: DISPOSAL:
It shall be unlawful to dispose of any garbage, refuse or ashes anywhere in the
village except in a legally permitted incinerator or disposal device, properly
constructed and operated, or in a lawfully established garbage or landfill
site. (Ord. 75-4, 5-5-1975)
7-4-7: GARBAGE COLLECTION BY VILLAGE; FEE:
   (A)   Weekly Collection: The collection of garbage, refuse and ashes shall
be available from the village for all premises at least once a week, provided
that the material is properly stored and set out for collection in a container
complying with the provisions of this chapter. Garbage pick up will be at the
curb or street line unless otherwise designated from time to time by the proper
village authorities.
   (B)   Fees: Effective June 1, 2007, there are hereby established the
following monthly fees for garbage collection services provided by the village:
 
Single-family residences          $ 5.00
Business and commercial pick ups  10.00
 
Business pick ups shall also include any dumpster pick up service at any site
in the village. Apartment units will be assessed a single-family residence fee
for each apartment unit.
   (C)   Collection Of Fee: The village collector shall have the duty to assess
and collect the garbage collection fee in conjunction with the collection of
charges for village water and sewer service. The garbage collection fee shall
be payable to the village monthly no later than the close of business on the
fifteenth day of the month immediately following the end of the monthly period
for which garbage collection service has been provided.
   (D)   Liability For Payment: The owner of the premises and the occupant
thereof shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the fee for the garbage
collection service for said premises. This service is provided to the premises
by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises and the
occupant are jointly and severally liable to the village for the payment of
this fee. The garbage collection fee shall run with the property and remain a
liability of the individuals aforementioned.
   (E)   Late Payments: If the fee for garbage collection service is not paid
within fifteen (15) days after the rendition of the bill for such service, then
a penalty of twenty percent (20%) of the amount of the bill shall be added
thereto. (Ord. 2007-05, 5-21-2007)
   (F)   Discontinue Service: If the fee for garbage collection service is not
paid within thirty (30) days after the rendition of the bill for such fee,
creating a delinquency, then a second notice will be sent and will serve as a
notice of delinquency to the owner of the premises as well as the tenant of the
property seven (7) days prior to the date scheduled for termination of
services, informing them of the delinquent amount. Said notice shall state that
garbage collection service will be discontinued seven (7) days from the date of
such notice. If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the village
collector, or the delinquent bill remains unpaid, then the service to the
property will be discontinued on the termination date stated in the final
notice, being seven (7) days from the date of the delinquency notice. Upon
termination of garbage collection services, the owner or occupant of the
premises shall become responsible for removing garbage from such premises.
Garbage collection service shall not be reinstated until all past due bills,
penalties, and other charges are paid in full.
Should the charges for garbage collection service not be paid due to a check
returned by the bank for nonpayment for any reason, the village shall follow
the process set forth in subsection
 8-5-11(B) of this code for addressing the returned check and the resulting
nonpayment of the garbage collection service fee, which shall include the
village's authority to terminate garbage collection services as set forth in
subsection
8-5-11(B) of this code. (Ord. 2008-05, 9-15-2008)
7-4-8: CONTAINERS:
It shall be the duty of every owner or his agent or occupant of any house,
building, flat or apartment in the village where persons reside, board or
lodge, or where animal or vegetable food is prepared or served, or where
"garbage", as hereinbefore defined, is created, to provide for such house,
building, flat or apartment, and at all times to maintain in good order and
repair, containers of reasonable size and number so that all garbage and refuse
will not only fit in such containers, but, additionally, that the containers
can be sealed with lids after the garbage and refuse has been placed therein.
Plastic or polyethylene bags will be permissible for the convenience of the
residents located in residential areas only. However, the condition of said
bags shall be the prime responsibility of the resident and the village will not
be responsible for the collection of strewn garbage or litter from torn bags.
(Ord. 75-4, 5-5-1975)
7-4-9: DUTY TO COLLECT:
The duties of collection and disposal of garbage, ashes and rubbish, together
with the regulations in regard thereto, be and are hereby assigned to the
street and alley committee in conjunction with the board of health of the
village of Roanoke. (Ord. 75-4, 5-5-1975)
7-4-10: SEPARATION:
Refuse which is flammable shall not be mixed or mingled with refuse that is
nonflammable. (Ord. 75-4, 5-5-1975)
7-4-11: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
The fact that garbage, refuse or ashes remain on any occupant's premises in the
village in violation of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence that the
occupant of such premises is responsible for the violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 75-4, 5-5-1975)
7-4-12: NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; REMOVAL; LIENS:
   (A)   When the owner or person in control of a parcel of private property is
in violation of any of the preceding sections of this chapter, the owner or
person in control shall be notified in writing of the violation, specifying the
type of violation, what is to be done to remedy the violation, and granting a
period not to exceed fourteen (14) days within which said condition is to be
remedied. Notification shall be made by certified or registered mail from the
village clerk or the "code official" as designated in section
7-4-13 of this chapter, or by personal service from a proper law enforcement
officer, the "code official" as designated in section
7-4-13 of this chapter, or other person authorized by law to make personal
service.
   (B)   If the condition is not remedied by said owner or person in control of
the private property within fourteen (14) days of the aforementioned
notification, the village may provide for the removal of the garbage and debris
from the private property.
   (C)   The village may recover the reasonable cost of the removal of such
garbage and debris from the owner or person in control of the property. After
the removal of the garbage and debris, village authorities shall present the
owner or person in control of the property with a bill for the reasonable
charges for the removal of such garbage and debris. Unless otherwise designated
by the village, the owner or person in control shall have ten (10) calendar
days to pay such costs. Notice of the bill shall be served upon the owner or
person in control of the property by personal service or by certified or
registered mail.
   (D)   If the costs are not paid within ten (10) days or other time period
designated by the village, the cost and related expenses shall become a lien
against the property. The village or the person performing the service by
authority of the village, in his or its own name, may file a notice of lien in
the office of the recorder of deeds of Woodford County against the property and
the owner or the person in control of the property for such costs and related
expenses. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth
the description of the real estate, the amount of the cost and expense
incurred, and the date or dates when such costs and expense were incurred by
the village.
The lien shall be superior to all prior existing liens and encumbrances, except
taxes, provided that within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is
incurred, the village shall file a notice of lien for the cost and expense
incurred by the village in the office of the recorder of deeds for Woodford
County. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner or persons interested
in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed. The
lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose.
   (E)   Any action taken by the village pursuant to this section shall not
impede or supersede the village's authority to take any other action permitted
under this code, including the issuance of ordinance violation notices that
impose a fine for the violation. (Ord. 2002-13, 8-19-2002)
7-4-13: BOCA PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
   (A)   The nationally recognized BOCA ("Building Officials and Code
Administrators") national property maintenance code/1996, together with all
future supplements and amendments which may from time to time be approved and
published by the governing body or board, is hereby adopted by reference as a
village ordinance governing buildings and structures on any property and
property maintenance within the village.
   (B)   The following insertions and amendments are hereby made to the BOCA
national property maintenance code/1996, and these insertions and amendments
together with the text of the BOCA national property maintenance code/1996
shall constitute the form of the BOCA national property maintenance code/1996
as it shall apply in the village.
      1.   Section PM-101.1: Insert "The Village of Roanoke, Illinois," as the
name of the jurisdiction.
      2.   Section PM-105.1: At the end of the section, add "For the purposes
of the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/1996, the code official shall be
hereby designated as the chairperson of the Village's Ordinances Committee."
      3.   Section PM-106.2: Amend the provision in the first sentence of the
section to read as "be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than
$750.00" and delete the provision which reads "or imprisonment for a term not
to exceed [number] days, or both, at the discretion of the court".
      4.   Section PM-107.2: At the end of the section, add "This section shall
apply except when notice, or the form of the notice, is specifically set forth
elsewhere in this code or the Village Code."
      5.   Section PM-107.3: At the end of this section, add "Additionally,
service of notice may be proper when completed in accordance with other
provisions of the Village Code or the Illinois Municipal Code."
      6.   Section PM-108.1: The text of the entire section is deleted and
replaced with "It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any
unsafe structure, unsafe equipment, or structure unfit for human occupancy, as
these terms are defined below, within the Village, and it shall be unlawful for
the owner, occupant, or person in custody of any unsafe structure, unsafe
equipment, or structure unfit for human occupancy to permit the same to remain
in such condition, or to occupy or allow occupancy of the same while it remains
in such condition. Further, the code official may condemn the property or
equipment pursuant to the provisions set forth below in this Section."
      7.   Section PM-108.1.1: At the end of this section, add "or that lacks
doors or windows making the structure available to or frequented by malefactors
or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of the structure".
      8.   Section PM-108.1.2: Add the phrase "fence," after the phrase
"includes any".
      9.   Section PM-110.1: The text of the entire section is deleted and
replaced with "See Chapter 7 of Title 7 in the Village Code."
      10.   Sections PM-110.2, PM-110.3, and PM-110.4 are deleted in their
entirety.
      11.   Section PM-111.0, entitled "Means of Appeal", and all its
subsections are deleted in their entirety.
      12.   Section PM-303.4: The text of the entire section is deleted and
replaced with "See Chapter 5 of Title 7 in the Village Code."
      13.   Section PM-303.8: The text of the entire section is deleted and
replaced with "See Section
9-5-8 of the Village Code."
      14.   Section PM-304.15: Delete the provision that reads "During the
period from [date] to [date]" and replace with "Throughout the year".
      15.   Section PM-602.2.1: Insert "during the period from September 1st to
June 1st" for the dates.
      16.   Section PM-602.3: Insert "during the period from September 1st to
June 1st" for the dates.
(Ord. 2002-13, 8-19-2002)
CHAPTER 5
PLANTS AND WEEDS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Weeds Declared A Nuisance
7-5-2: Height
7-5-3: Barberry Bushes
7-5-4: Removal; Notice
7-5-5: Abatement
7-5-6: Filing Of Lien For Removal Costs
7-5-7: Growth Of Weeds Prohibited
7-5-1: WEEDS DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Any weeds, including such weeds as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur
or other weeds of a like kind, found growing on any lot or tract of land in the
village or standing uncut or otherwise uncontrolled are hereby declared to be a
nuisance. (Ord. 2002-13, 8-19-2002)
7-5-2: HEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants other than
trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow to a height
exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the village; any such plants or weeds
as exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. The only
exception to this height regulation is a home garden, which need not comply
with this height regulation. (Ord. 2003-06, 6-2-2003)
7-5-3: BARBERRY BUSHES:
It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to plant or permit the growth of a bush or
the species of tall, common or European barberry, further known as the Berberis
vulgaris or its horticultural varieties within the village. (Ord. 75-5, 4-21-
1975)
7-5-4: REMOVAL; NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of the "code official", as designated in section
7-4-13 of this title, to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner or
occupant of any premises on which weeds, plants, or grasses are permitted to
grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter and to demand the abatement
of the nuisance within seven (7) days.
Notice shall be served by personal service, by certified or registered mail, or
by posting a sign on the premises of the property in violation. Personal
service may be obtained through delivery of the notice by a village employee,
the "code official", or any person authorized by law to make personal service.
Service by certified or registered mail may be obtained by addressing and
sending the notice to the residence or usual place of business of the owner or
person in control of the property. Service by posting a sign on the premises
with an occupied structure may be obtained by posting a sign in a conspicuous
place near the main entrance of a structure on the property. Service by posting
a sign on the premises with a vacant lot or an unoccupied structure may be
obtained by posting a sign on the property in a conspicuous place near a public
street or roadway adjacent to the property or an entry point onto the property.
The posted sign shall be at least fourteen inches (14") in height and eight
inches (8") in width and at the top thereof in large letters shall state the
words "Notice to Abate". The text of the notice shall contain a reference to
the provision of this code violated and may contain such other information
respecting the nature of the violation as the "code official" deems advisable.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to deface, tamper with, or remove the "Notice
to Abate" sign from the property where it is posted unless authorized by the
"code official". (Ord. 2003-06, 6-2-2003)
7-5-5: ABATEMENT:
If the person so served or provided notice as set forth in section
7-5-4 of this chapter does not abate the nuisance within seven (7) days from
the date of the service or notice, the chairman of the street and alley
committee may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the
expenses of the abatement and any related costs and such expenses and related
costs shall be charged to and paid by such property owner or occupant. (Ord.
2003-06, 6-2-2003)
7-5-6: FILING OF LIEN FOR REMOVAL COSTS:
When the village has abated the nuisance as mentioned in the preceding section,
the chairman of the street and alley committee shall cause a notice of such
charges, along with notice of both the applicable statutory authority and this
chapter, to be served on such owner or occupant of the offending premises by
personal service or certified mail after the abatement. Said owner or occupant
shall have ten (10) calendar days within which to pay such charges. Whenever
payment pursuant to such notice has not been paid within ten (10) days or other
time period designated by the village, the incurred expenses shall become a
lien against the property. The village or person performing the service by
authority of the village, in his or its own name, may file a notice of lien in
the office of the recorder of deeds in Woodford County against the property and
the owner for such expenses. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn
statement setting forth the description of the real estate, the amount of the
cost and expense incurred, and the date or dates when such cost and expense
were incurred by the village.
The lien shall be superior to all prior existing liens and encumbrances, except
taxes, provided that within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is
incurred, the village shall file a notice of lien for the cost and expense
incurred by the village in the office of the recorder of deeds for Woodford
County. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner or persons interested
in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed. The
lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose.
Any action taken by the village pursuant to this section shall not impede or
supersede the village's authority to take any other action permitted under this
code, including the issuance of ordinance violation notices that impose a fine
for the violation. (Ord. 2002-13, 8-19-2002)
7-5-7: GROWTH OF WEEDS PROHIBITED:
As provided in this section, "growth of weeds" shall mean that such weeds have
exceeded the height limitations set forth in section
7-5-2 of this chapter.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or person in control of
any real property to permit the growth of weeds on such property.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or person in
control of any real property to permit the growth of weeds on any right of way
located between the property line of such property and the roadway portion of
an adjoining roadway, highway, or alleyway, inclusive of all parkways,
sidewalks, and waterways found thereon. When a parcel or right of way has,
because of a dangerously steep slope or gradient or for other similar reasons,
weed growth in a natural state and such area has not been previously graded,
improved, or otherwise maintained, this provision shall not apply to that
portion of the right of way with such slope or gradient.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or person in control of
any real property to permit the encroachment of vegetation, including all
weeds, flowers, bushes, hedges, trees, or any other plant growth, to encumber
any public place or public way.
   (D)   The village may enforce this section through the procedures and
processes provided in this chapter, along with any other means of enforcement
permitted under this code. (Ord. 2008-06, 10-6-2008)
CHAPTER 6
AIR POLLUTION
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definitions
7-6-2: Emission Of Dense Smoke
7-6-3: Open Burning
7-6-4: Penalty
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter have the following meanings:
   AIR POLLUTION: The discharging from stacks, chimneys, exhausts, vents,
ducts, openings, buildings, structures, premises, open fires, portable boilers,
vehicles, processes or any other source of any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust,
cinders, dirt, noxious or obnoxious acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors, odors,
toxic or radioactive substances, waste, particulate, solid, liquid or gaseous
matter, or other materials injurious to human, plant or animal life or
property.
   COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE: Any combustible waste material containing carbon in free
or combined state other than liquids or gases.
   DENSE SMOKE: For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke,
the Ringelmann smoke chart is hereby adopted, and shall be used, as a standard
for such grading. Smoke is hereby declared to be "dense" when it is of a degree
of density of number two (2) or greater, of Ringelmann smoke chart for more
than six (6) minutes in an hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or
not.
   OPEN FIRE OR BURNING: Any fire from which the products of combustion are
admitted directly into the open air without passing through a stack or chimney.
   RINGELMANN CHART: The chart used in estimating the light- obscuring capacity
of smoke, published and described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information
Circular 6888, on which are illustrated the graduated shades of gray to black.
   SMOKE: Small gas borne particles, consisting, predominantly of carbon and
other combustible material, resulting from incomplete combustion and present in
sufficient quantity to be observable independently of the presence of other
solids.
   STACK OR CHIMNEY: A vertical conduit, duct, vent or flue attached to a
permanent structure. (Ord. 1992-04, 7-6-1992)
7-6-2: EMISSION OF DENSE SMOKE:
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke or
fumes from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency in the
village which causes annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof.
The owner, proprietor, lessee or occupant of any building, or the person in
charge of the furnace therein, who causes, permits or allows dense smoke or
fumes to issue or be emitted from the smokestack of any stationary furnace, or
the chimney or smokestack of any building in the village contrary to the
provisions of this code, is guilty of creating a nuisance. (Ord. 1992-04, 7-6-
1992)
7-6-3: OPEN BURNING:
The open burning of paper, garbage, refuse, waste or other combustible material
on any property, public or private, from any source whatsoever, within the
village of Roanoke is unlawful and is hereby prohibited, with the exception of
leaf burning and the burning of any other yard waste such as trimmings from
trees or bushes or similar type brush material. It shall also be lawful to make
small fires of wood or charcoal for outdoor cooking purposes. Anyone starting a
fire under this provision must attend that fire at all times. (Ord. 1999-07,
11-1-1999)
7-6-4: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
or for any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, as set forth in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1992-04, 7-6-1992)
CHAPTER 7
DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE BUILDINGS
SECTION:
7-7-1: Statutory Authority
7-7-2: Notice To Demolish Or Repair
7-7-3: Court Action
7-7-4: Other Action
7-7-5: Filing Of Lien For Demolition Or Repair Costs
7-7-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to the power vested in the village by section 11-31-1 of the Illinois
municipal code, the village hereby adopts in whole all provisions of section
11-31-1 as it currently exists and as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2002-13, 8-19-2002)
7-7-2: NOTICE TO DEMOLISH OR REPAIR:
When village officials determine that a building is dangerous or unsafe,
uncompleted or abandoned, or unfit for human occupancy, village officials shall
provide notice to the owner of the property, and all lien holders of record, to
demolish or repair such building. Notice shall set forth a description of the
real estate and a description of how the building is dangerous or unsafe,
uncompleted or abandoned, or unfit for human occupancy. Notice shall also
provide the property owner at least fifteen (15) days to remedy the problems
with the building by demolishing or repairing such building. The chairperson of
the village's ordinance committee, or other designated village official or law
enforcement officer, shall provide this notice by mail or by both personal
service and mail. If after a diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of
the property owner, which may include the lien holders of record, cannot be
determined, notice mailed to the person in whose name the real estate was last
assessed shall be sufficient notice, even if such notice to the person is
subsequently returned undeliverable. (Ord. 2002-13, 8-19-2002)
7-7-3: COURT ACTION:
If the property owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
demolish or repair after a notice period of at least fifteen (15) days, the
village officials may seek court approval authorizing the village to demolish,
repair, enclose, or remove the building under the authority of section 11-31-
1 of the Illinois municipal code. It shall not be a defense to any cause of
action brought by the village under this chapter that the building has been
boarded up or otherwise enclosed. After the village has received court approval
to demolish, repair, enclose, or remove the building, village officials shall
take appropriate action to have the building demolished, repaired, enclosed, or
removed. (Ord. 2002-13, 8-19-2002)
7-7-4: OTHER ACTION:
Any action taken by the village pursuant to this chapter shall not impede or
supersede the village's authority to take any other action permitted against
the property owner, occupant of the property, or person in control of the
property under this code, including the issuance of ordinance violation notices
that impose a fine for the violation. (Ord. 2002-13, 8-19-2002)
7-7-5: FILING OF LIEN FOR DEMOLITION OR REPAIR COSTS:
The cost of the demolition, repair, enclosure, or removal incurred by the
village, including court costs, attorney fees, and other costs related to the
enforcement of this chapter, is recoverable from the property owner and shall
become a lien against the property. The lien shall be superior to all prior
existing liens and encumbrances, except taxes, provided that within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the repair, demolition, enclosure, or removal, the
village shall file a notice of lien for the cost and expense incurred by the
village in the office of the recorder of deeds for Woodford County. The notice
of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth the description of the
real estate, the amount of the cost and expense incurred, and the date or dates
when such costs and expense were incurred by the village. Upon payment of the
cost and expense by the property owner or persons interested in such property
after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village.
The village may enforce this lien at any time by initiating foreclosure
proceedings pursuant to section 11-31-1 of the Illinois municipal code, and the
costs of the foreclosure proceedings, including court costs, attorney fees, and
other costs related to the enforcement of this section, is also a lien against
the property and recoverable from the property owner. (Ord. 2002-13, 8-19-2002)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Sidewalks, Streets And Watercourses   1
Street Numbering   2
Railroads   3
Public Benches   4
Waterworks And Sewerage System   5
Street And Alley Petition Procedure   6
Recreation Center   7
Small Wireless Facilities In Public Right-Of-Way   8
CHAPTER 1
SIDEWALKS, STREETS AND WATERCOURSES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Construction Of Sidewalks; Removal
8-1-2: Use Of Paved Streets
8-1-3: Obstructing Streets, Sidewalks, Watercourses
8-1-4: Digging In Streets
8-1-5: Injure Public Ways; Hinder Repairmen
8-1-6: Riding, Driving On Sidewalk
8-1-7: Leaving Animals; Vehicles (Rep. by Ord. 77-2, 5-2-1977)
8-1-8: Erection Of Telegraph, Electric Light Poles
8-1-9: Driveways
8-1-10: Tree Regulations
8-1-11: Drainage Water On Streets And Sidewalks
8-1-12: Mailboxes
8-1-13: Dumping On Streets, Sidewalks, Alleys And Right-Of-Way
8-1-1: CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS; REMOVAL:
Whenever there is to be constructed any new sidewalk in the village upon any of
the streets and alleys therein, where there has not been any sidewalk before,
or where there has been a sidewalk but which needs repair, the village may and
shall pass an ordinance stating that such sidewalk is to be built and the
materials, etc., to be used, and the kind of work that is to be done, and in
what manner. On any such construction of sidewalks or repair of sidewalks
within the village, the village will supply the materials if the owner of the
property supplies the labor. This the village will do only in a residential
area. In a business area, properly zoned as a business area, the village will
provide all of the materials and the labor. (Ord. 88-11, 10-3-1988)
8-1-2: USE OF PAVED STREETS:
The use of all streets in the village which are now or hereafter may be paved
with bituminous material shall be subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to drive any automobile, truck or other vehicle
on said streets at a greater speed than twenty five (25) miles per hour; or to
drive over said streets with any vehicle having either steel or rubber tires,
bearing such a load as to cut or force a depression in the surface of the
pavement, or to drive or lead thereon any horse or other animal shod with
calked shoes, or to injure the pavement in any other manner.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to burn weeds or other materials upon the surface
of said streets, or on the parkway between the curb and sidewalks on such
streets. (Ord. 196, 9-7-1943)
8-1-3: OBSTRUCTING STREETS, SIDEWALKS, WATERCOURSES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw or leave, or cause
to be placed, thrown or left in any street or alley, or on any sidewalk, any
obstruction or encumbrance not authorized by law or ordinance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to obstruct any
street crossing.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, or cause to be
obstructed, any watercourse, drain, public ditch or sewer at any place that
said obstruction shall hinder or obstruct the free passage of the water in such
watercourse, drain, public ditch or sewer. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 12)
8-1-4: DIGGING IN STREETS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any hole, drain or ditch
in any street, alley or other public place without first having obtained
permission from the president of the board of trustees.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, for any private purpose, to dig,
remove or carry away any earth from any street or alley without permission of
the board of trustees. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 12)
8-1-5: INJURE PUBLIC WAYS; HINDER REPAIRMEN:
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or destroy any sidewalk,
pavement, crossing, drain or sewer, street, bridge or culvert, or any part
thereof, or to hinder or obstruct any agent or employee of the village in
repairing or making any sidewalk, pavement, crossing, street, sewer, bridge,
culvert or drain or any public improvement or work, ordered to be done by the
village, or to obstruct any of its officers in the discharge of their duties.
(R.O. 1908, Ord. 12)
8-1-6: RIDING, DRIVING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to lead, ride or drive any animal or
vehicle upon or across any sidewalk otherwise than going into or out of
premises occupied or owned by him or his employees. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 12)
8-1-7: LEAVING ANIMALS; VEHICLES:
(Rep. by Ord. 77-2, 5-2-1977)
8-1-8: ERECTION OF TELEGRAPH, ELECTRIC LIGHT POLES:
   (A)   No telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles or wires shall
be erected or extended in the streets or alleys of the village except under the
directions and supervision of the committee on streets and alleys and the
street commissioner of the village. All poles shall be cedar and of uniform
height, and when new lines are being built, the wires of the new line shall be
at least four feet (4') above the wires of the lines already established at all
places where the wires intersect or cross or run parallel to each other close
enough to be within four feet (4') of each other. Whenever in the judgment of
the president and board of trustees, the removal or change of location of such
poles or wires, or the raising or lowering of the same at any point or along
any street or alley is necessary, then the change shall be made by the owners
or operators of the system to which the poles or wires belong within thirty
(30) days after notice from the officials of the village of such desired
change, and in case of fire when in the judgment of the village officials, any
of such poles and wires may be cut down and removed, and shall be replaced by
the parties to whom they belong under the direction of the said committee on
streets and alleys, and street commissioner, without expense to the village,
and the village shall not be liable for any damage resulting from the cutting
and removing of such poles and wires.
   (B)   No poles or other apparatus shall be erected so as to interfere with
any sewer, gutter, tile drains, water mains or other public or local
improvements and in case of improvements in any way of any street or alley,
upon which poles or other apparatus are located, then the owner of such poles
or other apparatus shall make, at his own expense, all changes necessary to
conform to such improvement.
   (C)   The poles and wires and other apparatus shall be so erected as not to
interfere with any tree or trees in the village or with any tree or trees on
the streets or alleys of the village, and all wires dangerous to persons or
property, shall be properly insulated and well protected so as not to cause any
injury to persons or property.
   (D)   Parties desiring to erect or operate telegraph, telephone or electric
light systems, or to extend the same along the streets and alleys of the
village, shall make application for permit to the president and board of
trustees at some regular or special meeting, and in granting permits, the
president and board of trustees shall reserve unto the village and its
officers, the free use of telegraph and telephone service for fire alarm,
police and other village purposes. (R.O. 1908, Ord. 37)
8-1-9: DRIVEWAYS:
   (A)   Before any new driveway is constructed or an existing driveway is
altered, extended, repaired, or rebuilt in any manner, a permit must be
obtained to construct, alter, extend, repair, or rebuild the driveway from the
zoning officer. The application for the permit shall include the proposed
design or plan for constructing, altering, extending, repairing, or rebuilding
the driveway. The requirement to obtain a permit under this section shall not
apply to routine maintenance and upkeep of a driveway. As used in this code,
the term "driveway" shall mean a private accessway from the public road to any
adjacent lot for vehicular traffic, including any off street vehicle parking
areas that are not within an enclosed structure on lots with single-family or
two-family homes.
   (B)   The zoning officer will review the proposed design or plan for the
construction or modification of the driveway to determine whether the design or
plans for the driveway conform to the requirements set forth in this section.
   (C)   The construction of a new driveway or the modification of an existing
driveway shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   No driveway or property entrance for vehicular traffic shall be
constructed in a manner that allows such traffic to cross over an existing or
planned curb, unless appropriate curb cuts are made in a manner to provide
sufficient access for the driveway or entrance. This provision shall apply to
any off street parking areas adjacent to an existing or planned curb.
      2.   The portion of the driveway that extends from a public street and
crosses the public or street right of way shall be paved in such a manner as to
support vehicular traffic, including a sufficient rock base as necessary. Such
paved area shall be maintained at all times in good and safe structural
condition. Further, if a concrete paved sidewalk is removed or used for this
portion of the driveway, the entire portion of the driveway covered by this
provision shall be concrete.
      3.   The driveway shall not be located within thirty five feet (35') of
any intersection of public streets, as measured from the nearest curb of the
street that intersects the street to which the driveway connects.
      4.   The driveway shall have clearly defined edges or borders or shall be
contained by a weather durable permanent fixture such that the driveway area is
clearly marked or defined as a driveway.
      5.   The driveway shall conform to the overall street design, curb and
gutter design, and sidewalk design existing for the street onto which the
driveway will provide access, including standards for curb cuts, the elevation
or depression of the existing grade, and drainage.
      6.   If a sidewalk is damaged or removed during the construction or
modification of a driveway, then such sidewalk shall be repaired or replaced at
applicant's expense to a better or equivalent condition as the sidewalk was in
prior to when the driveway was constructed or modified.
      7.   Roof or surface drainage water from the property served by a
driveway shall not be permitted to flow over the portion of the driveway that
is on the public or street right of way, and a driveway shall not be used to
direct roof or surface drainage water in a manner that creates a hazardous
condition as defined in section
 8-1-11 of this chapter.
A variance may be requested from the requirements of this section in accordance
with the procedures and time periods provided in section
10-13-6 of this code, except a variance cannot be granted for requirements
(C)1, (C)4, and (C)6 of this section.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, extend,
repair, or rebuild a driveway without first obtaining a permit as required by
this section. If anyone constructs a new driveway or modifies any existing
driveway that does not conform to the requirements set forth in this section,
then the zoning officer and village officials are empowered to take the
necessary action to require that individual to bring the driveway into
compliance with village requirements for design of the driveway, including
street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk requirements.
   (E)   When the zoning officer has approved the applicant's plan to
construct, alter, extend, repair or rebuild a driveway, the zoning officer will
issue a permit to such applicant indicating that the applicant may proceed with
the work as outlined. The fee for such permit is twenty dollars ($20.00), which
must be paid before a permit can be issued under this section. The permit shall
be the same in form and substance as the zoning use permit used under section
10-13-3 of this code, and the procedures and time periods provided in section
10-13-3 of this code shall apply to a permit issued under this section.
   (F)   Once the plan for driveway design has been approved by the zoning
officer, the applicant is then permitted to proceed with constructing the
driveway or modifying the existing driveway. When the driveway is completed,
the applicant shall notify the zoning officer who will then inspect the
driveway to ensure that it conforms with the requirements set forth herein.
   (G)   Any nonconforming driveway in existence on the date of the approval of
ordinance amending this section, or from the effective date of any subsequent
change to this section for the respective subsequent changes, shall remain a
legal nonconforming use subject to the conditions and provisions set forth in
title 10, chapter 11 of this code. Furthermore, in addition to the conditions
and provisions set forth in section
10-11-3 of this code, any changes or reconfiguration made to a legal
nonconforming use under this section, other than routine maintenance and upkeep
or repairs or replacement consistent with the layout of the driveway prior to
any such work, shall terminate the legal nonconforming use and the requirements
of this section must be met for the changed or reconfigured portion of the
driveway.
   (H)   Any person, or any agent, employee, or contractor of such person, who
shall violate, disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply with, or who shall
resist enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense or to a penalty as provided
for by section
1-4-13 of this code. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
8-1-10: TREE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   No trees of any type, ornamental or otherwise, shall be planted on any
village of Roanoke easement or public right of way.
   (B)   Other than trees, property owners can plant ornamental shrubbery on
easements of the village and public rights of way. However, if the village
needs to use said public right of way or easement for any village use, then
said shrubbery, ornamentation or any form of landscaping that exists on said
public right of way or village easement will be removed in the sole discretion
of the village and the village will have no responsibility or liability for the
replacement of the shrubbery, ornamentation or anything else that has been
placed on said public right of way or village easement.
   (C)   Any violations of this section, after the date of passage, will result
in the village removing said plantings or any other use of that nature and any
other conversion to private use at the expense of the person so causing the
disturbance or unofficial usage and said person shall be charged for the cost.
If the cost is not paid by said person, the village by power of this section
will be empowered to proceed to any legal proceeding necessary to recover said
costs from said person attempting to convert public easements or rights of way
to private use.
   (D)   The village will not be obligated to notify anybody in writing to
remove said plantings or any other converted use of public rights of way or
easements. The village will be empowered to act immediately to keep public
easements and rights of way clear as provided in this section. (Ord. 1992-1, 2-
3-1992)
8-1-11: DRAINAGE WATER ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee or occupant of any building or
premises to permit water to drain or empty from any such building or premises
owned, occupied, or controlled by such person so as to spread over or across
any street or sidewalk adjoining the premises in such a manner as to create an
icy or slick condition on the street or sidewalk. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-21-2002)
8-1-12: MAILBOXES:
The village shall permit property owners to place and maintain a mailbox for
mail delivery on or over the village's right of way adjacent to any public
street maintained by the village, provided that the property owner does so at
the property owner's risk of any inadvertent damage caused by the village
during the village's maintenance of the public street. Accordingly, the
property owner shall be responsible for any inadvertent damage caused by the
village during the village's maintenance of the public street, and the village
shall not be responsible for such damage. Under this section, the maintenance
of a public street shall include snow removal from the public street. This
section shall apply to all mailboxes currently maintained on or over a village
right of way and any mailboxes erected on or over a village right of way after
the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2004-04, 1-19-2004)
8-1-13: DUMPING ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS, ALLEYS AND RIGHT-OF-WAY:
   (A)   Dumping Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage,
refuse, ashes, or any unwanted item or unwanted material on any village street,
sidewalk, alley, or right-of-way at any time unless such person or entity has
express prior consent from the village to dump or place garbage, refuse, ashes,
or any unwanted item or unwanted materials on a village street, sidewalk,
alley, or right-of-way.
   (B)   Signage: The Village may post signage on or near an area on village
street, sidewalk, alley, or right-of-way upon which improper or illegal dumping
has occurred in the past at a location that provides reasonable notice and
warning to violators and potential violators that dumping is prohibited on that
area of the village street, sidewalk, alley, or right-of-way and that a minimum
fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) will be imposed for any violations of
this “no dumping” provision. However, the lack or absence of such signage or
the violator's lack of knowledge or viewing of such signage shall not be a
defense to committing a violation of this Section.
   (C)   Exemptions: This provision shall not apply to residents of property
abutting a Village right-of-way, street, or alley from placing garbage and
refuse for weekly pick-up on the right-of-way, street, or alley immediately
adjacent to property upon which the person resides.
   (D)   Penalty: A person or entity violating this section shall be fined not
less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense. A person
violating this section within twelve (12) months of the first violation shall
be fined not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such
offense. The chairperson of the village's ordinance committee shall be
permitted to issue administrative citations for violations of this section
under section
1-4-13 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each date
upon which a violation occurs. In addition to any fine imposed for a violation
of this section of the Village Code, a person convicted of a violation of this
section shall be required to reimburse the Village for the reasonable cost of
removal and disposal of the garbage, refuse, ashes, unwanted item, or unwanted
material dumped or placed on the village street, sidewalk, alley, or right-of-
way in violation of this section. (Ord. 2020-07, 6-1-2020)
CHAPTER 2
STREET NUMBERING
SECTION:
8-2-1: Numbering
8-2-2: Map and Record
8-2-3: Violation
8-2-1: NUMBERING:
All lots, buildings and structures in the Village shall be numbered in
accordance with the following plan:
The base line for streets running north and south shall be Front Street, and
numbers lying north or south thereof shall be designated north or south as the
case may be; the base line for streets running east and west shall be Main
Street, and numbers lying east or west of this line shall be designated east or
west, as the case may be. Numbering shall begin with the base lines with the
number 100, and one unit shall be allowed for each twenty five feet (25') of
frontage. Provided that the numbers at each block shall begin with 100 or a
multiple thereof.
Odd numbers shall be on the north and west sides of the streets.
8-2-2: MAP AND RECORD:
The Clerk shall keep a map of the Village showing the proper street number of
every lot in the Village, which map shall be open to inspection by any
interested person, and shall further keep a record showing the number assigned
to each lot or parcel of land in the Village, which record shall be open to
inspection by any interested person.
8-2-3: VIOLATION:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to penalty
as provided for by Section
1-4-1 of this Code; provided, that no such person shall be liable for the
penalty provided until after he has received from the Clerk, by mail or
personal service, a notice of the fact that a building owned or occupied by him
does not have the proper number to comply with this Chapter. (Ord. 247; 5-7-51)
CHAPTER 3
RAILROADS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Obstructing Street Crossings
8-3-2: Maintain Public Ways
8-3-3: Speed
8-3-1: OBSTRUCTING STREET CROSSINGS:
No railroad company, conductor or other person managing or controlling any
locomotive or car shall stop or permit to be stopped, or leave the same upon
any railroad track at the crossing of any street or alley intersecting such
railroad so as to obstruct the passageway across the same for any longer time
than five (5) minutes, unless such railroad company shall be necessarily
engaged in making up or switching off its trains; in that case the obstruction
of the passageway across such railroad track shall not continue longer than is
absolutely necessary in the diligent making up or breaking of such trains. Any
such obstructions shall not in any case be continued to exceed twenty (20)
minutes at a time.
8-3-2: MAINTAIN PUBLIC WAYS:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each and every railroad company operating any
railroad within the Village, and they are hereby required to make and keep open
and to keep in repair ditches, drains, sewers and culverts along and under
their railroad tracks so that pools of water cannot stand on its grounds or
right of way, and so that the natural drainage of adjacent property shall not
be impeded.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of each and every railroad company within the
Village, and they are hereby required, to construct and maintain and keep in
repair all street crossings at the railroad crossings in the Village, and the
approaches to said crossings within their respective rights of way, so that
said crossings shall at all times be convenient and safe to cross. (R.O. 1908,
Ord. 12)
8-3-3: SPEED:
No locomotive, engine, passenger car or other car used upon any railroad shall
be driven, propelled or run upon or along any railroad track within the limits
of the Village at a greater rate of speed than twenty five (25) miles per hour.
(R.O. 1908, Ord. 12 amd. 1974 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC BENCHES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Village Responsibility
8-4-2: Placement Requirements
8-4-3: Maintenance
8-4-1: VILLAGE RESPONSIBILITY:
The Village will assume all liability arising out of the use of benches placed
by local businessmen in front of their places of business, regardless of the
ownership of the land upon which the benches are placed. (Ord. 1974-1, 1-7-
1974)
8-4-2: PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Any benches set out for the use of the general public, in the manner set forth
herein, shall be anchored in place in a manner acceptable to the Village Board,
so as to prevent the movement or shifting of said benches. Approval must be
obtained from said Village Board both as to the placing of the benches for
public use and the method of anchoring said benches. (Ord. 1974-1, 1-7-1974)
8-4-3: MAINTENANCE:
The Village does not accept responsibility for the maintenance and upkeep of
said benches, but rather it remains the responsibility of the individual or
individuals making the benches available for public use. However, in order to
ensure that said benches will never become a detriment to the public welfare,
the Village does reserve the right to specify the materials of which the
aforementioned benches will be constructed, the manner or mode of construction
and to what extent, if any, these benches may be used for advertising purposes.
(Ord. 1974-1, 1-7-1974)
CHAPTER 5
WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-5-1: Superintendent Of Public Works; Duties And Powers
8-5-2: Meters Required
8-5-3: Interfere With Apparatus
8-5-3A: Destruction Of Water Meters
8-5-4: Wasting Water
8-5-5: Water Shutoff; Emergency
8-5-6: Rates, Charges For Combined Waterworks And Sewerage System
8-5-7: Billing Date
8-5-8: Liability For Payment
8-5-9: Late Payments
8-5-10: Delinquencies; Lien On Property
8-5-11: Discontinue Service; Returned Checks; Fee
8-5-12: Village Collector To Render Bills
8-5-13: Funds Kept Separate
8-5-14: Waterworks And Sewerage Revenue Fund
8-5-15: System Of Accounts
8-5-16: Annexed Property, Water And Sewer Lines Required
8-5-17: Sewer Line And Storm Drain Connections; Storm Water Drainage
8-5-18: Water Supply System Protection
8-5-19: Water Well Drilling
8-5-20: Damaging Water Or Sewer Lines; Responsibility For Cost Of Repair
8-5-1: SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS; DUTIES AND POWERS:
The superintendent of public works is hereby vested with full and complete
power: (Ord. 79, 6-1-1914; amd. Ord. 2009-12, 9-8-2009)
   (A)   To direct in what manner and when attachments may be made to the
street water mains for private purposes.
   (B)   To grant permits for water meters.
   (C)   To have full control of the waterworks system, and make all necessary
rules and regulations concerning the amount of water to be used, the times when
same may be used and to prevent the waste of water.
   (D)   To exercise a supervision over the hydrants and see that they are kept
in proper repair and see that no person except those duly authorized have
access to them. (Ord. 79, 6-1-1914)
8-5-2: METERS REQUIRED:
Water shall be supplied to the inhabitants of the village through meters only,
and said meters shall be properly boxed to protect same from frost and also to
permit their inspection.
All water meters shall be put in under the supervision of the water committee
at the cost and expense of the owner of the premises on which said meter is
installed. The village shall conduct the water to the sidewalk line of the
premises on which said water is desired to be used. All village water used on
said premises shall pass through the said water meter. (Ord. 79, 6-1-1914)
8-5-3: INTERFERE WITH APPARATUS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way interfere with any water
meter, main or hydrant, or to interfere or manipulate or remove any manhole
covers or other appurtenances to the combined waterworks and sewerage system,
without permission from any member of said water board, which board is hereby
vested with full power and complete authority to control the same. (Ord. 79, 6-
1-1914)
8-5-3A: DESTRUCTION OF WATER METERS:
The owner of property located within the village on which a water meter is
located or placed, will be responsible for all damage to said water meter or
meters located on that property. Said owner will also be responsible for all
costs incidental to the repair or replacement of said meter.
The appropriate authorities of the village are hereby empowered to take all
action necessary to see to it that said water meters of the village are
maintained in good repair and to further take all legal action necessary to see
to it that any damaged water meter or meters needing replacement due to damage
are paid for by the property owner on which said meter was placed. (Ord. 86-2,
3-17-1986)
8-5-4: WASTING WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use Village water in any manner so as to
waste the same or to let any hydrant, hose, faucet or other tap run for an
indefinite time or to use the water of the Village in any manner in violation
of the rules which may be established by the Waterworks Board for the use of
Village water. (Ord. 79, 6-1-1914)
8-5-5: WATER SHUTOFF; EMERGENCY:
Whenever it shall be deemed necessary for adequate fire protection by the Water
Committee, this committee may shut off the water to any or all private takers
and no claim shall be allowed against the Village or any of its officers for a
failure on the part of the Village or any of its officers to supply sufficient
water. (Ord. 79, 6-1-1914)
8-5-6: RATES, CHARGES FOR COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM:
Effective December 1, 2016, there shall be and there are hereby established
rates and charges for the use of and for the service supplied by the combined
waterworks and sewerage system of the Village as follows:
   (A)   Water Rates:
      1.   Property Within Village Limits: Water being supplied to any property
within the Village limits of Roanoke or annexed to the Village of Roanoke, and
to the three (3) properties located at 1207 West Front Street, 1201 West Front
Street, and 1301 West Front Street, will be billed according to the following
schedule:
 
First 1,000 gallons (minimum charge) $24.15 per thousand
For 1,001 gallons and over           18.58 per thousand
 
      2.   Property Outside Village Limits: Water being supplied to any
property not within the Village limits of Roanoke or not annexed to the Village
of Roanoke will be billed according to the following schedule which is double
the current rate:
 
First 1,000 gallons (minimum charge) $48.30 per thousand
For 1,001 gallons and over           37.16 per thousand
 
      3.   Adjustments: The water billing rates set forth in this subsection
(A) shall be adjusted on an annual basis every May 1st by an increase of 3.00
percent to both the applicable minimum charge for the first one thousand
(1,000) gallons of usage and the applicable rate for usage of one thousand one
(1,001) gallons and over.
   (B)   Bulk Water Sales: The sale of bulk water is made available to
customers with their own container on a drive up basis at the Roanoke Water
Plant. Any amount in twenty five (25) gallon increments may be purchased and
will be paid for at the time of purchase according to the following schedule:
      25 gallons for $1.25 ($0.05 per gallon)
   (C)   Sewer Rates:
      1.   Property Within Village Limits: Sewerage being processed (based on
water usage) for any property within the Village limits of Roanoke or annexed
to the Village, and for the three (3) properties located at 1207 West Front
Street, 1201 West Front Street, and 1301 West Front Street, of Roanoke will be
billed according to the following schedule:
 
First 1,000 gallons (minimum charge) $6.70 per thousand
For 1,001 gallons and over           1.65 per thousand
 
      2.   Property Outside Village Limits: Sewerage being processed (based on
water usage) for any property not within the Village limits of Roanoke or not
annexed to the Village of Roanoke, except for the three (3) properties listed
above, will be billed according to the following schedule which is double the
current rate:
 
First 1,000 gallons (minimum charge) $13.39 per thousand
For 1,001 gallons and over           3.30 per thousand
 
   (D)   Water Tap-In Fees:
      1.   Residential, business, and industrial (commercial) that requires
water services for any property within the Village limits of Roanoke or annexed
to the Village of Roanoke will be billed according to the following schedule:
 
                        Includes 1" meter, check valve, curb stop, tubing (to
1" tap-in fee $1,750.00 property line), fittings, borings (if necessary), labor
                        and equipment
                        Includes 2" meter, backflow preventer valve, curb stop,
2" tap-in fee 3,550.00  tubing (to property line), fittings, borings (if
                        necessary), labor and equipment
 
      2.   Residential, business and industrial (commercial) that requires non-
sewer water services for any property within the Village limits of Roanoke or
annexed to the Village of Roanoke. A separate water meter may be installed by a
licensed plumber on the existing water line to be used for non-sewer water
(i.e., irrigation, preparing batch mixes) at the owner's expense, subject to
the approval of the Village of Roanoke. The owner will be billed according to
the following schedule:
 
1" tap-in fee $1,250.00 Includes 1" meter with check valve
2" tap-in fee 2,100.00  Includes 2" meter with backflow preventer valve
 
   (E)   Sewer Fees: Residential, business, and industrial (commercial) that
requires sewerage services for any property within the Village limits of
Roanoke or annexed to the Village of Roanoke will be billed according to the
following schedule:
 
                                      Property owner pays entire cost of
                                      installation of material, labor and
                                      excavation cost from the property to main
Sewer inspection fee         $ 50.00  trunk sewer line. Before covering the
                                      connections they will be inspected by an
                                      authorized employee of the Village of
                                      Roanoke
Special sewer connection fee 3,000.00  
 
   In addition to the sewer inspection fee, a special sewer connection fee is
imposed for a sewer connection to a sewer line that passes sewerage through the
lift station located on West Davidson Street.
   (F)   Water And Sewer Service To Rental Units: All applicants for service
who occupy rental units shall pay a one hundred dollar ($100.00) security
deposit at the time of making such application. Such deposit shall be refunded
in full at the time service to said applicant is terminated, provided all
charges for services have been paid in full. In the event that said applicant
terminates service and there remains a balance due therefor, the Village shall
have the right to use so much or all of said security deposit as is necessary
to pay any unpaid charges. Service to a rental unit shall be considered
terminated when that rental unit is vacated by the present tenant of record.
(Ord. 2016-13, 11-7-2016; amd. Ord. 2023-09, 10-16-2023)
8-5-7: BILLING DATE:
For the purpose of the operation of the combined waterworks and sewerage system
the calendar year shall be divided into twelve (12) monthly periods, said
periods to begin on the first day of each month. The rates or charges for
service above provided for shall be payable monthly on the fifteenth day of the
month immediately following the end of the monthly period for which service has
been supplied. (Ord. 67-5, 6-5-1967)
8-5-8: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of either water or
sewerage services, shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service
on said premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the Village
only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of
the service, are jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village. Said
water bills will run with the property and remain a liability of the
individuals aforementioned. All bills for services shall be rendered monthly as
of the first day of the month succeeding the monthly period for which service
is billed, and shall be payable not later than the close of business on the
fifteenth day after the bills are rendered. (Ord. 1981-3, 4-6-1981, eff. 5-1-
1981)
8-5-9: LATE PAYMENTS:
If the charges for water and sewerage service, or either of them, are not paid
within fifteen (15) days after the rendition of the bill for such service, then
a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the bill shall be added
thereto. (Ord. 67-5, 6-5-1967)
8-5-10: DELINQUENCIES; LIEN ON PROPERTY:
In the event said rates or charges for water and sewerage service, or either of
them, are not paid within thirty (30) days after the rendition of the bill for
such service, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be
delinquent and thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the
real estate for which such services are supplied, regardless of the fact that
the owner of the property and the occupant may be separate and distinct
individuals. Further, the Village Collector is hereby authorized and directed
to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Woodford County, Illinois, and the filing of such
statements shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for such
services. (Ord. 1996-04, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 1998-5, 6-1-1998; Ord. 1998-09,
11-2-1998)
8-5-11: DISCONTINUE SERVICE; RETURNED CHECKS; FEE:
   (A)   If the charges for water, sewerage and garbage service, or either of
them, are not paid within thirty (30) days after the rendition of the bill for
such service, creating the delinquency, water service will be discontinued on
that date. A second notice will be sent and will serve as a notice of
delinquency to the owner of the premises as well as the tenant of the property
seven (7) days prior to the date scheduled for termination of services,
informing them of the delinquent amount. If the matter is not resolved to the
satisfaction of the Village Collector, or the delinquent bill remains unpaid,
then the service to the property will be discontinued on the termination date
stated in the second notice, being seven (7) days from the date of the
delinquency notice. Should the Village Collector be unavailable or unable to
address matters pertaining to a delinquent bill, then the Chairperson of the
Village's Public Works Committee shall have the authority to handle the matter
during the Village Collector's unavailability or absence. When water service is
terminated for non-payment by a current water customer, there will be a fifty
dollar ($50.00) service charge for reinstating such water service, and this
customer shall only be required to fully pay the delinquency in order to have
this customer's water service reinstated. In all other situations, there will
be a fifty dollar ($50.00) service charge for reinstating such water service.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the water service shall not be reinstated
until all past due bills, penalties, and other charges are paid in full.
   (B)   If the charges for water and sewerage, or either of them, are not paid
due to a check returned by the bank for nonpayment for any reason, including,
but not limited to, insufficient funds or a closed account, a notice of the
returned check will be sent informing the account holder of the dishonored
check and a twenty five dollar ($25.00) returned check charge will be added to
the account.
If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the Village Collector, or
the delinquent bill remains unpaid due to the returned check, then the service
to the property will be discontinued on the date stated in the notice. Should
the Village Collector be unavailable or unable to address matters pertaining to
a delinquent bill, then the Chairperson of the Village's Public Works Committee
shall have the authority to handle the matter during the Village Collector's
unavailability or absence. A fifty dollar ($50.00) service charge for
reinstating such water service will be assessed against the account holder. The
water service shall not be reinstated until all past due bills, penalties, and
other charges are paid in full.
If the charges for a delinquent account are not paid due to a check returned by
the bank for nonpayment for any reason, including, but not limited to,
insufficient funds or a closed account, and the notice of delinquent account
has been sent and the date for termination of service has past, water service
will be terminated immediately without a notice sent. A twenty five dollar
($25.00) returned check charge plus a fifty dollar ($50.00) service charge for
reinstating such water service will be added to the account at the time of the
termination of service. The water service shall not be reinstated until all
past due bills, penalties, and other charges are paid in full. (Ord. 2017-01,
2-27-2017)
8-5-12: VILLAGE COLLECTOR TO RENDER BILLS:
It is hereby made the duty of the Village Collector to render bills for water
and sewerage service, or either of them, and for all other charges in
connection therewith, and to collect all monies due thereon. (Ord. 67-5, 6-5-
1967; amd. Ord. 1998-09, 11-2-1998)
8-5-13: FUNDS KEPT SEPARATE:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined waterworks
and sewerage system shall be held by the Village Clerk separate and apart from
his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the Village,
and all of said sums, without any deductions whatsoever, shall be delivered to
the Village Treasurer not more than ten (10) days after the receipt of the
same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed
by the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 67-5, 6-5-1967)
8-5-14: WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE REVENUE FUND:
The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the combined
waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the
operation of said system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the
same in a separate fund designated as the "Waterworks and Sewerage Revenue Fund
of the Village of Roanoke", and the Village Treasurer shall administer said
fund in every respect in the manner provided by the Illinois Municipal Code and
all other laws pertinent thereto. (Ord. 67-5, 6-5-1967)
8-5-15: SYSTEM OF ACCOUNTS:
The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper records, books and accounts, in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals the Village Board of Trustees
shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books
to show the receipts and disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage
system. (Ord. 67-5, 6-5-1967)
8-5-16: ANNEXED PROPERTY, WATER AND SEWER LINES REQUIRED:
   (A)   Henceforth, upon due publication and notification to the public, it
will be the complete and total responsibility, including financial
responsibility of anyone annexing to the Village, to run water and sewer lines
from the property being annexed to the village water and sewer lines
appropriately designated by the village engineer. All expenses of hooking up
such water and sewer lines are the complete and total expense of the property
owner. Under no circumstances is the financial obligation of such water and
sewer hookup and line extension the financial obligation of the village.
   (B)   Such annexing property owner, be it a subdivision or unsubdivided
tract of land, may now extend water and sewer lines from his property to
existing village water and sewer lines only upon the approval of the village
engineer, tapping into existing village water and sewer lines only where
designated by the village engineer.
   (C)   This legislation supersedes all legislation of the village reflected
in this code, be it in the subdivision regulations or otherwise. (Ord. 83-1, 1-
17-1983)
8-5-17: SEWER LINE AND STORM DRAIN CONNECTIONS; STORM WATER DRAINAGE:
   (A)   Inspection Of Sanitary Sewer Line: Before any footing tile or sanitary
sewer line connecting to any new housing construction in the village or old
housing construction in the village may be covered by a contractor,
subcontractor or homeowner, said footing tile or sanitary sewer line must be
inspected by the designated inspector of the village board and said designated
inspector must give a written approval that said footing tile or sanitary sewer
line has been inspected. If said inspection is not obtained prior to said
footing tile or sanitary sewer line being covered by dirt by said contractor,
subcontractor or homeowner, then the village board and its designated
inspectors and other agents are hereby authorized and empowered to force said
homeowner, contractor and/or subcontractor to uncover said footing tile and/or
sewer line for proper inspection at the expense of that contractor,
subcontractor or homeowner.
   (B)   Maintenance, Continuation Or Retention Of Broken, Defective Or
Presently Unlawful Building Drains, Building Sewers Or Storm Drain Connections
Or Conditions:
      1.    It is unlawful for any person owning property located within the
village to permit any of the following conditions to be or remain on such
property ninety (90) days after notification by the superintendent of public
works, or actual knowledge, of the existence of such a condition:
         (a)   A storm sewer or storm drain which is so constructed or is in
such a condition as to allow or permit the discharge of stormwater, surface
water or groundwater into a building drain, building sewer or public sanitary
sewer, either directly through a direct connection or indirectly by discharging
or permitting the discharge of such water in or near areas of gravel, crushed
rock or other porous soil or material located near or around openings, holes,
cracks, loose joints or other gaps in a building drain, building sewer or
public sanitary sewer;
         (b)   A private combined sewer;
         (c)   A stormwater, surface water or groundwater collection or
diversion device, including, without limitation, the following: area drains,
yard drains, footing tiles, downspout, leaders, stormwater, surface water or
groundwater sump pumps or other pumping device, which is constructed or in such
a condition so as to discharge or permit or allow the discharge of stormwater,
surface water or groundwater into a building drain, building sewer or public
sanitary sewer either directly through a direct connection or indirectly by
discharging or permitting the discharge of such water in or near areas of
gravel, crushed rock or other porous soil or material located near or around
openings, holes, cracks, loose joints or other gaps in a building drain,
building sewer or public sanitary sewer;
         (d)   A building drain or building sewer with broken, missing or
cracked tiles, loose or separated joints or other holes, cracks, gaps or
spaces;
         (e)   Any other fixture, structure or condition which permits or
allows or is in such a condition to permit or allow stormwater, surface water
or groundwater to enter directly or indirectly a building drain, building sewer
or public sanitary sewer.
      2.   The superintendent of public works may give notification of the
existence of such a condition described in subsection (B)1 of this section
either personally or by certified mail to the owner of record of the property
on which such a condition is located or to the person who last paid local real
estate taxes on such property and upon the giving or mailing of such
notification, the property owner shall be deemed to have received notice of the
existence of such a condition.
      3.   The notification provided in subsection (B)2 of this section shall
be given if one or more of the following occurs:
         (a)   An on-site visual or physical inspection of the property
indicates the existence of a condition described in subsection (B)1 of this
section;
         (b)   A "dye test" indicates that water or dye placed in stormwater,
surface water or groundwater collection or diversion devices or in the ground
near the foundation of a building or structure located on such property enters
the public sanitary sewer;
         (c)   A "smoke test" indicates that smoke placed into the public
sanitary sewer under pressure is escaping through the ground or through
downspouts, leaders, gutters, yard drains, area drains or other stormwater
collection or diversion devices located on the owner's property.
      4.   The superintendent of public works is authorized to develop material
describing the testing procedures set forth in this section and indicating the
manner in which such tests shall be conducted.
      5.   Any person to whom such notification is given may appeal the
determination of the superintendent of public works to the water and sewer
committee of the village by delivering to the village board, within ten (10)
days from the date such notification is given, a "notice of appeal" detailing
the circumstances, grounds or reasons why the property owner believes that the
determination of the superintendent of public works is incorrect or inaccurate.
      6.   The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
   (C)   Storm Drain Discharge Connections and Stormwater Discharge:
      1.   Stormwater, surface water, or groundwater from area drains, footing
tiles, downspouts, leaders, stormwater or groundwater pumps, or other pumping
devices may be directed into a gutter in a village street through an existing
opening in the curb in existence on or before October 1, 2009. Any such
existing use of an existing opening in the curb will be allowed to continue
until such time as a new sidewalk or the replacement curb is installed at which
time no holes or openings will be permitted in either the new sidewalk or the
replacement curb. If such existing opening in the curb allows water to stand in
the immediately adjacent curb and gutter area in a village street for more than
four (4) days after a storm or rainfall, this standing water and use of the
existing opening in the curb will be declared a nuisance, and the use of the
existing opening in the curb must be discontinued by the property owner within
thirty (30) days after receiving written notice from a village official that
the use of the existing opening in the curb is creating a nuisance in this
section. After October 1, 2009, no property owner may direct stormwater,
surface water, or groundwater from area drains, footing tiles, downspouts,
leaders, stormwater or groundwater pumps, or other pumping devices into a
gutter in a village street by creating a hole or opening in the curb or placing
a drainage pipe such that it drains directly into a village street. After
October 1, 2009, property owners shall not be permitted to create any holes or
openings in a curb along a village street for any purpose, except when
authorized by the village for purposes of creating or expanding driveway access
for the property.
      2.   For residential properties, the proper way to discharge stormwater,
surface water, or groundwater would be to use one of the following methods:
         (a)   Into the grass or lawn on the homeowner's property;
         (b)   Direct connection from the homeowner's property to the village
stormwater sewer system;
         (c)   A natural waterway, drainage ditch, or creek adjacent to the
homeowner's property; or
         (d)   A dry well or sump on the homeowner's property.
      3.   It is unlawful for any person owning property located within the
village to permit the discharge of stormwater, surface water, or groundwater
from a downspout, a sump pump or other pumping device, or any other storm water
diversion device, equipment, or fixture onto adjacent property such that the
discharged water is directed at, into, or immediately next to a primary or
accessory building on the neighboring property in a manner that the discharged
water flows into, onto, or immediately next to the building on the neighboring
property or otherwise negatively impacts the building on the neighboring
property. As set forth herein, the term "building" shall be defined as set
forth in the village's zoning regulations as set forth in Title 11 of the
Village Code and shall additionally include any attached improvements to the
building, including, but not limited to, a patio, porch, deck, or carport.
         (a)   The superintendent of public works may give notification of the
existence of such a condition described in subsection (C)3 of this section
either personally or by certified mail to the owner of record of the property
that is discharging stormwater, surface water, or groundwater in a manner that
violates this subsection (C)3 or to the person who last paid local real estate
taxes on such property, and upon the giving or mailing of such notification,
the property owner shall be deemed to have received notice of the existence of
such a condition that violates this subsection (C)3.
         (b)   The notification provided in this subsection shall be given if
an on-site visual or physical inspection of the property indicates the
existence of a condition described in this subsection (C)3.
         (c)   Any person to whom such notification is given may appeal the
determination of the superintendent of public works to the water and sewer
committee of the village by delivering to the village board, within ten (10)
days from the date such notification is given, a "notice of appeal" detailing
the circumstances, grounds, or reasons why the property owner believes that the
determination of the superintendent of public works is incorrect or inaccurate.
         (d)   The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such
notice, permanently cease all violations.
         (e)   This provision shall not apply to stormwater, surface water, or
groundwater that flows from one property onto or into an adjacent property
along a naturally occurring path for such water drainage.
   (D)   Violation; Fine Specified: Any person violating the provisions of this
chapter or permitting such a violation to remain beyond the period of time
provided for voluntary correction or elimination thereof, shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
   (E)   Violation; Liability For Loss Or Damage: Any person violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the village for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned the village by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 2009-12, 9-8-2009; amd. Ord. 2-15-2022)
8-5-18: WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM PROTECTION:
   (A)   Backflow Prevention Devices Required: If in accordance with the
Illinois plumbing code or in the judgment of the chairman of the water and
sewer committee, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system, the chairman of the water and sewer
committee will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved
device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, purchase the
backflow prevention device from the village or acquire a village designated
backflow prevention device. The superintendent of public works shall maintain a
list of approved and acceptable backflow prevention devices by manufacturer
name and model number. In order to comply with this section, the water customer
must install a backflow prevention device set forth on the list maintained by
the village. The water customer will be responsible for any costs associated
with removing and replacing a backflow prevention device not included on the
list of approved and accepted devices maintained by the village. The water
customer shall also, at his own expense, install such an approved device at a
location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code and all
applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such
approved devices as required by the Illinois plumbing code and local
regulations. After such device has been installed, inspected, and approved by
the village, the village shall maintain such device as part of the village's
water supply system.
   (B)   Approval Of Private Water Supply System: No person shall establish or
permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection
whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular
public water supply of the village enters the supply or distribution system of
the municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and
the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
village and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   (C)   Investigation Of Industrial Properties: It shall be the duty of the
chairman of the water and sewer committee to cause surveys and investigations
to be made of industrial and other properties served by the public water supply
to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may
exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record
and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years unless a licensed plumber
has installed a backflow preventer device on the industrial property, or
annually if an irrigation system has been installed on the property. Records of
such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at
least five (5) years.
   (D)   Right Of Entry For Cross Connection Control Inspection: The approved
cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying the presence
or absence of cross connections, and the superintendent of public works or his
authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the village for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the
customer regarding the required cross connection control inspection. On demand
the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
chairman of the water and sewer committee any information which he may request
regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The
refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the
chairman of the water and sewer committee, be deemed evidence of the presence
of improper connections as provided in this chapter.
   (E)   Discontinue Water Service For Violation: The chairman of the water and
sewer committee of the village is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service
to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
chapter is known to exist, which includes the installation of a backflow
prevention device that is not included on the village list of approved and
accepted devices, and to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply
distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until
such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and until a reconnection fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) is paid to the village. Immediate disconnection with verbal
notice can be effected when the chairman of the water and sewer committee is
assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water
supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of
the cause of disconnection.
   (F)   Responsibility For Cost Of Cleanup: The consumer responsible for back
siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the
potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an
improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been
bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
   (G)   Maximum Tap Line: The maximum tap line for a residence into the
village water line is a one inch (1") tap line. No tap line to a residence of
any type, single-family or multiple-family, may exceed one inch (1") unless
specific written permission by variance is given by the board of trustees of
the village. (Ord. 2015-12, 8-3-2015)
8-5-19: WATER WELL DRILLING:
The president and board of trustees of the village hereby adopt the following
as the water well drilling policy of the village:
   (A)   Issuance Of Permits By Water Department: The water department has the
authority to issue water well drilling permits when the conditions for drilling
the well meet all of the standards set forth in the following policy.
   (B)   Permit Required; Fee: The owner of the well shall have obtained a
permit from the water department. The permit fee shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00).
   (C)   Requirements: Before a permit shall be issued, the following
requirements shall be met:
      1.   Use of water obtained from the well:
         (a)   May not be used for potable water use;
         (b)   Will be permitted for the watering of landscape material (trees,
shrubs, flowers or grass);
         (c)   Will be permitted to supplement lakes, ponds and wet detention
basins;
         (d)   Will be permitted to supply cooling systems, the manufacture of
products and the cleaning or washing of vehicles or other equipment.
      2.   Wells may only be located on a tract of land that is at least five
(5) acres in size and is under a single ownership. Each additional well to be
developed shall require an additional twenty five (25) acres of land under one
ownership.
      3.   All wells will be limited in capacity to under fifty (50) gallons
per minute.
      4.   Plans and specifications for all proposed wells must be submitted to
the department clearly indicating precautions that will be taken to prevent the
interconnection of the water taken from the well with the public water system.
   (D)   Water Meter Required: All wells will be required to be metered and the
owner required to pay the appropriate monthly fee to the village if it is
determined by the village that the water from the well is being discharged into
the sanitary sewer system. This subsection is retroactive and will apply to all
existing wells.
   (E)   Existing Wells: All wells currently in operation on the date of the
adoption of these policies will be required to obtain a permit, but they will
be exempted from all requirements except subsection (D) of this section. (Ord.
1990-2, 1-15-1990)
8-5-20: DAMAGING WATER OR SEWER LINES; RESPONSIBILITY FOR COST OF REPAIR:
Any property owner who in any way repairs or does any type of maintenance work,
repair work or any type of work at any time on any water or sewer line on his
property and as a result said work, maintenance, etc., causes any type of
damage or malfunction on water and sewer lines of the village which are not
located on his property, and such damage to the water and sewer lines can be
established by the village engineer of the village, then the cost of repair for
such damage to such water and sewer lines occasioned by the action of the
property owner shall be assessed to the property owner and a bill for such
costs shall be sent to him. If that charge is not paid within sixty (60) days
of the receipt of the bill, then the village will take whatever legal action is
necessary to collect the cost for the repair of said water and sewer system.
(Ord. 1990-8, 12-3-1990)
CHAPTER 6
STREET AND ALLEY PETITION PROCEDURE
SECTION:
8-6-1: Petition To Lay Out, Widen Or Vacate
8-6-2: Description; Owners Named
8-6-3: Copy Posted
8-6-4: Petition Filed With Clerk
8-6-5: Notice Of Meeting
8-6-6: Adjournment
8-6-7: Proceedings To Vacate
8-6-8: Survey And Plat
8-6-9: Ascertain Damages
8-6-10: Agreement
8-6-11: When Damages Not Released
8-6-12: Notify Owners
8-6-13: Venire For Jury
8-6-14: Challenge Of Jury
8-6-15: Unknown Owners
8-6-16: Notice Served
8-6-17: Jury Sworn
8-6-18: Hear Evidence
8-6-19: Damages Assessed
8-6-20: Board Determination
8-6-21: Revoke Proceedings
8-6-22: Order Made
8-6-23: Proceedings, Damages Released
8-6-24: Inducements Offered
8-6-25: Prima Facie Evidence
8-6-26: Road Tax
8-6-27: Streets On Village Line
8-6-28: Vacation, By Ordinance
8-6-29: Streets Laid Out; Fees
8-6-1: PETITION TO LAY OUT, WIDEN OR VACATE:
The board of trustees may lay out, alter, widen or vacate any street, alley or
avenue when petitioned by one or more freeholders of the village, residing in
the vicinity of the street, alley or avenue to be laid out, altered, widened or
vacated. (Ord., 10-15-1900; amd. 1974 Code)
8-6-2: DESCRIPTION; OWNERS NAMED:
Said petition shall set forth in writing a description of the street, alley or
avenue, and what part thereof is to be altered, widened or vacated and, if for
a new street, alley or avenue, the names of the owners of the land, if known,
if not known it shall be so stated, over which the same is to pass; its general
course, and as near as may be, the terminal points.
8-6-3: COPY POSTED:
Whenever any number of freeholders shall determine to petition the Board of
Trustees for the laying out, alteration, widening or vacation of any street,
alley or avenue, the petitioner or petitioners shall cause a copy of the
petition to be posted up in three (3) of the most public places in the Village,
one of which shall be in the immediate vicinity of such street, alley or
avenue, at least ten (10) days before any action shall be had in reference to
said petition. The posting of any notice required by this Chapter may be proved
by the affidavit of the person posting the same, or by other legal evidence.
8-6-4: PETITION FILED WITH CLERK:
Whenever any petition shall have been so posted, it shall be filed in the
office of the Village Clerk, who shall at the next regular meeting lay the
same, with the proof of posting copies thereof, before the Board of Trustees,
and they shall thereupon, at the same or some subsequent regular meeting, fix
upon a time and place when they will meet to examine the same, and to hear all
reasons for or against granting the prayer of said petition.
8-6-5: NOTICE OF MEETING:
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to give at least ten (10) day's
notice of the time and place of said meeting by posting notices thereof in
three (3) of the most public places in the Village.
8-6-6: ADJOURNMENT:
The Board of Trustees may, by public announcement, and by the posting of a
notice at the time and place named for said meeting, adjourn the same from time
to time, but not for a time beyond the next regular meeting, when they shall
publicly announce whether they will grant or refuse the prayer of the petition,
and shall endorse upon, or annex to the petition a brief memorandum of such
decision, to be signed by them; such decision shall be subject to revocation in
case the prayer of the petitioners is granted in the manner hereinafter
provided. In case the Board of Trustees refuses to grant the prayer of
petition, the Clerk shall endorse upon the same the fact of said refusal and
preserve the said petition, so endorsed, among the files of his office.
8-6-7: PROCEEDINGS TO VACATE:
If the petition is simply for the vacation of a street, alley or avenue, and
the Board of Trustees, or a majority of them, shall at such meeting decide that
the prayer of the petitioners should be granted, they shall order such street,
alley or avenue to be vacated, a copy of which order, together with the
petition, shall be by them filed with the Clerk, such order to be so filed
within ten (10) days after the date of such decision; and if not so filed, said
order of vacation shall be deemed void and of no effect.
8-6-8: SURVEY AND PLAT:
If such petition is for laying out a new street, alley or avenue, or the
alteration or widening of an existing one, and the Board of Trustees, or a
majority of them, shall be of the opinion that the prayer of the petitioners
should be granted, they shall cause a survey, and plat of such street, alley or
avenue to be made by a competent surveyor, who shall report such survey and
plat to said Board, giving the courses and distances, and specifying the land
over which it is to pass, in which they may make such changes between the
termini of the street, alley or avenue described in the petition, as the
convenience of the public, in their judgment may require.
8-6-9: ASCERTAIN DAMAGES:
They shall also, before they order any street, alley or avenue to be
established, altered, widened or vacated, ascertain as hereinafter provided,
the aggregate amount of damages which the owner or owners of the land over
which it is to pass shall be entitled to by reason of the location, alteration
or vacation of such street, alley or avenue; provided, however, that in case an
appeal is taken from the assessment of damages before the proper Village
officer, the Board in its discretion may make an order laying out, widening or
altering or vacating such street, alley or avenue either before or after such
appeal is determined.
8-6-10: AGREEMENT:
The damages sustained by the owner or owners of the land by reason of the
laying out, widening, alteration or vacation of any street, alley or avenue may
be agreed upon by the owners of such land, if competent to contract, and the
Board of Trustees, or they may be released by such owners, in which case the
agreement or release shall be in writing, and shall be filed and recorded, with
a copy of the order establishing or altering such street, alley or avenue, in
the Village Clerk's office, and shall be a perpetual bar against such owners,
their grantees and assigns, for all further claims for such damages.
8-6-11: WHEN DAMAGES NOT RELEASED:
In case such damages are not released or agreed upon as in the preceding
Section specified, the Board of Trustees shall within twenty (20) days of the
date at which it was decided to grant the prayer of the petition, make a
certificate that they are about to establish, widen, vacate or alter a public
street, alley or avenue, describing such street, alley or avenue, vacation,
widening or alteration, and land over or on which such street, alley or avenue
is to be established, altered, widened or vacated, naming the owners of such
land, if known, and if not known, stating the fact, and asking for a jury to
assess the damages of such owners, and shall present such certificate to some
proper County officer, who shall summon a jury in the manner hereinafter
provided, having the qualification of jurors, to appear before such officer at
a time to be fixed by him, within ten (10) days from the time such certificate
was presented to him, to assess such damages.
8-6-12: NOTIFY OWNERS:
The said Board shall also notify each and every owner of land, if known, and a
resident of the County, whose damages are to be assessed, that they will apply
to a proper officer (giving the time when and place where) to have a jury
impaneled to assess such damages.
8-6-13: VENIRE FOR JURY:
Upon the presentation of such certificate by the said Board, the proper officer
shall forthwith issue a venire directed to any constable of the County, to
summon twelve (12) persons having the qualification of jurors, at least one-
half (1/2) of whom shall be residents of the Village to appear, at such time
and place as may be designated for the trial of said cause, whose competency
shall be determined the same as in other civil causes before the proper
officers.
8-6-14: CHALLENGE OF JURY:
At the trial of the case either party shall have the right of challenge, as in
other cases, and any deficiency in the number of jurors, from whatever cause,
shall be supplied by summoning other persons in the same manner as in civil
cases. Such proper officers shall notify the owners of such land mentioned in
such certificate to appear at the same time before such officer to prove their
damages.
8-6-15: UNKNOWN OWNERS:
In case it shall appear either from the certificate of the said Board, the
affidavit of any person or the return of any officer to whom the writ may be
delivered for service, that there is an unknown owner or owners, who cannot be
found and served within the County, such proper officer shall also cause notice
to be posted in three (3) of the most public places in the Village, in the
vicinity of such proposed street, alley, avenue, or alteration, at least six
(6) days before the time fixed for the appearance of such jury, stating when
such jury is to be impaneled by him, and describing the street, alley or avenue
to be established, altered, widened or vacated as petitioned for, and the land
for which damages are to be assessed.
8-6-16: NOTICE SERVED:
The notice to such owners of land may be served by any constable, or one of the
petitioners, or other person of lawful age, at least five (5) days before the
time of appearance. If any of such owners is an infant, by delivering a copy to
the infant or its guardian, if any; if no guardian, the person with whom he
resides. If any owner is a lunatic or habitual drunkard, having a conservator,
or insane, by delivering a copy to his conservator, if any. If any such owner
is a married woman, by delivering a copy to her.
8-6-17: JURY SWORN:
The jury shall appear and be sworn, or affirmed, by such proper officer,
faithfully and impartially to assess the damages of each of the owners
specified in such certificate, or those of them to be adjusted, according to
law to the best of their judgment and understanding, and all parties in
interest shall be entitled to subpoenas, and other writs and papers, and
changes of venue may be had, and the trial shall be conducted as in other civil
cases.
8-6-18: HEAR EVIDENCE:
The jury shall hear such lawful evidence touching the question of such damages
as may be presented to them, and shall also on request of the said Board; or
owners of land whose damages are to be determined, in a body visit and examine
the proposed location, alteration, widening or vacation of such street, alley
or avenue, and the lands to be taken and affected thereby, and make a written
verdict, specifying the amount of damages, if any, which each such owner shall
recover, and return the same to such proper officer, to be by him entered upon
his docket in the nature of a judgment, to be paid by the said Board, together
with the costs of such suit, in case they shall finally determine to establish,
alter, widen or vacate such street, alley or avenue, and the money therefor
shall be paid by the Village out of the funds in the hands of the Treasurer
raised for road and bridge purposes; provided, that in estimating the damages,
the jury may consider the benefits conferred, or may disregard such benefits;
but no benefits enjoyed in common by the owners of such surrounding property
shall be considered in estimating damages.
8-6-19: DAMAGES ASSESSED:
When there are several such owners, the jury may assess the damages of one or
more, or all of them at the same time, or they may assess such damages at
different times, or there may be different juries and trials at different times
for different owners, if any owner shall demand a separate trial; and such
assessment of damages may be continued from time to time, for good cause, with
like effect as continuances in other cases before proper officers.
8-6-20: BOARD DETERMINATION:
After the total amount of damages shall have been ascertained either by release
or agreement of the parties, or by assessment before a proper officer and a
jury, in the manner hereinbefore provided, the Board shall at its next regular
meeting determine upon the laying out, altering, widening or vacation of such
street, alley or avenue, of which meeting said Board shall give public notice,
by causing not less than three (3) notices thereof to be posted at public
places within the Village, at least five (5) days prior thereto.
8-6-21: REVOKE PROCEEDINGS:
In cases where the damages are not wholly released or agreed upon, and the
Board shall be of the opinion that the damages assessed by the jury are
manifestly too high, and the payment of the same would be an unreasonable
burden upon the Village, the Board may revoke all proceedings had upon the
petition by a written order to that effect, and such revocation shall have the
effect to annul all such proceedings, and the assessments, releases and
agreements, in respect to damages, growing out of the proceedings upon the
petition.
8-6-22: ORDER MADE:
In case the Board shall not revoke such prior proceedings, they shall make an
order, to be signed by them, declaring such street, alley or avenue altered,
widened or laid out, a public street, alley or avenue, which order shall
contain, or have annexed thereto, a definite description of the line of such
street, alley or avenue, together with a plat thereof. The said Board shall,
within ten (10) days, cause the same, together with the report of the surveyor,
the petitions and releases, or agreements in respect to damages, to be
deposited and filed in the office of the Village Clerk, who shall note upon
such order the date of such filing, and record the same.
8-6-23: PROCEEDINGS, DAMAGES RELEASED:
In cases where the damages claimed by the landowners for the right of way is
released, or is agreed upon between the landowners and the said Board, the
Board may at their first meeting, or at an adjourned meeting, examine the route
of the street, alley or avenue, and cause a survey to be made and make out
their order establishing, altering, widening or vacating the same according to
the prayer of the petitioners, and return the same within the time, and in the
manner specified in this Chapter.
8-6-24: INDUCEMENTS OFFERED:
Any person or persons interested in the establishment, alteration, widening or
vacation of any street, alley or avenue in the Village are hereby authorized to
offer inducements to the said Board, for the establishment, alteration,
widening or vacation of any such street, alley or avenue, by entering into
contract with the Board, conditioned upon such establishment, alteration,
widening or vacation, to pay any money or other valuable thing to the Village,
for the benefit of the Village, or to perform any labor, or to construct any
street, alley or avenues, which said persons desire to have established,
widened or altered. And such contract in writing, made with the Village, shall
be deemed good and valid in law, and may be enforced by the Village before any
court having jurisdiction.
8-6-25: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
The record of the Clerk, or a certified copy of such record and papers relating
to the establishment, location, alteration, widening or vacation of any street,
alley or avenue, shall be prima facie evidence in all cases that all the
necessary antecedent provisions had been complied with, and that all the acts
of the Board, or all other persons and officers in regard thereto were regular
in all respects.
8-6-26: ROAD TAX:
The amount of road tax assessed by the Commissioners of Highways of the
Township of Roanoke on the real estate and personal property in the Village
liable to taxation shall, when paid into the Village Treasury, be appropriated
to the improvement of the streets and bridges of the Village, under the
direction of the President and Board of Trustees; provided, that the President
and Board of Trustees may at any time, by a written order, signed by a majority
of the Board, a copy of which shall be spread upon their records, notify the
Collector not to collect the tax so levied within the limits of the Village.
8-6-27: STREETS ON VILLAGE LINE:
Streets and roads may be laid out, altered, widened or vacated on the Village
line in the same manner as other public roads and streets, except that in such
cases, copies of the petition shall be posted up in, and presented to the
Commissioners of Highways of each township interested; whereupon the
Commissioners of Highways of the Township may meet with the Board, and act as
one body, in the same time and in the same manner as in other cases in
considering the petition, viewing the premises, adjusting damages, and making
all orders in reference to proposed road or street alteration, widening or
vacation, and a majority of all such Commissioners, and also a majority of the
Board must concur in all such orders, and a copy of all final orders, plats and
papers shall be filed and recorded in the town clerk's office of the township
interested, and the office of the Village Clerk.
8-6-28: VACATION, BY ORDINANCE:
No street, alley or avenue shall be vacated except by ordinance, and upon a
three-fourths (3/4) majority of all the Trustees authorized by law to be
elected, which vote shall be by yeas and nays, and entered on the record of
said Board.
8-6-29: STREETS LAID OUT; FEES:
Whenever any street, alley or avenue shall be laid out, altered or widened, it
shall be the duty of the Board of Trustees to cause a plat thereof to be made,
showing the width, course and extent thereof, and making such reference to
known and established corners or monuments that the location thereof may be
ascertained, and have the same recorded in the recorder's office of the proper
county; and when any street, alley or avenue is vacated, the ordinance vacating
the same shall be in like manner recorded. The fees for recording shall be paid
by the Village. (10-15-1900; amd. 1974 Code)
CHAPTER 7
RECREATION CENTER
SECTION:
8-7-1: Provision for a Recreation Facility
8-7-1: PROVISION FOR A RECREATION FACILITY:
   (A)   The Village Board authorizes the designation of specific areas as
recreation centers, and
   (B)   The Board may in its discretion provide for the construction of a type
of recreation center, or
   (C)   The Board in its discretion may designate an existing building or
buildings and the surrounding area as recreation centers, and
   (D)   Said recreation center or centers as aforementioned are to be
controlled by the said Village Board of the Village of Roanoke as to the hours
of use by all persons and the Village Board reserves the right to determine
what type of recreational activities will be engaged in upon said premises.
(Ord. 75-9; 6-16-75)
CHAPTER 8
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
SECTION:
8-8-1: Purpose And Scope
8-8-2:    Definitions
8-8-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
8-8-4: Dispute Resolution
8-8-5: Indemnification
8-8-6: Insurance
8-8-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
(A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities in the rights-of-way within the village's jurisdiction, or outside
the rights-of-way on property zoned by the village exclusively for commercial
or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act.
(B)   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
(C)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws
or regulations. (Ord. 2018-07, 7-16-2018)
8-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to
those codes, including the national electric safety code.
APPLICANT: Any person or entity who submits a siting application and the
agents, employees, and contractors of such person or entity.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and/or a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation at a specific location,
as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a pre- existing structure or
utility pole, and/or modification of a structure for the purpose of mounting or
installing a wireless facility on that structure or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended;
mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended; or wireless
service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the national
register of historic places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
keeper of the national register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the national register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the nationwide programmatic agreement codified at
47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the certified
local government program of the Illinois state historic preservation office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois state
historic preservation office is pending.
LAW: A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the village in
public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the village to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and (ii) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility and any pre-existing associated equipment of the structure is
cumulatively no more than twenty eight (28) cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and
other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a non-discriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
2018-07, 7-16-2018; amd. Ord. 2019-03, 5-6-2019)
8-8-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
(A)   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted
uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in division (C)9
herein regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning
review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning
district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for
commercial or industrial use.
(B)   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the
village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
   1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the village, together with the village's small cell
wireless facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit
application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or
wireless support structure:
      (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the structural engineering practice act of 1989;
      (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed
facility;
      (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the structural engineering practice act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
      (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
      (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge; and
      (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
   2.   Completeness Of Application:
      (a)   Should the village notify the applicant on or before the tenth day
after the applicant’s submission that the application is materially incomplete,
and clearly and specifically identifies the missing documents and information
and the specific rule or regulation creating the obligation to submit such
documents or information, the time period date calculation (in divisions 3(b)
and 3(c) below) shall restart at zero (0) on the date on which the applicant
submits all of the documents and information identified by the village to
render the application complete.
      (b)   Should the applicant make a supplemental submission that is still
deficient, the village must notify the applicant within ten (10) days of that
supplemental submission that it is deficient in the same manner as described
above. If the village adequately notifies the applicant of the continued
deficiency, the village’s time period to approve the application is tolled from
the day after the date when the village notifies the applicant that its
supplemental submission was not sufficient to render the application complete
in the manner listed in the above division, until the date when the applicant
submits all of the documents and information identified by the village to
render the application complete.
   3.   Application Process: The village shall process applications as follows:
      (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
      (b)   (1)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
non- discriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the village fails to
approve or deny the application within sixty (60) days after the submission of
a completed application.
         (2)   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
forty five (45) days after the submission of a completed application.
         (3)   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
sixtieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day
after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of
the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the
permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
      (c)   (1)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a non-
discriminatory basis and deemed approved if the village fails to approve or
deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a
completed application.
         (2)   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
         (3)   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one
hundred ninetieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth
day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt
of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the
permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
      (d)   The village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
         (1)   If the village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the wireless provider.
         (2)   The village shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
village denies an application.
         (3)   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the
village and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after
notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional
application fee. The village shall approve or deny the revised application
within thirty (30) days after the applicant resubmits the application, or it is
deemed approved. Failure to resubmit a revised application within thirty (30)
days of the denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application with
applicable fees, and recommencement of the village's review period.
         (4)   The applicant must notify the village in writing of its
intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis,
which may be submitted with the resubmitted application.
         (5)   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application to cure
defects does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new
or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facility.
      (e)   Batch Applications:
         (1)   A single application seeking authorization for multiple
collocations of small wireless facilities on existing utility poles or wireless
support structures, or the replacement of existing utility poles or wireless
support structures, shall comply with the time frames set forth in division 3
(b) above.
         (2)   A single application seeking authorization for multiple
collocations of small wireless facilities using a new utility pole or wireless
support structure shall comply withe the time frames set forth in division 3(c)
above.
         (3)   A single application seeking authorization for multiple
collocations of small wireless facilities combining collocations on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures and new utility poles or support
structures shall comply with the time frames set forth in division 3(c) above.
   4.   Tolling: Any time period involving an application may be further tolled
by the express written agreement by both the applicant and the village.
   5.   Consolidated Applications:
      (a)   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within
the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at the applicant's
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities if the
collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless
facility and substantially the same type of structure.
      (b)   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the
village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application
and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
   6.   Duration Of Permits:
      (a)   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of five (5) years,
and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the village
makes a finding that the small wireless facility or the new or modified utility
pole do not comply with the applicable village codes or any provision,
condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
      (b)   If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals
of permits shall be subject to the applicable village code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
   7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit applications,
supporting information, and notices to the village clerk at the Roanoke Village
Hall, 101 N. Main Street, Roanoke, Illinois, 61561, by regular mail postmarked
on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
(C)   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
   1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
   3.   (a)   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
      (b)   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the
type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency's communications equipment.
      (c)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
      (d)   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR Parts 22.970 through 22.973 and 47 CFR Parts 90.672 through
90.675.
      (e)   The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with
the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous division. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
   4.   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      (a)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      (b)   For purposes of this division, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the national electric safety code as published
by the institute of electrical and electronics engineers.
   5.   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local
code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
   6.   The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that
are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in any village
ordinance, written policy adopted by the village, comprehensive plan or other
written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including location on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
   7.   Alternate Placements:
      (a)   Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions
section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless
facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be
required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole.
However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless
facility associated with a new utility pole, the village may propose that the
small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the
alternate structure
on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure do
not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the
applicant.
      (b)   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the village, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this division.
   8.   Height Limitations:
      (a)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
      (b)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on
which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         (1)   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility
pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in
place on the date the application is submitted to the village, that is located
within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or
wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the village, provided the village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
         (2)   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
   9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for a
new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the
small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply
for a special use permit in conformance with procedures, terms, and conditions
set forth in chapter 12 of the Zoning Code.
   10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the rights-of-way.
   11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply
with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses a
wireless provider's request for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
   12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
   13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
(D)   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows.
   1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for an application to collocate up to five (5) small wireless
facilities on existing utility poles or wireless support structures, and one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a
consolidated application to collocate more than five (5) small wireless
facilities on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
   2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
   3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local ordinance,
applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
   4.   The village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
      (a)   Routine maintenance;
      (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with division (B)1(d) herein titled “Application
Requirements”; or
      (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
   5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
(E)   Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person
to collocate small wireless facilities on:
   1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
   2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
   3.   (a)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-
7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, metra commuter rail or any other public
commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of
the public utilities act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public
commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do
not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless
facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the
public utilities act.
      (b)   For the purposes of this division, "public utility" has the meaning
given to that term in section 3-105 of the public utilities act. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a)
to obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service, or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter.
(F)   Pre-Existing Agreements:
   1.   Existing agreements between the village and wireless providers that
relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the rights-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on village utility
poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small
wireless facilities collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to
applications submitted to the village before June 1, 2018, subject to
applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
   2.   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the village on
the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the
village makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small
wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application
submitted two (2) or more years after the effective date of the Act, by
notifying the village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The
existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination
provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has
collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its
option under this division.
(G)   Annual Recurring Rate:
   1.   A wireless provider shall pay to the village an annual recurring rate
to collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals (i) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or (ii) the
actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of
space on the village utility pole. This annual recurring rate includes any
possible right- of-way access fee or fee for attachment to the village-owned
structures in the right-of-way.
   2.   If the village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct
costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day
after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of
intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
(H)   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
   1.   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
   2.   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the village within
thirty (30) days of the sale or transfer of a small wireless facility within
the jurisdiction of the village. Such notice shall include the name and contact
information of the new wireless provider. (Ord. 2018-07, 7-16-2018; amd. Ord.
2019-03, 5-6-2019)
8-8-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Woodford County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the small wireless facilities deployment
act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per municipal
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 2018-07, 7-16-2018)
8-8-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability. (Ord. 2018-07, 7-16-2018)
8-8-6: INSURANCE:
(A)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
   1.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   2.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; and
   3.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the village improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily
injury and property damage in the amount of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence with an aggregate limit of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
(B)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional insured
on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
(C)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirement required by the village. A wireless provider
that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to
comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this
section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage limits required by the village.
(D)   As used in this section, "financial ability to self-insure" shall mean
having and maintaining net unrestricted assets of at least one hundred million
dollars ($100,000,000.00), as determined in accordance with generally accepted
accounting methods consistently applied, while maintaining appropriate loss
reserves for the amount of self-insurance obligations established in this
section and otherwise which are actuarially derived in accordance with accepted
standards of insurance industry and accrued or otherwise funded. (Ord. 2018-07,
7-16-2018)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Definitions, General Provisions   1
Through, One-Way And Stop Streets (Rep. by Ord. 2017-09, 7-5-2017)   2
Rules For Driving   3
Pedestrians   4
Parking Rules   5
Condition Of Vehicles   6
Drivers   7
Violation; Penalties   8
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS, GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Definitions
9-1-2: Obedience To Officers
9-1-3: Signs And Signals
9-1-4: Unauthorized Signs
9-1-5: Interference With Signs
9-1-6: Animals Or Bicycles
9-1-7: Exemptions
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the
meaning respectively ascribed to them in this chapter:
   ABANDONED VEHICLE: All vehicles in a state of disrepair, rendering the
vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any vehicle that has not
been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently
deserted.
   ALLEY: A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of
lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
   BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than twenty inches
(20") in diameter.
   CROSSWALK: That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of
the sidewalk lines at street intersections.
   DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Police vehicles, vehicles of the Fire Department,
ambulances, vehicles carrying a State, County or Municipal officer or employee
in response to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service
corporations on an emergency call.
   FARM TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry.
   IMPROVED HIGHWAY: A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or gravel.
   INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation of the property
lines of two (2) or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not such
streets cross.
   LANED ROADWAY: A street, the roadway of which is divided into two (2) or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained for overhead wires, but not operated
upon rails.
   MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
   PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time
greater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of
persons.
   PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
   PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots
or property abutting thereon.
   PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the Municipality, the County, any park
district, school district, the State of Illinois or the United States
government.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
   SAFETY ZONE: That portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of
pedestrians, suitably marked or elevated.
   SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a
public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious organization
solely for the transportation of pupils in connection with school activities.
   SEMI-TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by
another vehicle.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line or roadway and the
adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of each side or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic and each way
set aside for public travel by vehicles.
   TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for the purpose
of travel.
   TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers
or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no
part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
   TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
   VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moving by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-1966; amd.
Ord. 77-3, 5-2-1977)
9-1-2: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS:
The proper law enforcing officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic
in accordance with the provisions of this title or in emergencies as public
safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a
policeman; except in case of emergency it shall be unlawful for any person not
authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-1966;
amd. Ord. 79-3, 5-7-1979, eff. 5-8-1979)
9-1-3: SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions
of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the Village Board
or in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois, excepting on direction
of a police officer. All signs and signals established by direction of the
Governing Body shall conform to the State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-1966)
9-1-4: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway or
right-of-way within the Village, including any parking area within such highway
or right-of-way in the Village, any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or
device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct
the movement of traffic or to control or limit parking, nor shall any person
place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any other sign which
hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic, the regulation of
parking, or the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad
sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public
authority permit upon any highway or right-of-way any traffic sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
Any such unauthorized device is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be
removed after due notice by any law enforcement officer, the Village Streets
Department, or the Chairperson of the Village Streets, Alley and Ordinances
committee. (Ord. 2017-10, 8-21-2017; amd. Ord. 2022-01, 1-3-2022)
9-1-5: INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, damage, remove, move, or
interfere with any official traffic sign or signal or any other Village sign.
(Ord. 2017-10, 8-21-2017)
9-1-6: ANIMALS OR BICYCLES:
Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a
vehicle upon any street shall be subject to the provisions of this title
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which can have
no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal. Provided
that, except in business districts, bicycles may be ridden on sidewalks. (Ord.
66-3, 5-2-1966; amd. Ord. 2017-10, 8-21-2017)
9-1-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this title regulating the movement or parking of vehicles
shall not apply to the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call, but such driver upon approaching a red or stop
signal or any stop sign shall slow down as necessary for safety but may proceed
cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal. At other times drivers of
authorized emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal.
No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special
privileges under the Act except when such vehicle is operated in response to an
emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator
of the law.
The provisions of this title regulating the movement and parking of vehicles
shall not apply to equipment or vehicles while actively engaged in installing,
repairing or otherwise improving streets or street pavement. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-
1966; amd. Ord. 2017-10, 8-21-2017)
CHAPTER 2
THROUGH, ONE-WAY AND STOP STREETS
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-09, 7-5-2017)
CHAPTER 3
RULES FOR DRIVING
SECTION:
9-3-1: Method Of Turning At Intersections
9-3-2: Turning On Crest Of Hill
9-3-3: Starting Parked Vehicle
9-3-4: Driver's Signal
9-3-5: Driving From Alleys, Driveways
9-3-6: Driving On Sidewalks, Safety Zones
9-3-7: Right Of Way
9-3-8: Vehicle Turning Left
9-3-9: Limitations On Turning Around
9-3-10: U-Turns
9-3-11: No Left Turn
9-3-12: Fire Department Vehicles; Fires
9-3-13: Driving On Right Side Of Roadway
9-3-14: Passing Vehicles
9-3-15: Overtaking Vehicles
9-3-16: Overtaking Vehicles On The Right
9-3-17: Limitations On Overtaking On The Left
9-3-18: Driving On Roadways Laned For Traffic
9-3-19: Operation Of Vehicles; Approach Of Emergency Vehicles
9-3-20: Reckless Or Careless Driving
9-3-21: Speed Restrictions
9-3-22: Obstructing Traffic
9-3-23: Bicycles And Motorcycles
9-3-24: Unattended Vehicles
9-3-25: Unattended Animals
9-3-26: Clinging To Vehicles
9-3-27: Toy Vehicles
9-3-28: Riding On Running Boards
9-3-29: Train Signals
9-3-30: Driving Through Funeral, Other Procession
9-3-31: Drivers In A Procession
9-3-32: Funeral Processions To Be Identified
9-3-33: Backing
9-3-34: Restricted Access
9-3-35: Trucks Prohibited On Certain Streets
9-3-36: Limited Load Streets
9-3-37: School Buses
9-3-38: Snowmobile Routes
9-3-39: Truck Route, Load Limits
9-3-40: Golf Carts And Qualified Nonhighway Vehicles
9-3-1: METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as
follows:
   (A)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall
be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the
roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that
portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
9-3-2: TURNING ON CREST OF HILL:
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed tin the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade, where such
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within five hundred feet (500').
9-3-3: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
9-3-4: DRIVER'S SIGNAL:
No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn
without first giving a suitable signal in such a manner as to apprise others
who might be affected by his action.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian
may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by
such movement.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during not
less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before
turning.
      The signals herein required shall be given either by motion of the hand
and arm or by a signal lamp or signal device, but when a vehicle is so
constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to
the front and rear of such vehicle then said signal must be given by such a
lamp or device.
      All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
         Left Turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
         Right Turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
         Stop or Decrease of Speed: Hand and arm extended downward.
9-3-5: DRIVING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage, shall stop
such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk, or across a sidewalk
line projected across such alley, and shall exercise extreme care in driving
upon said sidewalk or across such line.
9-3-6: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS, SAFETY ZONES:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area, except at a
permanent or temporary driveway, nor at any time into or upon any portion of a
roadway marked as a safety zone.
9-3-7: RIGHT OF WAY:
Excepting as otherwise herein provided, the driver of a vehicle approaching an
intersection shall yield the right of way to a vehicle which has entered the
intersection from a different highway; and when two (2) vehicles entering an
intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver
of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the
right.
9-3-8: VEHICLE TURNING LEFT:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or
into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right of way to any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded may proceed
at such time as a safe interval occurs.
9-3-9: LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as
to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety
and without backing into traffic or otherwise interfering with traffic.
9-3-10: "U" TURNS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a "U" turn in the
middle of a block or at any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance.
(Ord. 66-3, 5-2-66)
No one will be permitted to make any "U" turns on Main Street between Broad
Street and Ann Street.
Anyone making a "U" turn after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be
subject to a fine and shall be cited by any police official who discovers a
person to be in violation of this Ordinance.
The fine that will be given to an individual will be the fine set forth within
the Village Code of the Village. However, under no circumstances will the fine
be less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and under no circumstances will it
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1986-5, 10-20-86)
9-3-11: NO LEFT TURN:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn left at any
place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance.
9-3-12: FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES; FIRES:
Upon the approach of a Fire Department vehicle, drivers of vehicles shall
comply with the provisions of Section
9-3-19 of this Chapter relating to the approach of authorized emergency
vehicles.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on
official business, to follow any fire apparatus in response to a fire alarm,
closer than one block, or to park any vehicle within the block where fire
apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm.
It shall be further unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive over any
unprotected hose of the Fire Department without the consent of the Fire Marshal
or the assistant in command. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-66)
   (B)   No fire truck will be taken at any time from the District Fire
Department unless the explicit and specific permission of the Fire Chief is
given to the Village Officer or Employee needing and requesting the vehicle,
and no vehicle will be taken or used except that specific vehicle designated by
the Fire Chief or his designee. The vehicle will at all times be returned in
exactly the same condition in which it was received from the Fire Department,
and if the Fire Chief is not available, then the Village Employee, Officer,
Trustee or Village President will contact that individual designated by the
Fire Chief to give that specific permission. (Res. 1992-1, 7-6-92)
9-3-13: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY:
Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right
half of the roadway except as follows:
   (A)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movements;
   (B)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
   (C)   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
   (D)   Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic.
   (E)   Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public
highway and two (2) vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the
wider shoulder shall give the right of way on such pavement to the other
vehicle.
9-3-14: PASSING VEHICLES:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to
the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic
in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2)
of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
9-3-15: OVERTAKING VEHICLES:
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
9-3-16: OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE RIGHT:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      1.   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      2.   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles in each direction;
      3.   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main traveled
portion of the roadway.
9-3-17: LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT:
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand side of the
roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction.
   (B)   No vehicle shall in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any
other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following
conditions:
      1.   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the driver's view is obstructed within sufficient distance as to
create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction.
      2.   When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing.
      3.   Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the
right, or a distinctive center line is marked, which distinctive line also so
directs traffic as declared in the signs manual adopted by the State Department
of Public Works and Buildings.
      4.   That limitations in subparagraphs 1 and 2 of this subsection (B)
shall not apply upon a one-way street or upon a street with unobstructed
pavement of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving traffic in
each direction when such movement can be made with safety.
9-3-18: DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent
herewith shall apply:
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of
traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such
center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the
direction that the vehicle is proceeding and is sign posted to give notice of
such allocation.
   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same
direction and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
9-3-19: OPERATION OF VEHICLES; APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver
is giving audible sign by siren or bell, or flashing light, the driver of every
other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to, and as close as possible to the right hand edge or curb
of the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such
position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer.
This Section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the highway.
9-3-20: RECKLESS OR CARELESS DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the Village in a reckless or
wanton manner, or carelessly so as to endanger life or property.
9-3-21: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Public Works and Buildings, State of
Illinois, or the County, in an urban district within the Village at a speed in
excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour, or in an alley at a speed in excess
of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
Provided that if the Village Board, by ordinance, sets other limits as provided
by Statute after an engineering or traffic survey, then such limits shall
govern the rate of speed on the streets indicated in such ordinance. The
Superintendent of Streets shall post appropriate signs showing such speed
limits.
Provided further, that the speed of all vehicles of the second division, as
defined by Statute as having two (2) or more solid tires, shall not exceed ten
(10) miles per hour.
The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum
speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on
or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any street or highway within the
Village under jurisdiction of the State Department of Public Works and
Buildings, or of the County, at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such
street.
9-3-22: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in such a
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon.
9-3-23: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES:
It shall be unlawful for more than one person to ride upon any bicycle
propelled by human power upon any street, or for any person to ride upon any
motorcycle other than upon a seat permanently attached to said vehicle to the
right or rear of the operator.
9-3-24: UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
No vehicle shall be left unattended while the motor of such vehicle is running;
and no vehicle shall be left without a driver on any hill or incline unless the
vehicle is secured against moving.
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or
causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
9-3-25: UNATTENDED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal unattended in any
street without having such animal securely fastened.
9-3-26: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle
or any toy vehicle to cling to or to attach himself or his vehicle to any
moving motor vehicle or wagon.
9-3-27: TOY VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled or other toy
vehicle to go upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk.
9-3-28: RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board or
outside step of any vehicle.
9-3-29: TRAIN SIGNALS:
The driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing when a signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train, shall stop within
fifty feet (50') but not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest track of
such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop at and not traverse such grade crossing when
a crossing gate is lowered or when a flagman, or automatic signal warns of the
approach of a train.
The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or any school bus
carrying school children, or any vehicle carrying explosives or flammable
liquid as cargo shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet (50') but not less
than ten feet (10') from the nearest rail of the tracks and shall listen and
look in both directions along such track from which a train might come, before
proceeding across such tracks at a grade crossing; provided, that no such stop
need by made at any such crossing where a police officer or a traffic-control
signal directs traffic to proceed.
9-3-30: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL, OTHER PROCESSION:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously designated as required in this Chapter. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals
or police officers.
9-3-31: DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION:
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right
hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as
close as practicable and safe.
9-3-32: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED:
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by
the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying
insignia and by having the lights of each vehicle lighted.
9-3-33: BACKING:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interference with other traffic.
9-3-34: RESTRICTED ACCESS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled or limited
controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established
by public authority.
9-3-35: TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any truck, except for the purpose of making a
delivery and then for one block only on any street so designated by ordinance
and properly sign posted.
9-3-36: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
Whenever the weight of vehicles permitted on a street is limited by ordinance
and signs indicating such limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful to
operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the
purpose of making a delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle
may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary
for the purpose. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-1966)
The street known as "Mill Street" between Main Street and State Street will be
subject to a ten (10) ton load limit. (Ord. 75-14, 12-15-1975)
9-3-37: SCHOOL BUSES:
The driver of a vehicle on a street or highway upon meeting or overtaking from
either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the
purpose of receiving or discharging any schoolchildren shall stop the vehicle
before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on the bus a visual
signal as required by the statute for operation while the bus is transporting
pupils; provided, that the driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway of
which the roadway for traffic moving in opposite directions is separated by a
strip of ground which is not surfaced or suitable for vehicle traffic need not
stop his vehicle upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on the opposite
roadway. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-1966)
9-3-38: SNOWMOBILE ROUTES:
The designated snowmobile route will be Route 116, down Court Street to Church
Street to Davidson Street to Green Street to Randolph Street to Sixth Street to
Carol Street and out of the Village. An additional route will be South Main
Street to Mill Street to State Street to Court Street and North Main Street out
of the Village.
These routes are not to be abused or used in any manner for racing of vehicles
around, through or up and down through the Village in any manner or fashion.
Anyone who does not live on one of these designated routes is permitted access
to these routes in the most direct manner possible, but only via the public
roadway system that is not across private property. Additionally, such
individuals may not in any way deviate from this most direct route since to do
so would be considered a violation of this section.
Anyone using a snowmobile vehicle in the Village on any road or property,
private or public, other than as specified in this section, is in violation of
the ordinances of the Village and such action will be a misdemeanor and citable
as such. Such violation shall subject the offending party to a fine of not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. 2001-02, 1-15-2001)
9-3-39: TRUCK ROUTE, LOAD LIMITS:
Regarding a route beginning at the intersection of West Front Street and Main
Street (County Highway 13); thence proceeding westerly on West Front Street to
Franklin Street; thence proceeding northerly on Franklin Street to the
intersection of Franklin Street and Hussemann Street (Illinois Route 116) at
which point said truck route ends, all being situated in the Village of
Roanoke:
   (A)   The load limit of two (2) tons is hereby imposed on the route
mentioned in this section so that no type of vehicle together with its load
weighing more than two (2) tons may proceed on said route.
   (B)   Any vehicle violating said load limit regarding the above designated
route shall be subject to a fine of a minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per occurrence but not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per
occurrence. (Ord. 2018-03, 6-4-2018)
9-3-40: GOLF CARTS AND QUALIFIED NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES:
   (A)   Annual Permit Fee: Permit for golf cart or qualified non- highway
vehicle (annual): Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   (B)   Golf Carts And Qualified Non-Highway Vehicles Permitted; Definitions:
The operation of golf carts or qualified non- highway vehicles shall be
permitted on streets under the jurisdiction of the Village of Roanoke and
within its corporate boundaries as set forth in this section. The term "golf
cart" shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 1-123.9 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, and "qualified non-highway vehicles" shall have the same
meaning as set forth in section 1-168.8 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. All-
terrain vehicles (ATV) (as set forth in section 1-101.8 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code) and off-highway motorcycles (as set forth in section 1-153.1 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code) are specifically excluded from this provision and are
not permitted on streets under the jurisdiction of the Village of Roanoke and
within its corporate boundaries.
   (C)   Compliance With Illinois Vehicle Code: The operation of golf carts and
qualified non-highway vehicles within the Village shall be in accordance with
all provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, including, without limitation,
section 11-1426.1 thereof. All golf carts and qualified non-highway vehicles
must have, at a minimum, the equipment and other items set forth in section 11-
1426.1(e) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, which includes a rearview mirror,
operational headlights, brake lights, and tail lights and the required
reflectors.
   (D)   Permits: No person shall operate a golf cart or qualified non-highway
vehicle within the Village of Roanoke without first obtaining a permit, or
being listed as an additional operator under a permit, as provided herein.
Permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. The cost of the permit shall
be as set forth in this Code.
      1.   Applications for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
Village, shall be executed by the applicant and each additional operator and
shall contain the following:
         (a)   Name and address of applicant;
         (b)   Name of liability insurance carrier and policy number;
         (c)   The serial number, make, model and description of golf cart or
qualified non-highway vehicle;
         (d)   Waiver of liability; and
         (e)   Such other information as the Village may require.
      2.   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
         (a)   A physically handicapped applicant or operator must submit a
certificate signed by a physician, certifying that the applicant is able to
safely operate a golf cart or qualified non-highway vehicle on Village streets;
         (b)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance
with the provisions of the Illinois Statutes regarding minimum liability
insurance for passenger motor vehicles to be operated on the roads of the State
of Illinois;
         (c)   The applicant must be at least sixteen (16) years of age and
possess a valid driver's license, and must provide a copy of the applicant's
driver's license.
      3.   Permits may be renewed upon demonstration of compliance with the
requirements for initial issuance of a permit and the payment of the permit
fee.
   (E)   Additional Requirements: The following requirements shall apply to the
operation of golf carts within the Village of Roanoke:
      1.   Golf carts and qualified non-highway vehicles may be operated at any
time of day provided that the operator of the golf cart or qualified non-
highway vehicle: a) operates the headlights and tail lights as required for all
vehicles when traveling in the nighttime or early morning hours and during
rainfall; and b) does not operate the golf cart or qualified non-highway
vehicle at any time on Illinois Route 116 (except to directly cross Illinois
Route 116), on any other State route, or on any roadway with a speed limit
exceeding thirty five (35) miles per hour;
      2.   All operators must be at least sixteen (16) years of age and possess
a valid driver's license; and
      3.   A Village decal evidencing that a permit has been obtained shall be
displayed on the rear of the golf cart or qualified non-highway vehicle at all
times.
   (F)   Violations: Any person who violates the provision of this section
shall be subject to revocation of permit or nonrenewal of permit, at the
discretion of the Village Board and a monetary fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the first offense, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second
offense, and three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each subsequent offense. (Ord.
2018-03, 6-4-2018)
CHAPTER 4
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Right of Way
9-4-2: Crossing Roadway
9-4-3: Signals
9-4-4: Standing on Sidewalk
9-4-5: Pedestrian Crossing
9-4-6: Walking Along Roadways
9-4-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
Where traffic-control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway or street within any marked crosswalk or within
any unmarked crosswalk.
Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection
or a marked crosswalk between intersections the pedestrian shall have the right
of way over drivers of vehicles; and at such marked places drivers of vehicles
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and any pedestrian within or
entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right of
way over any vehicle so stopped.
9-4-2: CROSSING ROADWAY:
At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the most direct
route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any place other than a
crosswalk he shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety zone, if
such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic.
9-4-3: SIGNALS:
At intersections where traffic is directed by a policeman or a stop and go
signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway other than
with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful movement of
traffic.
9-4-4: STANDING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except as near
as reasonably possible to the building line or curb line, if such standing
interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other pedestrians.
9-4-5: PEDESTRIAN CROSSING:
Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
9-4-6: WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS:
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway
or its shoulder facing traffic, and upon meeting a vehicle shall step off to
the left.
   (C)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-66)
CHAPTER 5
PARKING RULES
SECTION:
9-5-1: No Parking Places
9-5-2: Parking At Curb
9-5-3: Vehicles For Sale
9-5-4: Loading Zone
9-5-5: Alleys
9-5-6: Cabstands; Bus Stands
9-5-7: Time Limit Parking
9-5-8: Inoperable And Unused Motor Vehicles
9-5-9: Signs
9-5-10: Unlawful Parking Of Second Division Motor Vehicles And Trailers
9-5-11: Parking; Snow
9-5-12: Illegally Parked Vehicles To Be Towed Away
9-5-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control device:
   (A)   Intersections: In any intersection.
   (B)   Crosswalks: In a crosswalk.
   (C)   Bridges: Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the
approach thereto.
   (D)   Safety Zones: Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within
thirty feet (30') of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a
safety zone.
   (E)   Traffic Signals: Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, beacon
or sign on the approaching side.
   (F)   Intersections And Crosswalks: Within twenty feet (20') of any
intersection or crosswalk.
   (G)   Usable Width Of Roadway Reduced: At any place where the standing of a
vehicle will reduce the usable width of the roadway for moving traffic to less
than eighteen feet (18').
   (H)   Fire Hydrants: Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
   (I)   Driveways: At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a
driveway.
   (J)   Railroad Crossings: Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a
railroad grade crossing.
   (K)   Entrance To Fire Department Station: Within twenty feet (20') of the
driveway entrance to any fire department station and on the side of the street
opposite the entrance to any such station within seventy five feet (75') of
such entrance when properly signposted.
   (L)   Sidewalks And Parkways: On any sidewalk or parkway.
   (M)   Prohibited By Signs: At any place where official signs prohibit
parking.
   (N)   Route 116: On the north side of Route 116 from Garfield Street west
one hundred seventeen feet (117').
   (O)   No Parking Zone:
      1.   On Route 116 on the eastbound side from 701 W. Front Street
extending east along Route 116 for a distance of two hundred twenty one feet
(221'). This entire area will be declared a no parking zone and will be marked
by appropriate signs.
The above designated no parking zone will also be indicated by yellow curb
markings.
      2.   In the eastbound lane of Route 116 from Green Street extending west
along Route 116 for a distance of two hundred nineteen feet (219').
In the eastbound lane of Route 116 from Main Street west to the entrance of 117
W. Husseman Street.
   (P)   No Parking Zone/Semitrucks: Semitruck tractors and trailers (either
together or separate) shall not park on the south side of Route 116 from Green
Street extending east along Route 116 for a distance of one hundred thirty five
feet (135'). This entire area is declared a no parking zone for semitruck
tractors and trailers and will be marked by appropriate signs.
Anyone violating any provision of this section shall be subject to citation and
a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. Additionally, the
vehicle may be towed at the owner's expense, which will include any expenses or
fees for storage of the vehicle. No vehicle that has been towed and stored will
be released until the entire amount due for said towing and storage has been
paid. (Ord. 2016-01, 1-4-2016)
9-5-2: PARKING AT CURB:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb,
except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any
vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2)
right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly
established curb line, except that upon those streets that have been marked for
angle parking, vehicles shall be parked within the lines designated at the
angle to the curb indicated by such marks. Vehicles over twenty feet (20') must
be parallel.
Anyone violating this section shall be subject to citation and a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per violation, plus the person committing such violation shall
be subject to having his vehicle towed at his expense. Said expense will also
include storage. No vehicle that has been towed and stored will be released
until the entire amount due for said towing and storage has been paid. (Ord.
1999-05, 9-20-1999)
9-5-3: VEHICLES FOR SALE:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale or salvage, or to park any vehicle upon any business
street from which vehicle, merchandise is peddled.
Anyone violating this section shall be subject to citation and a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per violation, plus the person committing such violation shall
be subject to having his vehicle towed at his expense. Said expense will also
include storage. No vehicle that has been towed and stored will be released
until the entire amount due for said towing and storage has been paid. (Ord.
1999-05, 9-20-1999)
9-5-4: LOADING ZONE:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle
for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the driver to stand any
freight carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is necessary to
load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any
place designated by the village board as a loading zone and marked as such, or
in any of the following designated places:
   (A)   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance of any hospital or hotel at any time.
   (B)   At any place not to exceed fifty feet (50') along the curb before the
entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) P.M.
   (C)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the
theater is open for business.
Anyone violating this section shall be subject to citation and a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per violation, plus the person committing such violation shall
be subject to having his vehicle towed at his expense. Said expense will also
include storage. No vehicle that has been towed and stored will be released
until the entire amount due for said towing and storage has been paid. (Ord.
1999-05, 9-20-1999)
9-5-5: ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
Anyone violating this section shall be subject to citation and a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per violation, plus the person committing such violation shall
be subject to having his vehicle towed at his expense. Said expense will also
include storage. No vehicle that has been towed and stored will be released
until the entire amount due for said towing and storage has been paid. (Ord.
1999-05, 9-20-1999)
9-5-6: CABSTANDS; BUS STANDS:
No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated
by ordinance as a cabstand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in
a place so designated as a bus loading zone.
Anyone violating this section shall be subject to citation and a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per violation, plus the person committing such violation shall
be subject to having his vehicle towed at his expense. Said expense will also
include storage. No vehicle that has been towed and stored will be released
until the entire amount due for said towing and storage has been paid. (Ord.
1999-05, 9-20-1999)
9-5-7: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a
longer consecutive period of time than that designated between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., in any area designated
as a limited parking area and so marked. Parking on State Street from Broad
Street north to the alley which is closest, will be limited to no more than
three (3) consecutive hours between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. seven (7) days a week, Monday through Sunday. The fine
for any violation of this parking regulation will be fifty dollars ($50.00) per
offense.
Anyone violating this section shall be subject to citation and a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per violation, plus the person committing such violation shall
be subject to having his vehicle towed at his expense. Said expense will also
include storage. No vehicle that has been towed and stored will be released
until the entire amount due for said towing and storage has been paid. (Ord.
1999-05, 9-20-1999)
9-5-8: INOPERABLE AND UNUSED MOTOR VEHICLES:
   (A)   Definitions: Whenever used in this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings as set forth below:
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or
on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own motor power.
   UNUSED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle which: 1) is not currently licensed,
registered, or properly displaying registration plates or stickers as required
under chapter 3 of the Illinois vehicle code; 2) is not capable of being driven
in normal traffic within the village at normal speeds within the statutory
limits as set forth in the village; or 3) is in a state of disrepair, damage,
or missing parts which poses an open threat of injury or contamination.
      1.   A person shall fall within that class of persons who shall be deemed
to cause, permit, or allow a nuisance to exist under this section, if such
person:
         (a)   Has an ownership interest in or is in control of the unused or
inoperable motor vehicle;
         (b)   Causes the unused or inoperable motor vehicle to be deposited at
the site in question;
         (c)   Has an ownership interest in the private real estate upon which
the unused or inoperable motor vehicle is located;
         (d)   Has an ownership interest in or operates a business which
causes, permits, or allows such a nuisance to exist on the real estate upon
which the business is operated or on adjacent real estate which is under the
control of the business owner or operator; or
         (e)   Has an ownership interest in real estate upon which a business
is being operated and the operator or owner of said business causes, permits or
allows such a nuisance to exist on the real estate upon which the business is
being operated or on adjacent real estate which is under the control of the
person having an ownership interest in real estate upon which said business is
being operated.
   (B)   Regulation: All inoperable or unused motor vehicles or parts of a
motor vehicle within the village, whether on public or private property and in
view of the general public, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and
unlawful. However, this section shall not apply to any motor vehicle, or part
thereof, which is: 1) kept inside a building when not in use, 2) over twenty
five (25) years of age and operable, 3) on the premises of a place of business
engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles, or 4) rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to
perform ordinary service or repair operations. (Ord. 2002-03, 3-4-2002)
   (C)   Violations:
      1.   Any person who shall cause, permit, or allow a nuisance to exist or
continue as set forth in this section shall be notified in writing that the
vehicle or part in question is an inoperable or unused motor vehicle, that he
or she is in violation of this section, and that he or she has seven (7) days
to abate or dispose of the inoperable or unused motor vehicle or part thereof.
Notification shall be made by certified or registered mail from the village
clerk or by personal service from a proper law enforcement officer or other
person authorized by law to make personal service.
      2.   If an inoperable or unused motor vehicle has not been removed or
brought into compliance with this section within seven (7) days after such
notification, the offending person or persons may be cited in any manner as
allowed for notification as set forth above for violating this section. Each
day after the expiration of the seven (7) day notice period that the motor
vehicle or part thereof continues or exists as a nuisance under this section
shall be deemed a separate offense. Furthermore, each inoperable or unused
motor vehicle shall constitute a separate offense.
      3.   Also, if an inoperable or unused motor vehicle or any part thereof
has not been removed or brought into compliance with this section within seven
(7) days after such notification, the village may, at its option, authorize the
removal and impoundment of the inoperable or unused motor vehicle or part
thereof. If the owner of an inoperable or unused motor vehicle cannot be found,
then the village shall treat such vehicle as abandoned and the vehicle in
question may be towed and disposed of pursuant to the powers granted by chapter
4 of the Illinois vehicle code as amended from time to time. Nothing in this
section shall impose a duty upon the village to abate a nuisance specified in
this section. Any action authorized by this section regarding the removal of an
inoperable or unused motor vehicle or part thereof shall be in addition to and
without waiver of any other remedy or penalty available to the village. (Ord.
2002-14, 8-19-2002)
   (D)   Penalties: A violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). Any additional violation of this section committed by the same
person within twelve (12) months of the first violation, will result in a fine
of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Any fine imposed for a violation of this
section shall be in addition to any towing and storage charges assessed in
order to reclaim the vehicle.
   (E)   Disposal: An inoperable or unused motor vehicle or part thereof which
has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this section, whether
impounded at a public facility or on the property of private towing services,
shall be kept in custody for at least a ten (10) day period for the purpose of
determining the identity of the registered owner or lien holder and contacting
said owner or lien holder, if known, by regular U.S. mail. If, after the
expiration of the ten (10) day period, the registered owner or lien holder has
not taken action to recover the vehicle or part, the vehicle or part shall be
disposed of as an abandoned or junk vehicle pursuant to chapter 4 of the
Illinois vehicle code as amended from time to time. The owner of the vehicle or
part which has been removed, impounded, or both will be responsible for all
towing and storage charges.
   (F)   Severability: If any part, paragraph, or provision of this section
shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or
unenforceability of such part, paragraph, or provision shall not affect any of
the remaining provisions of this section. (Ord. 2002-03, 3-4-2002)
9-5-9: SIGNS:
Any person authorized by the president or village board shall cause signs to be
posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited, indicating such
limitations or prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to post or
cause to be posted any signs limiting or prohibiting parking on any Village
street or right-of-way without prior authorization from the village. (Ord.
1999-05, 9-20-1999; amd. Ord. 2022-01, 1-3-2022)
9-5-10: UNLAWFUL PARKING OF SECOND DIVISION MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAILERS:
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle having commercial license plates
and/or which is longer than twenty feet (20') or wider than eighty inches (80")
on any street of the village of Roanoke, at any time, for any reason other than
an immediate emergency, which emergency must be determined and approved by the
president or a trustee of the village of Roanoke. Further, it shall be unlawful
to park a recreational vehicle, a recreational trailer, or a trailer on any
street in the village of Roanoke for a period of over forty eight (48)
consecutive hours at any given time. This prohibition against vehicles being
parked on a village street for more than forty eight (48) consecutive hours
shall include, but not be limited to, vehicles having a recreational vehicle
(RV), recreational trailer (RT), or trailer (TA, TB, or farm) license plate,
and shall include any such vehicle that would have such license plate if
properly licensed in the state of Illinois, but does not have a license plate
or has a similar out of state license plate. After the original citation for
the violation of this section is issued, each day thereafter that the vehicle
stays in violation shall be an additional violation of this section.
The terms "motor vehicle", "vehicle", "recreational vehicle", and "trailer"
shall have the same meanings as these terms have in chapter 1 of the Illinois
vehicle code 1  as amended from time to time.
Anyone violating this section shall be subject to citation and a fine of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation, plus the person committing such
violation shall be subject to having his vehicle towed at his expense. Said
expense will also include storage. No vehicle that has been towed and stored
will be released until the entire amount due for said towing and storage has
been paid. (Ord. 2016-06, 6-6-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
9-5-11: PARKING; SNOW:
(A)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or public
off- street parking lot or area in the village at any time after a snowfall of
two inches (2") or more has occurred until after the snow has been removed from
the public street or public off-street parking area.
(B)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or public
off- street parking lot or area in the village at any time a two-inch (2")
snowfall event is predicted from the predicted start time of the snowfall event
as reported by the national weather service through the time when (i) the
snowfall event has occurred and the snow has been removed from the public
street or public off-street parking area, or (ii) the snowfall event has passed
through the village and less than two inches (2") of snowfall has occurred.
(C)   Anyone violating this section shall be subject to citation and a minimum
fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation and must be paid within
thirty (30) days after issuance of the citation. If the fine is not paid within
the thirty (30) day period and the violation is the first violation within a
twelve (12) month period, the fine shall be increased by one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) to a total fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). For a
second or subsequent violation of this section within a twelve (12) month
period, see section
1-4-13 . Additionally, the person committing such violation shall be subject to
having his vehicle towed at his expense. Said expense will also include
storage. No vehicle that has been towed and stored will be released until the
entire amount due for said towing and storage has been paid. (Ord. 2015-04, 3-
16-2015; amd. Ord. 2019-02, 3-4-2019)
9-5-12: ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES TO BE TOWED AWAY:
The law enforcement agency having jurisdiction and all members thereof are
hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any automobile or other vehicle illegally parked in
any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard,
blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs, or may obstruct, the movement of
any snow removal equipment, street cleaning equipment or movement of any
emergency vehicle.
Anyone violating this section shall be subject to citation and a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per violation, plus the person committing such violation shall
be subject to having his vehicle towed at his expense. Said expense will also
include storage. No vehicle that has been towed and stored will be released
until the entire amount due for said towing and storage has been paid. (Ord.
1999-05, 9-20-1999)
CHAPTER 6
CONDITION OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-6-1: Clear Vision
9-6-2: Gas And Smoke
9-6-3: Unnecessary Noise
9-6-4: Driving Unsafe Vehicle
9-6-5: Spilling Loads
9-6-6: Brakes
9-6-7: Horn
9-6-8: Lamps, Firemen's Vehicles
9-6-9: Lights
9-6-10: Muffler
9-6-11: Nonskid Devices
9-6-12: Projecting Loads
9-6-13: Signal Lamps, Devices
9-6-14: Tires
9-6-15: Weight
9-6-16: Lamps On Bicycles
9-6-17: Lights On Motorcycles, Trailers
9-6-18: Excessive Noise From Engine Braking
9-6-1: CLEAR VISION:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded or in such a
condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the
roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle.
Any vehicle with the view of the roadway to the rear so obstructed shall be
equipped with a mirror so attached as to give him a view of the roadway behind
him. (1974 Code)
9-6-2: GAS AND SMOKE:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits smoke or such an amount
of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons or as to endanger
the drivers of other vehicles. (1974 Code)
9-6-3: UNNECESSARY NOISE:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or
unnecessary noise. (1974 Code)
9-6-4: DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLE:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or
knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any
person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all
times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment as required by statute, or which is equipped in any manner in
violation of the statutes. (1974 Code)
9-6-5: SPILLING LOADS:
No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any
street or alley in the municipality. (1974 Code)
9-6-6: BRAKES:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless such
vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working condition,
as required by the state traffic law, or to operate any vehicle which is so
loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the mechanics operating
the brakes of such vehicles. (1974 Code)
9-6-7: HORN:
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient audible
signaling device in efficient working condition. Such signaling device shall be
sounded when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of a vehicle, but
such horn or other signaling device shall not be sounded for any purpose other
than as a warning of impending danger.
No motor vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a siren
or gong signaling device. (1974 Code)
9-6-8: LAMPS, FIREMEN'S VEHICLES:
Any motor vehicle owned or fully operated by a fireman may be equipped with not
to exceed two (2) lamps which shall emit a blue light as provided by statute.
(1974 Code)
9-6-9: LIGHTS:
It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not equipped
with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of the state law; provided,
that vehicles may be parked at nighttime without lights on any street or
portion thereof, designated by ordinance as a place where vehicles may be so
parked at nighttime. (1974 Code)
9-6-10: MUFFLER:
No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such vehicle is
provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition; and the use of a
cutout is prohibited. (1974 Code)
9-6-11: NONSKID DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any motor vehicle equipped with
any nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or nonflexible portion thereof
comes in contact with the pavement or roadway. (1974 Code)
9-6-12: PROJECTING LOADS:
The maximum width, length and height of any vehicle and its load shall not
exceed the limits expressed in the Illinois state traffic law.
No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a load
extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle nor
extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders on the right
side thereof.
No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more than two (2)
units, but such limitation shall not apply to vehicles operated in daytime when
transporting pipes, poles, machinery and other objects which cannot be readily
dismembered, nor to such vehicles operated at nighttime by a public utility
when engaged in emergency repair work; but such loads carried at night shall be
clearly marked with sufficient lights showing the full dimensions of the load.
No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet (3') in
front portion of the vehicle. (1974 Code)
9-6-13: SIGNAL LAMPS, DEVICES:
Every motor vehicle and trailer having a gross weight of three thousand (3,000)
pounds and less, including the weight of the trailer and the maximum load,
shall be equipped with a signal lamp or signal device which is so constructed
and located on the vehicle as to give a signal of the intention to stop which
shall be red or yellow in color, and signals of intention to turn to the right
or left, all of which signals shall be plainly visible and understandable in
normal sunlight and at night from a distance of one hundred feet (100') to the
rear but shall not project a dazzling or glaring light; except that a stop
signal need be visible only from the rear.
Any trailer having a gross weight of three thousand (3,000) pounds or less,
including the weight of the trailer and maximum load, need not be equipped with
such turn signal device unless the distance from the steering wheel of the
towing vehicle to the left outside limits of such trailer body exceeds twenty
four inches (24").
All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated during the period from
sunset to sunrise or when visibility is limited as to require the use of lights
for safety. (1974 Code)
9-6-14: TIRES:
It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which is not
equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the Illinois state
traffic law. (1974 Code)
9-6-15: WEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle with the weight,
including load, in excess of that permitted by the state traffic law for
driving on improved highways, or with weight distributed in a manner not
conforming to such law, or in violation of special weight limits provided for
by ordinance and sign posted. (1974 Code)
9-6-16: LAMPS ON BICYCLES:
Every bicycle when upon a street, during the period from sunset to sunrise
shall be equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting a white light, or
light of a yellow or amber tint, visible from a distance of five hundred feet
(500') to the front of the bicycle and with at least one lighted lamp
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to
the rear. (1974 Code)
9-6-17: LIGHTS ON MOTORCYCLES, TRAILERS:
During the period from sunset to sunrise, or at any other time when visibility
is so limited as to require the use of lights for safety, every motorcycle
operated on any street or other public place in the village shall carry and
exhibit one lighted lamp commonly known as a driving light and every motor
vehicle two (2) such lighted lamps showing white lights, or lights of a yellow
or amber tint, visible at least five hundred feet (500') in the direction
toward which each motorcycle or motor vehicle is proceeding, and each motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall also exhibit at least one lighted lamp
which shall be so situated as to throw a red light visible for at least five
hundred feet (500') in the reverse direction; provided, that every trailer
having a gross weight of three thousand (3,000) pounds or less including the
weight of the trailer and maximum load shall be equipped with two (2) lighted
lamps, one on each side of the rear of such trailer which shall be so situated
as to throw a red light visible for at least five hundred feet (500') in the
reverse direction. (1974 Code)
9-6-18: EXCESSIVE NOISE FROM ENGINE BRAKING:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to operate or actuate any
engine braking system that emits excessive noise, which shall include the use
of engine compression brakes (commonly referred to as "jake brakes"), on any
street, highway, or road within the village limits.
This section shall not apply to the use of an engine braking system that has an
adequate sound muffling system in proper working order that prevents excessive
noise. Furthermore, this section shall not apply if the driver used an engine
braking system that emits excessive noise in an emergency to avoid a collision
with a person or another vehicle. (Ord. 2007-08, 7-16-2007)
CHAPTER 7
DRIVERS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Liquor Or Drugs
9-7-2: Accidents
9-7-1: LIQUOR OR DRUGS:
It shall be unlawful for the habitual user of narcotic drugs to operate any
motor vehicle on any street; and it shall be unlawful for any intoxicated
person, or any person under the influence of alcohol or of a narcotic drug, to
operate or attempt to operate any motor vehicle on any street. (1974 Code)
9-7-2: ACCIDENTS:
The driver of a vehicle which has collided with or been in an accident with any
vehicle, person or property in such a manner as to cause injury or damage,
shall stop immediately, and render such assistance as may be possible, and give
his true name and residence to the injured person or any other person
requesting the same on behalf of the injured person, or the owner of the
property damaged, and to a policeman, if one is present. The driver of each
vehicle concerned in any such accident shall report to the nearest police
authority promptly after such accident. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 8
VIOLATION; PENALTIES
SECTION:
9-8-1: General
9-8-2: Arrests
9-8-3: Tickets
9-8-4: Prima Facie Proof
9-8-5: Parking Violations
9-8-1: GENERAL:
Any person violating any provision of this title shall be fined as set forth in
the specific village code section, not to exceed the amount, per violation, as
set forth in section
 1-4-1 of this code. In any instance where a specific penalty is not set forth
for a violation, then the provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code shall be the appropriate guideline. Additionally, any such
person convicted of a violation of any provision of this title may, in addition
to any fine imposed for the violation, be required to perform a reasonable
number of hours of public service which may include picking up litter in public
parks or along public highways or maintaining any public facility. Furthermore,
any person violating section
9-7-1 of this title may also be imprisoned for a period not to exceed six (6)
months or by any combination of fine, public service, and imprisonment. (Ord.
2002-04, 3-4-2002)
9-8-2: ARRESTS:
Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be
released upon proper bail being furnished as required by statute. The police
officer may prescribe the amount of bail or bond in each instance; provided,
that any arrested person may at his own request, have the amount of such bond
set as provided by statute. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-1966)
9-8-3: TICKETS:
For offenses other than driving while intoxicated or reckless driving, police
officers, after making note of the license number of the vehicle (and name of
the offender where possible) may issue a traffic violation ticket notifying the
offender to appear in court at the time designated for hearing such cases. Such
officer may sign a complaint for the issuance of a warrant if the offender does
not appear at the time and place so specified. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-1966)
9-8-4: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked is registered in the name
of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in
control of the automobile at the time of such parking. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-1966)
9-8-5: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking a vehicle
in a designated area or restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there
parked, may settle and comprise the claim against him for such illegal parking
by paying to the municipality the sum of one dollar ($1.00) within twenty four
(24) hours of the time such alleged offense was committed. Such payment may be
made to the arresting officer, and a numbered receipt shall be issued for all
money so received, and such money shall be promptly turned over to the
treasurer to be used in the manner provided for the disposition of fines for
traffic violations.
In the event of refusal of the accused to pay the arresting officer, they shall
have the option of paying either the village treasurer or village clerk within
twenty four (24) hours of such time the offense was committed.
In the event accused fails to pay the one dollar ($1.00) fine within the
prescribed time, the arresting officer may sign a complaint for the issuance of
a warrant against the offender. (Ord. 66-3, 5-2-1966)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
Title, Purpose, Definitions   1
Districts; Map   2
General Provisions   3
R-1 Residential District, Low Density   4
R-2 Residential District, Medium Density   5
R-3 Residential District, High Density   6
B-1 Central Business District   7
B-2 General Retail Business District   8
I-1 Industrial District   9
Off Street Parking And Loading   10
Nonconforming Uses   11
Special Uses   12
Administration, Enforcement   13
Joint Zoning And Planning Board   14
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Interpretation Of Terms
10-1-4: Definitions
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the ZONING CODE of the village of
Roanoke, Illinois. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
In accordance with division 13 of article 11 of the Illinois municipal code 1 ,
this zoning code establishes zoning regulations and standards for the following
purposes:
   (A)   Securing adequate light, pure air and safety from fire and other
dangers;
   (B)   Conserving the value of land, buildings and structures throughout the
village;
   (C)   Lessening and avoiding congestion in the public streets;
   (D)   Lessening and avoiding hazards to persons and damage to property
resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters;
   (E)   Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general
welfare;
   (F)   Regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings and
structures hereafter to be erected;
   (G)   Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback line or
lines on or along any street, trafficway, drive, parkway or storm or flood
water runoff channel or basin;
   (H)   Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas, and
regulating and determining the area of open space within and surrounding
buildings and structures;
   (I)   Classifying, regulating and restricting the location of trades and
industries and the location of buildings, structures and land designed for
specified industrial, commercial, residential and other uses;
   (J)   Dividing the entire village into districts of such number, shape, area
and such different classes according to the use of land, buildings and
structures, intensity of the use of lot area, area of open spaces, and other
classification as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this
zoning code;
   (K)   Fixing regulations and standards to which buildings, structures or
uses therein shall conform;
   (L)   Prohibiting uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of such districts; and
   (M)   Preventing additions to and alteration or remodeling of existing
buildings, structures or uses in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed under this zoning code. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 et seq.
10-1-3: INTERPRETATION OF TERMS:
In construing the intended meaning of words, terms, and phrases used in this
zoning code, the rules set forth below shall be followed:
Unless expressly stated or the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
following words, terms, and phrases shall, for the purpose of this zoning code,
have the meanings respectively indicated in section
10-1-4 of this chapter. Any pertinent word, term, or phrase not set forth in
section
10-1-4 of this chapter shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to it in
the village's subdivision code; and any word, term, or phrase not defined
either in section
10-1-4 of this chapter or in the subdivision code shall be construed to have
its usual legal definition or its standard English dictionary meaning as
dictated by the context of the word, term, or phrase.
The present tense includes the future tense.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and vice versa.
The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is always permissive.
The word "person" includes a partnership, association, firm, trust, club,
company, or corporation, as well as the individual.
The words "used" or "occupied" or "located" as applied to any land, building,
use, structure, or premises shall be construed to include the words "intended,
arranged or designed to be" used or occupied or located.
The word "lot" shall include the words "plot" and "parcel".
The word "village" shall mean the village of Roanoke, Illinois.
The term "zoning board" shall mean the joint zoning and planning board of the
village.
The term "plan commission" shall mean the joint zoning and planning board of
the village.
The term "zoning officer" shall include the person designated by the village
under the subdivision code as the "plat officer".
The word "engineer" shall mean the person or firm retained as engineer by the
village.
The term "governing body" shall mean the board of trustees of the village.
Captions (such as titles of sections, subsections, etc.) are intended merely to
facilitate general reference and in no way limit the substantive application of
the provisions set forth thereunder. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure on the same lot with the main or principal
structure, or the main or principal use, and subordinate to and used for
purposes customarily incidental to the main or principal structure or the main
or principal use.
   ACCESSORY USE: A use on the same lot with, incidental and subordinate to the
main or principal use or the main or principal structure.
   ALLEY: A permanent service right of way which affords only a secondary means
of access to property abutting such right of way and is not intended for
general traffic circulation.
   AREA, BUILDING: The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the largest
floor level of the main or principal building and all accessory buildings on
the same lot exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, steps or awnings,
marquees and nonpermanent canopies and planters.
   AREA, FLOOR: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several stories of
a building excluding cellar and basement floor areas not devoted to residential
use, but including the area of walled in and roofed porches and terraces. All
dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
   AREA, FLOOR, HABITABLE: The sum of the horizontal areas of all rooms in a
building used for habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen,
bedroom or closet, bathroom, but not including cellars, basements, nor unheated
rooms such as enclosed porches, nor rooms without at least one window or
skylight opening onto a yard or court, measured between the interior faces of
walls.
   AREA, LOT: The total area within the lot lines.
   BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) its height
below grade.
   BILLBOARD: See definition of Sign.
   BLOCK FACE: Property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the
two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or between the nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right of way, waterway,
unsubdivided area, or other definite boundary.
   BUILDING: An enclosed structure having a roof supported by columns, walls,
arches or other devices and used for the housing, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals and chattels.
   BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL: The building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which it is located.
   CELLAR: A story having less than one-half (1/2) of its height above grade.
   COURT: An open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building,
which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by, but is not enclosed by, the walls
of such building.
   COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.
   CURB LEVEL: The average elevation of the established curb of a street taken
along the curb line between the points of intersection of the curb line and the
lot lines. Where no curb has been established the curb level shall be the
average elevation of the land surface taken along the street right of way line
between the points of intersection of the right of way line and the lot lines.
   DISTRICT: An area or section of the village for which the regulations and
standards set forth in this zoning code are uniform, including the regulations
and standards governing the use of structures and premises, the height of the
structures, the size of yards, and intensity of use.
   DUPLEX: A dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units, side by side and on
the same level.
   DWELLING: A building designed for residential living purposes and containing
one or more dwelling units and/or lodging units.
   DWELLING, GROUP: A group of two (2) or more single-family, two-family or
multi-family dwellings in whatever combination, occupying a lot or lots in one
ownership.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling
units.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units with one
dwelling unit arranged on the story or stories above the other dwelling unit.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling
which are used exclusively as living quarters for one family and not more than
two (2) roomers or boarders, and which contain a stove, sink and other kitchen
facilities.
   FAMILY: (A) An individual; or
   (B)   Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption,
including foster children; or
   (C)   Maximum of three (3) persons not so related.
   FRONTAGE: All property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of a street, or if
the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between
an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building in which, for compensation, two (2) or more
vehicles are parked.
   GRADE: The average of the elevations of the surface of the ground measured
at all corners of a building.
   HEIGHT: The vertical measurement from grade to a point midway between the
highest and lowest points of the roof of a building or the vertical measurement
from the average level of the surface of the ground immediately surrounding a
structure to the uppermost portion of such structure.
   HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use of a service character customarily
conducted within a dwelling, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change the character
thereof or have any exterior evidence of such secondary use. The occupation
must conform to the following additional conditions:
   (A)   It must be carried on solely by the members of the family who are
residing on the premises;
   (B)   The total floor area devoted to such use shall not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the area of one floor of the dwelling, shall be located only
in the dwelling and shall not be located in any structure accessory thereto nor
in the open;
   (C)   No article is sold or offered for sale except such as may be produced
on the premises;
   (D)   No mechanical equipment is used except of a type that is similar in
character to that normally used for purely domestic or household purposes.
Home occupation shall include the use of premises by a physician, surgeon,
dentist, lawyer, clergyman or other professional person for consultation or
emergency treatment, but not for the general practice of his profession. Home
occupation shall also include a dressmaker, milliner, seamstress, and the
teaching of a musical instrument to a single pupil at a time. Home occupation
shall not include dancing instruction, group musical instruction, tea rooms,
tourist rooms, beauty shops, real estate offices, insurance offices, investment
offices, the repair or servicing of automotive vehicles, or the conduct of any
other trade or business not herein excepted.
   HOTEL: A building containing separate accommodations for use primarily by
transient persons. A hotel may contain restaurants, barbershops and other
accessory services for primarily serving its residents and only incidentally
the public.
   JUNKYARD: A lot, land, building or structure, or part thereof used primarily
for the collecting, storage and/or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or
discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of
machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts
therefrom.
   KENNEL: The keeping or housing of three (3) or more dogs six (6) months old
or older, either as an accessory use or a principal use, which may also include
breeding activities. Any kennel shall be within a completely enclosed building,
or if outdoor runs are provided, they shall be completely enclosed by a woven
wire fencing, solid fence or wall. Unless a kennel is the principal structure
on the lot, a kennel or any part thereof shall not be located in any front or
side yard, nor within ten feet (10') of any side or rear lot line in a rear
yard.
   LODGING HOUSE: A dwelling containing at least three (3) dwelling units or
lodging units in whatever combination. Meals are not provided within such
lodging house to the residents of the lodging units.
   LODGING UNIT: One or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling which
are used exclusively as living quarters for one family and do not contain
cooking facilities.
   LOT: When used alone shall mean a "zoning lot" unless the context of this
zoning code clearly indicates otherwise.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot located:
   (A)   At the junction of and abutting two (2) or more intersecting streets;
or
   (B)   At the junction of and abutting a street and the nearest shoreline or
high water line of a storm or flood water runoff channel or basin; or
   (C)   At the junction of and abutting two (2) or more storm or flood water
runoff channels or basins; or
   (D)   At and abutting the point of abrupt change of a single street where
the interior angle is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°) and the
radius of the street is less than one hundred feet (100').
   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot.
   MASTER PLAN: The complete plan or any of its parts for the development of
the village and adopted by the governing body as the official plan.
   MOTEL: A building or a group of buildings, whether detached, semidetached or
attached, containing accommodations primarily for transient automobile
travelers. The term "motel" includes such buildings designated as tourist
courts, tourist cabins, motor lodges and other similar terms.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE: A dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling
units.
   NONCONFORMING LOT, STRUCTURE OR USE: A lot, signs, structure or use which
does not conform to the regulations and standards of the district in which it
is located.
   NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: A building containing sleeping rooms where
persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals and nursing care for
hire.
   PARKING LOT: A lot, court, yard or portion thereof used for the parking of
vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE: A space accessory to a use or structure for the parking of
one vehicle, the size of which shall be determined as herein specified.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land which is developed as a unit under
single ownership or control, which includes two (2) or more principal
structures and is identified to its main or principal use by its functional
definition prefix, as dwelling group.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The entire dedicated tract or strip of land that is to be used
by the public for circulation and service.
   SCREEN PLANTING: A vegetative material of sufficient height and density to
filter adequately from view, in adjoining districts, structures and uses on the
premises upon which the screen planting is located.
   SETBACK LINE: The building restriction line nearest the front of and across
a lot establishing the minimum distance to be provided between the line of a
structure located on said lot and the nearest street right of way line or
centerline of the nearest shoreline or high water line of a storm or flood
water runoff channel or basin.
   SIGN: Any structure or device for visual communication that is used for the
purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not
including any flag, badge or insignia of any government agency. Each display
surface of a sign shall be considered a sign.
   SPECIAL USE: A use permitted in a district pursuant to, and in compliance
with, procedures specified herein.
   STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above, then
the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
   STREET: A thoroughfare within the right of way which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property. A street may be designated as an avenue,
a boulevard, drive, highway, expressway, lane, parkway, place, road,
thoroughfare, or by other appropriate name.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
surface of the ground or affixed to something having location on the surface of
the ground, or anything constructed underground, whether temporary,
semipermanent, or permanent. Among other things, structures include buildings,
walls, fences, swimming pools, decks, platforms, utility sheds, storage bins,
tents, antenna or radio towers, television discs, billboards, and signs. The
term "temporary" as used in the context of the definition of a structure shall
include only structures constructed or erected for a duration of thirty (30) or
more continuous days, and a break in the use or existence of a structure of
less than a week shall be considered as not disrupting or terminating the
continuous nature of the structure for determining this thirty (30) day period;
structures constructed or erected for less than thirty (30) days shall not be
considered to be a structure under the terms of this zoning code.
   STRUCTURE, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL: The structure in or on which is conducted the
main or principal use of the lot on which it is located.
   SUBDIVISION CODE: The village subdivision code as set forth in title 11 of
this code.
   TOURIST HOME: A dwelling containing the dwelling unit of the owner or
operator and containing separate accommodations which do not contain cooking
facilities primarily for transient automobile travelers.
   TRAILER CAMP OR MOBILE HOME PARK: A tract of land meeting the standards
established by the county health authorities and by the Illinois state
department of health:
   (A)   Where two (2) or more inhabited trailer coaches are parked and used
for residential purposes, or
   (B)   Which is used by the public as parking space for two (2) or more
inhabited trailer coaches.
   TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME: Any portable or mobile vehicle used for
residential living purposes by a family, or for business purposes. For the
purpose of this zoning code, such vehicle shall be classified as a trailer
coach whether or not its wheels, rollers, skids or other rolling equipment have
been removed, or whether or not any addition thereto has been built on the
ground.
   USE: The specific purpose for which land, a structure or premises, is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
   UTILITY SHED: An accessory building of one hundred fifty (150) square feet
or less.
   YARD: An open space, other than a court, of uniform width or depth on the
same lot with a structure lying between the structure and the nearest lot line
and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the surface of the ground upward except
as may be specifically provided by the regulations and standards herein.
   YARD, FRONT: A yard extending the full width of a lot and situated between
the front lot line and the nearest line of a structure located on said lot.
Where a lot is located such that its rear and front lot lines each abut a
street right of way line or the nearest shoreline or high water line of a storm
or flood water runoff channel or basin, both such yards shall be classified as
front yards. Each yard of a corner lot facing a street right of way line or the
shoreline or high water line of a storm or flood water runoff channel or basin
shall be classified as a front yard.
   YARD, REAR: A yard extending the full width of a lot and situated between
the rear lot line and the nearest line of a structure located on said lot.
   YARD, SIDE: A yard situated between the side lot line and the nearest line
of a structure located on said lot and extending from the rear line of the
required front yard to the front line of the required rear yard.
   ZONING LOT: A single property, parcel, unit, tract, plat or otherwise
designated portion of land, having metes and bounds, which is designated by its
owner or developer as a property, parcel, unit, tract, plat or otherwise
designated portion of land which has been sold, or is offered, or will be
offered for sale, and is to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under
single ownership or control, and which is occupied or capable of being occupied
by one or more structures and the accessory structures, or uses customarily
incidental to it, including such open spaces as are arranged and designed to be
used in connection with such structure. A zoning lot may or may not coincide
with a lot of record. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005; amd. Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 2
DISTRICTS; MAP
SECTION:
10-2-1: Districts Established
10-2-2: Map
10-2-3: Annexed Land
10-2-4: Zoning Of Public Ways
10-2-5: Interpretation Of District Boundaries
10-2-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this zoning code, the
village is hereby divided into the following districts:
   R-1   Residential district, low density
   R-2    Residential district, medium density
   R-3    Residential district, high density
   B-1    Central business district
   B-2    General retail business district
   I-1    Industrial district
(Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-2-2: MAP:
The locations and boundaries of the districts herein established are shown upon
the map entitled official "village of Roanoke zoning map", which with all
notations, references, and information thereon, is hereby made a part of this
zoning code by reference. A copy of the zoning map shall be on file with and
available for inspection from the village clerk or the zoning officer. (Ord.
2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-2-3: ANNEXED LAND:
Land which may be annexed to the village shall be classified in accordance with
the following schedule until such time as the village board changes the
classification in accordance with the provisions of their ordinance.
   County Zoning Classification   Roanoke Classification
      Residential AS   R-1
      Residential CS   R-2 and R-3
      Commercial   B-2
      Industrial   I-1
      Agriculture   R-1
      Conservation A   R-1
      Conservation B   R-1
Should the county revise its zoning classifications, the classification
equivalent or most similar to the previous zoning classification shall apply.
If land is not classified under one of the county classifications listed above
or if no equivalent or similar classification exists, the land shall be annexed
as an R-1 district. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-2-4: ZONING OF PUBLIC WAYS:
All streets, alleys, public ways, and rights of way, including railroad rights
of way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the
same zone as the property immediately abutting such street, alley, public way,
or right of way. Where the centerline of a street, alley, public way, or right
of way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, when not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of
the abutting property up to such centerline. Whenever any street, alley, public
way, or right of way is vacated, the zoning district abutting each side of such
street, alley, public way, or right of way shall be automatically extended to
the centerline of such a vacation, and all area included in the vacated area
shall thereafter be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended
districts. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-2-5: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, alleys, public ways, or rights of way shall be construed to follow
such centerlines.
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following recorded lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following village limits shall
be construed as following such village limits.
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks.
   (E)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streams, rivers, canals, drainageways, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be
construed to follow such centerlines.
   (F)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in subsections (A) through (E) of this section shall be so construed.
Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be determined by
the scale of the map.
   (G)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
different than those shown on the zoning map or in other circumstances not
covered by subsections (A) through (F) of this section, the zoning board shall
interpret the district boundaries. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Construction And Use
10-3-2: Open Spaces
10-3-3: Height
10-3-4: Yards/Fences
10-3-5: Exemptions From Regulations And Standards
10-3-6: General Prohibitions
10-3-7: Signs
10-3-1: CONSTRUCTION AND USE:
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered,
enlarged, remodeled, extended or moved unless in conformity with all
regulations and standards herein specified for the district in which it shall
be located.
   (B)   No structure shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered,
enlarged, remodeled, extended or moved:
      1.   To exceed the height limit;
      2.   To occupy or house a greater number of families;
      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of the lot area;
      4.   To exceed the floor area ratio;
      5.   To have smaller or less habitable floor area per dwelling unit or
lodging unit;
      6.   To exceed the maximum floor area;
than hereinafter required or in any manner contrary to the regulations and
standards of the district in which it is located.
   (C)   In no case other than in planned developments shall there be more than
one main or principal structure, or main or principal use on one lot or tract
of land.
   (D)   No accessory use shall be established prior to the establishment of
the main or principal use, and no accessory structure shall be constructed,
erected, altered, remodeled, extended or moved prior to the establishment or
construction of the main or principal structure except those accessory uses and
structures of a temporary nature required for the establishment of the main or
principal use, or for the construction of the main or principal structure.
   (E)   No structure shall be constructed or erected on a lot or tract of land
or moved to a lot or tract of land which does not abut a public street or
permanent easement of access to a public street. Such easement shall have a
minimum width of twenty feet (20') unless an easement of less width was on
record prior to the effective date of this zoning code.
   (F)   Nothing in this zoning code shall be deemed to require any change in
the plans, construction, or designated use of any structure existing or upon
which construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of this
zoning code, or any amendment thereto as such amendment specifically applies to
the plans, construction, or designated use, provided that such structure shall
be completed within one calendar year from the effective date of this zoning
code or any amendment thereto as such amendment is specifically applicable.
   (G)   The performance standards, regulations, rules, requirements,
provisions, and restrictions set by this zoning code shall apply to all
structures, uses, lots, and tracts of land created or established after the
effective date of this zoning code, or any amendment thereto as such amendment
specifically applies to the standards, regulations, rules, requirements,
provisions, and restrictions, and shall not be deemed to require any change in
the structure, uses, lots, or tracts of land lawfully existing on the effective
date of this zoning code or any amendment thereto, except as expressly
specified hereinafter.
   (H)   The uses permitted in one district shall not be permitted in any other
district unless specifically stated.
   (I)   Accessory structures and uses shall comply with size, height, setback,
and any other restrictions set forth in this zoning code, unless a variance is
properly granted under the provisions in chapter 13 of this title.
   (J)   Sheds shall be made of common building materials and shall not be
constructed of salvaged materials, such as wooden pallets.
   (K)   Shipping containers shall be used as an accessory structure and shall
not be allowed in any zoning district with the exception of the I-1 Industrial
District. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005; amd. Ord. 2024-06, 10-21-2024)
10-3-2: OPEN SPACES:
   (A)   No part of a yard, buffer strip or other open space, off street
parking space or loading berth, or lot area required about or in connection
with any structure or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations and
standards of this zoning code shall be included as part of a yard, buffer strip
or other open space, off street parking or loading berth or lot area similarly
required for any other structure or use.
   (B)   No yard, buffer strip or other open space, off street parking space or
loading berth, or lot shall be reduced in dimension or area below the
requirements set forth hereinafter. Yards, buffer strips or other open spaces,
off street parking spaces or loading berths, or lots created or established
after the effective date of this zoning code or any amendment thereto shall
meet at least the minimum requirements established by this zoning code or such
amendment thereto. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-3-3: HEIGHT:
   (A)   The height of any main or principal structure or accessory building
may exceed the maximum permitted height by one foot (1') for each additional
foot by which the width of each yard exceeds the minimum yard dimension for the
district in which such structure is located up to the maximum height
specifically set forth in this section.
   (B)   Height regulations and standards shall not apply to spires, belfries,
penthouses or domes not used for human occupancy nor to chimneys, ventilators,
skylights, water tanks, bulkheads, utility poles and power silos, and other
necessary mechanical appurtenances, provided their location shall conform where
applicable to the regulations and standards of applicable state law or the
federal communications commission, the civil aeronautics administration, and
other public authorities having jurisdiction.
   (C)   Structures shall not exceed height specified for the applicable
district, and in no event shall any structures exceed fifty four feet (54') in
height. All buildings and all main or principal structures shall be positioned
in conformation with the setback line regulations and standards specified
hereinafter for the district in which they are located. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-
2005)
10-3-4: YARDS/FENCES:
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this zoning code, the minimum
yard dimensions specified hereinafter shall not be reduced except through
appropriate action by the zoning board.
   (B)   Yards shall be kept unobstructed for their entire depth except as
specified hereinafter.
   (C)   Private driveways, service drives, easements, sidewalks, flag poles,
arbors, trellises, fences, walls, columns, light poles, hydrants, patios,
accessory signs and other decorative recreational and utility devices,
equipment and TV discs, may be placed in any yard.
   (D)   Fences, walls, and hedges may be placed in any yard or along the edge
of any yard; provided, that no fence, wall or hedge, except in the case of a
junkyard, shall exceed four feet (4') in height, except as modified by
subsections (E) and (F) of this section.
   (E)   Corner lot visibility: On a corner lot, nothing shall be permanently
or temporarily constructed, erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in
such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one-
half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above the centerline grades of the
intersecting streets in an area bounded by the street right of way lines of
such corner lot and a straight line adjoining points along said street right of
way lines fifty feet (50') from the nearest point of intersection. Beyond such
fifty foot (50') limits, subsection (D) of this section shall apply.
   (F)   Any fence or wall along a side yard or rear yard may be as high as,
but shall not exceed, six feet (6') in height in an R-1 or R-2 residential
district or eight feet (8') in height in all other zoning districts.
   (G)   The term "hedge", as used in this section, shall mean a dense row of
shrubs, bushes, or other vegetative material that form a boundary or barrier.
   (H)   A fence shall be constructed from materials commonly used for fencing
and shall not be constructed with railroad ties, wood pallets, tires, salvage
materials, or any livestock fencing. No fence shall be allowed which contains
any components which could cause a public safety hazard (e.g. barbed wire,
metal spikes, or electrical elements). (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005; amd. Ord.
2024-06, 10-21-2024)
10-3-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
The following structures and uses are exempted from the application of the
district regulations and standards and are permitted in any district:
Poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves
or any similar distributing equipment for telephone or other communications,
electric power, gas, water and sewer lines; provided, that the installation
shall conform where applicable with applicable state law or the rules and
regulations of the Illinois commerce commission, the civil aeronautics
administration, and of other public authorities having jurisdiction.
A zoning use permit shall be obtained for any aboveground electric substation
or switching station, gas regulator station, water pump station, telephone
exchange or similar utility structure. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-3-6: GENERAL PROHIBITIONS:
   (A)   No trailer camp or mobile home park shall be permitted in the village
unless specifically recommended by the zoning board and approved by the village
board through the special use process set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
Additionally, no one may maintain or permit on his premises, a trailer coach,
tourist home, or mobile home for more than thirty (30) days unless specifically
permitted by the zoning board, and village board approval is required through
the special use process set forth in chapter 12 of this title for such use for
more than ninety (90) days.
   (B)   No adult use of property shall be located or operating within one
thousand feet (1,000') of a school, daycare center, cemetery, public park,
forest preserve, public housing, or place of religious worship, or within seven
hundred fifty feet (750') of a residential district. "Adult use" includes any
adult entertainment facility and is defined as follows: 1) a striptease club or
pornographic movie theater whose business is the commercial sale,
dissemination, or distribution of sexually explicit material, shows, or other
exhibitions; or 2) an adult bookstore or adult video store whose primary
business is the commercial sale, dissemination, or distribution of sexually
explicit material, shows, or other exhibitions. "Adult use" shall also include
a massage parlor or massage establishment, except to the extent the massage
therapy is provided by a hospital, nursing home, physician's office,
chiropractic office, or by a state licensed massage therapist or other state
licensed person who practices in the healing arts.
   (C)   No property within the village shall be used to keep, raise, or
otherwise own, possess, or permit any of the following animals: horses, cattle,
sheep, ponies, mules, goats, pigs, swine, hogs, ducks, geese, chickens, minks,
skunks, bees, pigeons, any other hoofed animal not herein specifically
mentioned, any other livestock or poultry, or any undomesticated, wild, or
vicious feline, canine or ursine animal or any other undomesticated, wild, or
vicious animal potentially injurious to humans. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-3-7: SIGNS:
The following regulations are established to promote the public health and
safety by reducing the distractive characteristics of signs along public
streets, by prohibiting signs that interfere with traffic control devices, and
by assuring adequate standards for the erection and maintenance of signs. These
regulations are also established to regulate the size, height, location, and
general characteristics of signs to protect and enhance the physical appearance
and aesthetics of the community. No sign, display, or similar structure shall
be permitted unless such sign, display, or structure complies with the
regulations set forth herein.
   (A)   General Provisions: The following regulations apply to signs in any
zoning district:
      1.   No sign shall project onto the public right of way or interfere with
an authorized traffic signal, traffic control device, traffic sign, or street
sign or device, or interfere with the required corner lot visibility
requirements set forth in section
10-3-4 of this chapter.
      2.   No sign shall be attached to a tree, utility pole, post, fence,
hedge, rock, or any other structure or natural feature on public property or
within a public right of way, with the exception of authorized traffic control
devices, street signs, or markers.
      3.   No sign shall be located on vacant property except a sign
advertising the premises for sale or lease and which meets the standards set
forth in this section.
      4.   No sign shall prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window,
or fire escape.
      5.   Any sign that is hereafter abandoned, or that ceases to be used for
a period of thirty (30) days, or for which the business it advertises has not
been conducted on the premises for a period of thirty (30) days, shall be
removed by the owner, lessee, or other person or entity in control of the
premises on which the sign is located according to the following schedule: a)
the sign shall be removed and replaced with a blank face no later than sixty
(60) days after the sign was abandoned, the sign ceased to be used, or the
affiliated business ceased operation (whichever occurs first); and b) all
portions of the remainder of the sign, including framework, poles, braces,
structural elements and supports, shall be removed no later than three hundred
(300) days after the expiration of the initial sixty (60) day period set forth
above. Any sign that is hereafter unlawfully installed or maintained shall be
immediately removed by the owner, lessee, or other person or entity in control
of the premises on which the sign is located. Upon the failure to remove the
sign in compliance with this provision, the zoning administrator shall give
written notice of nonconformance to the owner, lessee, or other person or
entity in control of the premises on which the sign is located, who will be
required to remove the sign in compliance with this provision within fifteen
(15) days from the date of the notice. If such person or entity does not
comply, the zoning administrator shall have the sign removed and any expense
incident thereto shall be paid by the owner or by a lien placed against the
property. If the property owner is different than the person or entity that
erected or last maintained the sign on the property, then both the owner and
the person or entity that erected or last maintained the sign shall both
jointly and severally be responsible for removal of the sign in compliance with
this provision.
      6.   The owner, lessee, or person or entity in control of any sign shall
be required to keep such sign properly maintained at all times in good and safe
structural condition. The painted or colored portion of a sign shall be
repainted or replaced as necessary to be kept in good condition. Illuminated
and moving parts of a sign shall be kept in proper working order.
      7.   With the exception of authorized public traffic control devices,
dial clocks, and time and temperature devices, flashing, revolving, or animated
signs shall be permitted only in a B-1 central business district, a B-2 general
retail business district, and an I-1 industrial district.
      8.   Illuminated signs shall not be permitted in any residential
district, except for institutional signs as defined herein, and shall be
permitted in a B-1 central business district, a B-2 general retail business
district, and an I-1 industrial district.
      9.   The lighting used in any illuminated sign shall be such that only
the sign itself, and not the area surrounding it, will be illuminated.
Additionally, any lighting, flashing, or motion of a sign shall not create a
hazardous or annoying glare or condition. Further, in no case shall exposed
bulbs or strobe lights be allowed.
   (B)   Permitted Signs: The following signs are permitted in all zoning
districts provided the sign complies with the conditions and limitations set
forth herein. Such signs may not be illuminated unless otherwise specified.
      1.   Public signs: Signs of a public, noncommercial nature, to include
safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating
scenic or historical points of interest, memorial plaques, and the like, and
all signs erected by or on order of a public officer in the performance of a
public duty. Such signs may be illuminated.
      2.   Identification signs: Freestanding or wall signs which identify
permitted use, owner or resident, and set forth the address of the premises
where the sign is located, and which contain no other material. One such sign
is allowed per lot provided any lettering is not over four inches (4") in
height, the sign is not more than three feet (3') high, and the area of the
sign does not exceed three (3) square feet. No sign shall be closer than ten
feet (10') to the property line or one-half (1/2) the front yard depth,
whichever is less. This provision does not apply to mailboxes which are not
attached to a building.
      3.   Integral signs: Names of buildings, dates of construction,
commemorative tablets and the like, when carved into stone, concrete or similar
material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type of construction
and made an integral part of the building or structure.
      4.   Institutional signs: Any sign or bulletin board setting forth or
denoting the name of or simple announcement for any public, charitable,
educational or religious institution when located on the premises of such
institution, provided such sign or bulletin board or both shall not exceed a
total of forty (40) square feet in display surface. One such on site sign is
allowed per property not to exceed six feet (6') in height. No such on site
sign shall be closer than ten feet (10') to the property line or one-half (1/2)
the front yard depth, whichever is less. One off site directional sign is
allowed per institution not to exceed nine (9) square feet in area and ten feet
(10') in height. Such signs may be illuminated.
      5.   Private traffic direction signs and related signs: Signs directing
traffic movement onto a premises or within a premises, when such signs are
located on the premises, do not exceed four (4) square feet in area for each
sign and do not exceed five feet (5') in total height. Such signs must be
freestanding or wall mounted and no sign shall project into a public way. Such
signs are considered to include parking directions, exit or entrance signs,
drive-up window signs, restroom signs and the like. Horizontal directional
signs on and flush with paved areas are exempt from these standards.
      6.   Community event signs: Signs advertising a public entertainment or
event of public interest. These signs shall remain in place for no more than
twenty one (21) days before and fourteen (14) days after the event and may not
exceed ten (10) square feet in area. Signs placed over a public way shall be at
least fifteen feet (15') above ground level.
      7.   Political or campaign signs: Temporary signs or posters announcing
the candidates seeking public political office or political issues, and data
pertinent thereto, up to an area of ten (10) square feet. These signs shall be
confined to private property off the public right of way, have the consent of
the property owner, and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the
election for which they were erected.
      8.   Individual property sale or rental signs: Any on premises sign
announcing the name of the owner, manager, realtor or other person directly
involved in the sale or rental of the property or announcing the purpose for
which it is being offered. Signs may be freestanding or wall mounted only.
These signs must be removed within fourteen (14) days after sale or rental of
property. These signs shall not be closer than ten feet (10') to a property
line or one-half (1/2) the front yard depth, whichever is less. Such signs in
any zoning residential district shall not exceed five (5) square feet in area
or exceed three feet (3') in height. Such signs in any other zoning district
shall not exceed twenty five (25) square feet in area or exceed twelve feet
(12') in height.
      9.   Subdivision signs: Temporary signs announcing the names of
architects, engineers, contractors or other individuals or firms involved with
the subdivision of property and announcing the character of the subdivision,
the purpose for which it is intended, or the sale of lots. These signs shall be
confined to private property within the new subdivision and limited to one sign
per street bordering or entering the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed
thirty two (32) square feet in area or ten feet (10') in height for a
residential subdivision, or sixty four (64) square feet in area or twenty five
feet (25') in height for a commercial or industrial subdivision. These signs
shall not be closer than ten feet (10') to a property line or one-half (1/2)
the front yard depth, whichever is less. These signs shall be removed within
thirty (30) days after the sale of the last lot within the subdivision.
      10.   Construction signs: Any sign announcing the names of architects,
engineers, contractors or other individuals or firms involved with the
construction, alteration or repair of a building or announcing the character of
the building enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended, or
to indicate the presence of underground public utility structures to avoid
damage to structures by excavation. Such signs shall be confined to the site
for the construction, alteration or repair and shall be removed within twenty
one (21) days after completion of the work. Standards for such signs shall be
as for individual property sale or rental signs set forth above.
      11.   Holiday signs: Signs or displays which contain or depict a message
pertaining to a national, state, community or religious holiday. Such signs or
displays shall be permitted for no longer than forty five (45) days during the
respective holiday period. Such signs may be illuminated.
      12.   Underground public utility warning signs: Standard types of warning
signs marking the routes of underground public utility pipes, conduits and
cables.
   (C)   Permitted Signs; R-1 And R-2 Residential Districts: Except as noted
herein, no other signs besides those listed in subsection (B) of this section
are permitted in the R-1 or R-2 residential districts. However, for a home
occupation (a permitted and lawful business conducted by an occupant of the
structure), one wall mounted sign shall be permitted not exceeding four (4)
square feet in area or ten feet (10') in height, which identifies the name and
nature of the business or occupation conducted therein, and which contains no
other material.
   (D)   Permitted Signs; R-3 Residential District: For single-family or duplex
dwellings, subsection (C) of this section shall apply. For multiple-family
dwellings, a single identification sign not exceeding ten (10) square feet in
area and only the name and address of the building(s) and the name of the
management thereof may be displayed on such sign. Such sign shall not project
higher than six feet (6') above curb level and shall not project into the
public way. It shall be located at least ten feet (10') behind the property
line. One freestanding sign is permitted per apartment grouping under single
ownership.
   (E)   Permitted Signs; B-1 Central Business District: The following signs
are permitted in the B-1 central business district provided the sign advertises
only a business conducted in the building or on the premises of which such sign
is placed. One wall sign plus one freestanding, projecting, awning or marquee
sign is permitted per business, provided such signs comply with the following
guidelines:
      1.   For permitted residential uses, the requirements of subsection (D)
of this section shall apply.
      2.   Signs shall not exceed in total area two (2) times the linear feet
of the street frontage of the establishment, but in no case shall the area of
the sign exceed forty (40) square feet per establishment.
      3.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height
or the height of the building, whichever is less. No part of the sign may
extend into a public way.
      4.   Projecting signs shall not exceed the height of the building. The
bottom most portion of the sign must be at least eight feet (8') above the
finished grade of the sidewalk beneath it. Projecting signs may extend into the
public way but cannot be closer than two feet (2') to any curb line.
      5.   Wall signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total square
foot area of the face of the building, including doors and windows. As used in
this zoning code, a "wall sign" is any sign attached, erected, constructed,
painted on or against a wall, building, or structure parallel to the face of a
building and supported throughout its length by the building.
      6.   Signs attached to awnings or marquees may not project more than
twelve inches (12") from the structure and may not exceed ten (10) square feet
in area. The bottom most portion of the awning, marquee or sign attached
thereto, must be at least eight feet (8') above the finished grade of the
sidewalk beneath it. Such structures, with attached signs, may extend into the
public way but shall not be closer than two feet (2') to any curb line.
      7.   Signs shall not project over or across any property line.
   (F)   Permitted Signs; B-2 General Retail Business District: The following
signs are permitted in a B-2 general retail business district provided the sign
does not extend into a public way and they advertise only a business conducted
in the building or on the premises of which such sign is placed. Each business
is allowed one wall sign plus one freestanding, projecting or roof sign,
provided such signs comply with the following guidelines:
      1.   For permitted residential uses, the requirements of subsection (D)
of this section shall apply.
      2.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in
area and shall be no more than twice the height of the building or forty feet
(40'), whichever is less. Such signs must be at least twelve feet (12') from
the property line.
      3.   Projecting signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area and
shall not project above the roof of the building. The bottom most portion of
the sign must be at least eight feet (8') above the finished grade of the
sidewalk or ground beneath it.
      4.   Roof signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area,
and shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height as measured from that portion of
the roof directly beneath the sign. Signs must be located wholly within the
roof area of the structure.
      5.   Wall signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total square
footage of the face of the building, including doors and windows.
   (G)   Permitted Signs; I-1 Industrial District: The following signs are
permitted in the I-1 industrial district provided the sign does not extend into
a public way and they advertise only a business conducted in the building or on
the premises of which such sign is placed. Each business is allowed one wall
sign plus one freestanding, projecting or roof sign, provided such signs comply
with the following guidelines:
      1.   For permitted nonconforming residential uses, the requirements of
subsection (D) of this section shall apply.
      2.   For permitted business district uses, the requirements of subsection
(E) of this section shall apply.
      3.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in
area and shall be no more than twice the height of the building or seventy five
feet (75'), whichever is less. Such signs must be at least twelve feet (12')
from the property line.
      4.   Projecting signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in
area and shall not project above the roof of the building. The bottom most
portion of the sign must be at least eight feet (8') above the finished grade
of the sidewalk or ground beneath it.
      5.   Roof signs shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area,
and shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height as measured from that portion of
the roof directly beneath the sign. Signs must be located wholly within the
roof area of the structure.
      6.   Wall signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total square
footage of the face of the structure, including doors and windows.
   (H)   Nonconforming Signs: Any lawful signs existing at the effective date
of the adoption of this amendment to the zoning code that adopts this sign
ordinance, or subsequent amendment thereto, which would not be permitted under
the terms of this sign ordinance or zoning code, or subsequent amendment
thereto, is declared to be a legal nonconforming sign. In compliance with the
conditions and provisions set forth in section
10-11-4 of this title, such nonconforming signs shall be permitted until
terminated by voluntary act or by catastrophic event, and the conversion of
these legal nonconforming signs to conforming signs wherever and whenever
possible is encouraged. However, legal nonconforming institutional signs
permitted under this provision that are terminated by catastrophic event may be
replaced, reconstructed, or repaired, provided that such institutional sign is
no greater in size, height, or scope than prior to the catastrophic event, and
that such sign is built at the same specific location where such institutional
sign was located prior to the catastrophic event. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
CHAPTER 4
R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, LOW DENSITY
SECTION:
10-4-1: Purpose
10-4-2: Permitted Uses
10-4-3: Height
10-4-4: Lot Size
10-4-5: Yards
10-4-6: Building, Coverage
10-4-7: Habitable Floor Area
10-4-8: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-4-1: PURPOSE:
The R-1 residential district includes those portions of the village developed
predominantly with one-family dwellings on individual lots where it is deemed
desirable to maintain and encourage this pattern of development, or those
undeveloped portions of the village in which it is deemed desirable to
encourage this pattern of predominant land usage and density of population.
(Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-4-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected or altered within any R-1 residential district, unless otherwise
provided for in this zoning code, except for the following uses:
Churches; temples; other places of public worship, so long as they are of a
permanent type of construction and affixed to a permanent site.
Customary accessory uses, including private garages.
Customary home occupations, but not including the conduct of a retail or
wholesale business or manufacturing business.
Farming, gardening, horticultural nurseries, but not including the raising,
housing, pasturing or keeping of bees, fowl or livestock.
Libraries; public museums.
One-family dwellings.
Parks, recreation areas, recreation buildings operated by a unit of government;
government buildings but not including storage yards or buildings for the
housing of trucks, contractors' equipment, poles, pipe, road building
materials, or similar materials.
Public or private schools offering general instruction between kindergarten and
twelfth grade levels; public or private colleges offering courses leading
toward an associate, baccalaureate or advanced degree in arts or science or
comparable recognized degree.
Temporary buildings, structures and uses incidental to construction on the
site, for a period not to exceed one year. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-4-3: HEIGHT:
No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed thirty five feet
(35') in height. Furthermore, accessory buildings, utility sheds and television
discs shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-4-4: LOT SIZE:
Every building hereafter erected shall be on a lot having an area not less than
six thousand (6,000) square feet, a lot width measured along the front setback
line of not less than sixty feet (60'), and a lot depth of not less than one
hundred feet (100'), measured along a line midway between the side lot lines
perpendicular to the front lot line; provided, however, that where a lot is
smaller than herein required, and was of record at the time of the passage of
this zoning code, said lot may be occupied by not more than one 1-family
dwelling. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-4-5: YARDS:
No principal building shall hereafter be erected or enlarged unless the
following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such buildings:
   (A)   Front yard not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth, unless forty
percent (40%) of the block frontage is improved with buildings that have
observed a greater or lesser depth of front yard, in which instance no new
buildings or portion thereof shall project beyond a straight line drawn between
the points closest to the front property line of the two (2) nearest
residences, but this regulation shall not be interpreted to require a front
yard of more than fifty feet (50') nor to permit a front yard of lesser depth
than that of the nearest building. Where the street is curved, the line shall
follow the curve of the street rather than to be a straight line.
   (B)   A side yard on each side not less than ten percent (10%) of the width
of the lot.
   (C)   A rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25').
   (D)   Any addition to an R-1 structure as described herein, enclosed or
open, of whatever nature, which is an attached part of the main structure, must
conform to the setback requirements of rear, side and front yards set forth in
this chapter. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-4-6: BUILDING, COVERAGE:
No building, with any accessory structure, shall occupy in excess of thirty
seven percent (37%) of the area of an interior lot, nor more than forty percent
(40%) of the area of a corner lot. Additionally, any accessory building,
utility shed, or television disc, is subject to the same requirements.
Furthermore, buildings, accessory structures, utility sheds and television
discs must meet the following requirements:
   (A)   Shall not be permitted on the front or side yard area so defined in
subsection
10-4-5(A) or (B) of this chapter.
   (B)   Must be at least ten feet (10') from the rear lot line.
   (C)   Any television disc erected within the village may be placed in the
backyard of the residence only in accordance with the additional requirements
and restrictions of this code and the various yard and lot use restrictions
which are a part of said code.
   (D)   In order to erect a television disc on any property within the
village, said person desiring to erect such television disc must obtain a
zoning use permit to do so from the zoning officer and the cost of said
erection permit will be five dollars ($5.00).
   (E)   No more than one residential dwelling shall be built on any individual
"lot" as defined in both this zoning code and the subdivision code. (Ord. 2005-
04, 5-16-2005)
10-4-7: HABITABLE FLOOR AREA:
No one-story dwelling shall hereafter be erected with a habitable floor area of
less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
No two-story dwelling shall hereafter be erected with a habitable floor area of
less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-
2005)
10-4-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and loading in the R-1 residential district shall be
provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this
title. Furthermore, not more than one of the following listed vehicles may be
parked off the properly designated driveway or off street parking area for a
lot in an R-1 residential district in the side yard or rear yard of a lot: a
camper, camping trailer, camping bus, motor home, boat, boat trailer, house
trailer, trailer coach, tourist home, or similar vehicle. A vehicle that is
parked off the properly designated driveway or off street parking area under
this provision must be unoccupied and shall not project beyond the front of
either the structure or the garage on the lot. Furthermore, nothing in this
section shall permit vehicles not specifically listed herein to park off the
properly designated driveway or off street parking area for the lot. (Ord.
2005-04, 5-16-2005)
CHAPTER 5
R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, MEDIUM DENSITY
SECTION:
10-5-1: Purpose
10-5-2: Permitted Uses
10-5-3: Standards
10-5-4: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-5-1: PURPOSE:
The R-2 residential district, medium density is established to accommodate
single-family dwellings and two-family duplexes while providing for the
continued growth of the village. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected or altered within any R-2 residential district, unless otherwise
provided for in this zoning code, except for the following uses:
Any use permitted in the R-1 residential district subject to the restrictions
of that district.
Two-family residences, subject to the restrictions of the R-1 residential
district, sections
10-4-3 through
10-4-8 of this title. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-5-3: STANDARDS:
Standards to which duplexes shall comply:
   (A)   Lot Size: No duplex shall hereafter be erected, and no existing
building shall be converted to any such use unless the lot shall have an area
of at least ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet.
   (B)   Floor Area Ratio: Irrespective of the number of floors in a building
or a series of buildings on the same lot, the sum of the total area of all
floors shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area of the lot.
   (C)   Density: No duplex shall hereafter be erected or altered to
accommodate or make provision for more than two (2) families as a "family" is
defined in section
10-1-4 of this title, with a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet
of habitable floor area per dwelling unit not including any basement or cellar
where more than fifty percent (50%) of the total area of that cellar or
basement is below ground level.
   (D)   Building Height: No duplex shall hereafter be erected or altered to
exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
   (E)   Side Yard: On each side of the building, there shall be a side yard
having a width of not less than ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, or
one-fifth (1/5) the building height, whichever is greater.
   (F)   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
fifteen percent (15%) of the lot depth but not less than twenty five feet (25')
in depth, whichever is greater.
   (G)   Front Yard: There shall be a front yard along such abutting street
having a depth of at least twenty five feet (25') measured from the right of
way line.
   (H)   Site Plan Approval: Before any permit shall be issued for a duplex in
this district, the site plans therefor shall be submitted to the zoning board
for approval. Such site plans shall show: lot lines; building placement; width
of bounding streets and type of pavement; location and size of water lines and
sewer lines serving the property; location of off street parking with access
drives; heights of buildings or parts thereof; landscaping; surrounding land
uses, and such other details as the zoning board may require in its
deliberation.
In its deliberation, the zoning board shall give due consideration to the
probable effect the proposal would have on surrounding land uses; the adequacy
of existing water and sewer utilities serving the site; the relation of the
building height and mass to surrounding structures; and the effect the project
will have as a traffic generator on streets giving access to the site.
The zoning board may approve the plans, as submitted, subject to modification,
or may disapprove the plan. Its decision in each case shall be in writing and
set forth in the minutes of the zoning board, with copies to the applicant, the
zoning officer, and the village board. Once the site plan has been approved by
the zoning board, the grading or elevation of said site may not be altered in
any way unless specifically approved by the zoning board. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-
2005)
10-5-4: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and loading in the R-2 residential district shall be
provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this
title. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
CHAPTER 6
R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, HIGH DENSITY
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose
10-6-2: Permitted Uses
10-6-3: Permitted Special Uses
10-6-4: Standards
10-6-5: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-6-1: PURPOSE:
The R-3 residential district, high density is established to accommodate a wide
variety of family dwellings and similar residential uses while providing for
the continued growth of the village. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-6-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected or altered within any R-3 residential district, unless otherwise
provided for in this zoning code, except for the following uses:
Any use permitted in the R-1 residential district and the R-2 residential
district, subject to the restrictions of those districts.
Multi-family residences; sheltered care homes; nursing homes, subject to the
restrictions herein set forth for such uses. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-6-3: PERMITTED SPECIAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted by special use permit only upon the
review of an application at a public hearing and the subsequent approval of the
detailed site plans by the zoning board and the village board as set forth in
chapter 12 of this title:
One or more of the following uses may be established clearly incidental to a
multi-family residence, sheltered care home or nursing home: restaurant, office
of doctor or dentist, or similar practitioner in the healing arts. Such
incidental use shall be allowed only if it is primarily for the use and benefit
of the occupants of the principal use.
An application for a "permitted special use" set forth in this section shall
require the submission of the applicable initial special use permit fee as
provided in section
10-13-5 of this title. However, the permit for a "permitted special use" shall
be valid for the duration of the applicant's control of the premises as long as
the permitted use continues, without the need to annually renew the special use
permit or to annually pay the special use renewal fee. Any successor in
interest in the use of the property will be required to submit a new
application for the "permitted special use" with the applicable initial special
use permit fee. However, in all other aspects, chapter 12 of this title will
govern the review and issuance of a special use permit for a "permitted special
use". (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-6-4: STANDARDS:
Standards to which multi-family residences, sheltered care homes and nursing
homes shall comply:
   (A)   Lot Size: No multi-family residence, sheltered care home or nursing
home shall hereafter be erected, and no existing building shall be converted to
any such use unless the lot shall have an area of at least ten thousand five
hundred (10,500) square feet.
   (B)   Floor Area Ratio: Irrespective of the number of floors in a building
or a series of buildings on the same lot, the sum of the total area of all
floors shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area of the lot.
   (C)   Density: No multi-family residence shall hereafter be erected or
altered to accommodate or make provision for more than the following number of
families: two (2) families for the first ten thousand five hundred (10,500)
square feet of lot area, plus two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area for
each of the next two (2) families and three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot
area for each additional family. Additionally, each dwelling unit shall have a
minimum of seven hundred (700) square feet of habitable floor area not
including any basement or cellar where more than fifty percent (50%) of the
total area of that cellar or basement is below ground level.
   (D)   Building Height: No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to
exceed fifty four feet (54') in height.
   (E)   Side Yard: On each side of the building, there shall be a side yard
having a width of not less than ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot, or
one-fifth (1/5) the building height, whichever is greater.
   (F)   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
fifteen percent (15%) of the lot depth but not less than twenty five feet (25')
in depth, or one-third (1/3) the building height, whichever is greater.
   (G)   Front Yard: There shall be a front yard along each abutting street
having a depth of at least twenty five feet (25') measured from the right of
way line.
   (H)   Site Plan Approval: Before any permit shall be issued for a multi-
family residence, sheltered care home or nursing home in this district, the
site plans therefor shall be submitted to the zoning board for approval. Such
site plans shall show: lot lines; building placement, width of bounding streets
and type of pavement; location and size of water lines and sewer lines serving
the property; location of off street parking with access drives; heights of
buildings or parts thereof; landscaping; surrounding land uses; such other
details as the zoning board may require in its deliberation.
In its deliberation, the zoning board shall give due consideration to the
probable effect the proposal would have on surrounding land uses; the adequacy
of existing water and sewer utilities serving the site; the relation of the
building height and mass to surrounding structures; and the effect the project
will have as a traffic generator on streets giving access to the site.
The zoning board may approve the plans, as submitted, subject to modification,
or may disapprove the plan. Its decision in each case shall be in writing, and
set forth in the minutes of the zoning board, with copies to the applicant, the
zoning officer, and the zoning board. Once the site plan has been approved by
the zoning board, the grading or elevation of said site may not be altered in
any way unless specifically approved by the zoning board. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-
2005)
10-6-5: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
For a multi-family residence, off street parking for at least two (2) cars for
each dwelling unit on the same or an adjacent lot shall be provided. For a
sheltered care home or nursing home, one car space for each employee per shift
plus one car space for each four (4) residents' accommodations shall be
provided. In addition, if one or more permitted special uses are authorized by
the village board, additional off street parking shall be provided for the
permitted special use as deemed adequate by the zoning board and approved by
the village board in conjunction with the issuance of the special use permit.
Furthermore, all off street parking and loading shall be in compliance with the
requirements and regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 2005-
04, 5-16-2005)
CHAPTER 7
B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7-1: Purpose
10-7-2: Permitted Uses
10-7-3: Permitted Special Uses
10-7-4: Height
10-7-5: Yards, Courts, Coverage
10-7-6: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-7-1: PURPOSE:
The B-1 central business district is established solely for the village's
downtown business area to allow for the grouping of businesses compatible to
the downtown area as a means to serve these businesses, create convenience for
the public, and to discourage unsightly or inefficient business development in
the downtown area while encouraging continued use, vitality, and development of
the downtown area. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-7-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected or altered within any B-1 central business district, unless otherwise
provided in this zoning code except for the following uses:
Any use permitted in the R-3 residential district, subject to the restrictions
therefor set forth in chapter 6 of this title; however, the first floor of any
building having a store front, which includes any large window or open viewing
area whether such area is clear, translucent, or covered in any manner, on a
roadway or pedestrian walkway shall not be occupied as a residence.
Bakeries employing not more than eight (8) persons.
Banks and financial institutions.
Barbershops, beauty parlors.
Business and professional offices.
Catering establishments.
Comfort stations.
Dancing academies.
Dressmaking establishments, employing not more than eight (8) persons.
Employment agencies.
Food, beverage, and drug: grocery stores, supermarkets, meat markets, dairy
stores, liquor stores, pharmacies, drugstores, taverns, restaurants, lunchrooms
and cafeterias, and places for the sale and consumption of soft drinks, juices,
ice cream and beverages of all kinds, including alcoholic beverages, but
excluding drive-ins.
General merchandise stores; department and variety stores.
Hotels.
Laundries or dry cleaning plants employing not more than eight (8) persons.
Locksmith shops.
Lodge and meeting halls.
Messenger and communication services.
Millinery and hat shops.
Painting and decorating shops.
Photography studios.
Plumbing, electrical, and heating and air conditioning shops.
Printing shops.
Public services: government offices and buildings; post office; and libraries.
Repair shops and services for home appliances, employing not more than eight
(8) persons.
Sharpening or grinding shops.
Shoe repair shops.
Specialty shops: apparel and accessory stores, shoe stores, jewelers, retail
florists, gift shops, book and stationery stores, camera and photography shops,
sporting good stores, tobacco shops, art supply stores, galleries, furniture
and carpet stores, music stores, telecommunications, paint and wallpaper
stores, hardware stores, appliance dealers, antiques stores, and toy stores.
Studios.
Tailor shops employing not more than five (5) persons.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.
Upholstery shops. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-7-3: PERMITTED SPECIAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted by special use permit only upon the
review of an application at a public hearing and the subsequent approval of the
detailed site plans by the Zoning Board and the Village Board as set forth in
chapter 12 of this title:
Public parking garages; auto repair, auto body, or auto detailing shops; and
auto parts and accessories retail. No banners, flags, pennants, whirligigs or
other advertising devices shall be permitted. All products or parts for sale
shall be stored and displayed only within the building or in permanent storage
cabinets, the location of which shall be shown on the site plan. No such use
shall be approved within three hundred feet (300') of any church or public
park. The Zoning Board shall find that the entrances and exits thereto will not
create any undue hazard to vehicles or pedestrians; that such establishments
have adequate off-street car waiting space for the type of establishment
involved; and that there will be adequate supervisory personnel on the premises
at all times that the establishment is open to the public.
Self-service laundromats (a self-service laundry with user- paid or coin-
operated washers and driers).
An application for a "permitted special use" set forth above in this section
shall require the submission of the applicable initial special use permit fee
as provided in section
10-13-5 of this title. However, the permit for a "permitted special use" shall
be valid for the duration of the applicant's control of the premises as long as
the permitted use continues, without the need to annually renew the special use
permit or to annually pay the special use renewal fee. Any successor in
interest in the use of the property will be required to submit a new
application for the "permitted special use" with the applicable initial special
use permit fee. However, in all other aspects, chapter 12 of this title will
govern the review and issuance of a special use permit for a "permitted special
use". (Ord. 2017-11, 11-6-2017)
10-7-4: HEIGHT:
No building, whether a one-family or multi-family residence, sheltered care
home or nursing home or business building, shall hereafter be erected or
altered to exceed fifty four feet (54') in height. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-7-5: YARDS, COURTS, COVERAGE:
   (A)   There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten percent (10%) of the
depth of the lot; provided, however, it need not exceed ten feet (10') in
depth.
   (B)   No side yards are required, but if provided, a side yard shall be not
less than eight feet (8') in width.
   (C)   No front yard is required.
   (D)   If an outer court is provided, it shall be not less than five feet
(5') wide, nor shall its area be less than one-sixth (1/6) the length of such
court from the closed end.
   (E)   If an inner court is provided, it shall be not less than six feet (6')
wide, nor shall its area be less than twice the square of its least required
dimension.
   (F)   No building with its accessory buildings, to be used for commercial
purposes, shall occupy in excess of ninety percent (90%) of the lot area, and
accessory structures shall not be located closer than five feet (5') to any
boundary lot line.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any of the requirements in this section, buildings
used in whole or in part for residential purposes shall conform to the yard,
floor area ratio and density restrictions for such buildings in chapter 4 of
this title for one-family dwellings, in chapter 5 of this title for duplexes,
and in chapter 6 of this title for multi-family dwellings, as appropriate.
(Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-7-6: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and loading in the B-1 Central Business District shall be
provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this
title. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
CHAPTER 8
B-2 GENERAL RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8-1: Purpose
10-8-2: Permitted Uses
10-8-3: Permitted Special Uses
10-8-4: Height/Yards
10-8-5: Buffer Strip
10-8-6: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-8-1: PURPOSE:
The B-2 General Retail Business District provides adequate and reasonable
regulations for those business areas in the Village outside the downtown area
where general retail business has been established or where it may be
appropriate to encourage such use as a means to accommodate businesses by
grouping compatible businesses in areas that best serve the needs of the
businesses, the community, and the public by creating convenience for the
public, minimizing traffic congestion, and discouraging unsightly or
inefficient business development while encouraging business prosperity and
shopping convenience in these areas. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-8-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises in the B-2 General Retail Business District shall be
hereafter erected or altered, unless otherwise provided for in this title,
except for the following uses:
Uses permitted in the B-1 Central Business District.
Uses permitted in the R-3 Residential District, subject to the regulations of
that district as set forth in chapter 6 of this title; however, the first floor
of any building having a store front, which shall include any large window or
open viewing area whether such area is clear, translucent, or covered in any
manner, on a roadway or pedestrian walkway shall not be occupied as a
residence.
Auto repair, auto body, or auto detailing shops; retail sale of auto parts and
accessories; service stations.
Bowling alleys, indoor theaters, dance halls, gymnasiums, clubs, commercial
swimming pools, skating rinks, and other public or private recreational or
fraternal establishments, but not including recreational uses conducted
primarily in the open, such as golf driving ranges.
Business, trade, dancing, music or art schools.
Convenience type stores primarily for the retail sale of food, beverages, and
related products, and retail sale of gasoline.
Electric substations, telephone exchanges.
Motels.
Offices.
Personal service shops.
Public parking garages; car washes.
Rental of automobiles, trucks, or trailers.
Sale of new automobiles, trucks, or trailers.
Self-service laundromats (a self-service laundry with user- paid or coin-
operated washers and driers).
Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail business, provided all goods or
products offered for sale are displayed and stored within a building. Eating or
drinking establishments, designed for consumption in cars parked or which may
be parked on the premises, commonly known as "drive-ins" are not to be
construed as permitted hereby, being designated a special use under section
10-8-3 of this chapter.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors. (Ord. 2017-11, 11-6-2017)
10-8-3: PERMITTED SPECIAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted by special use permit only upon review of
an application at a public hearing and the subsequent approval of the detailed
site plans by the Zoning Board and the Village Board as set forth in chapter 12
of this title:
Drive-in restaurants.
Gasoline filling stations.
Miniature golf, golf courses, and driving ranges.
Roadside markets, commercial greenhouses, landscape nursery sales yard, lumber
yard, building material sales yard, or similar use where the products are
primarily displayed outside of a building.
Used car sales lots.
In its deliberation, the Zoning Board shall give due consideration to the
probable effect the proposed special use would have on the surrounding land
uses; the location of access drives into the site with respect to their
creating traffic hazards; the adequacy of on-site parking; lighting of the
premises; adequacy of supervision, and hours of operation.
An application for a "permitted special use" set forth above in this section
shall require the submission of the applicable initial special use permit fee
as provided in section
10-13-5 of this title. However, the permit for a "permitted special use" shall
be valid for the duration of the applicant's control of the premises as long as
the permitted use continues, without the need to annually renew the special use
permit or to annually pay the special use renewal fee. Any successor in
interest in the use of the property will be required to submit a new
application for the "permitted special use" with the applicable initial special
use permit fee. However, in all other aspects, chapter 12 of this title will
govern the review and issuance of a special use permit for a "permitted special
use". (Ord. 2017-11, 11-6-2017)
10-8-4: HEIGHT/YARDS:
Height, yard, court, and coverage requirements of sections
10-7-4 and
10-7-5 of this title shall apply in the B-2 General Retail Business District.
(Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-8-5: BUFFER STRIP:
Where a lot on which is located a business use abuts or adjoins any residential
district, a buffer strip shall be provided, located on the business lot for the
full length of the district boundary lot line. The buffer strip shall be at
least ten feet (10') in width, and shall not be used for parking, loading, or
unloading. Also, no accessory structures, accessory uses, or any other uses
related to the business use of the property or the principal or an accessory
structure on the property shall be located within this ten foot (10') buffer
strip. However, the buffer strip can be used for landscaping, screen planting,
or other similar purposes. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-8-6: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and loading in the B-2 General Retail Business District
shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in chapter 10 of
this title. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
CHAPTER 9
I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purpose
10-9-2: Permitted Uses
10-9-3: Buffer Strip
10-9-4: Required Yards
10-9-5: Height
10-9-6: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
The I-1 industrial district is established to provide an area for
manufacturing, warehousing, and related commercial or industrial operations
while protecting residential and business areas from related industrial
activities that may create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors,
heat, glare, fire hazards, and other annoying, disturbing, or objectionable
adverse effects on nearby properties. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall hereafter be
erected or altered within any industrial district, unless otherwise provided in
this zoning code, except for the following:
(A)   Any use permitted in any other district, except residences.
(B)   Building material storage yards, contractors plants or storage yards,
lumberyards.
(C)   Laboratories.
(D)   Manufacturing, fabricating, assembly and processing of materials,
articles and products, subject to the performance standards of the industrial
district of the Woodford County zoning ordinance, which standards are hereby
adopted by reference.
(E)   Public utility substations, distribution centers, gas regulator stations.
(F)   Wholesale business establishments, warehouses, storage of household
goods.
(G)   Offices, display rooms, as an accessory use to any of the above permitted
uses.
(H)   Dog kennels; the kennel and any part of the kennel structure and attached
appurtenances must be at least three hundred feet (300') from any residential
structure that is located in a residential zoning district. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-
16-2005; amd. Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
10-9-3: BUFFER STRIP:
Where a lot on which is located an industrial use abuts or adjoins any
residential district, a landscaped buffer strip shall be provided, located on
the industrial lot for the full length of the district boundary lot line. The
buffer strip shall be at least fifteen feet (15') in width, devoted to screen
planting and landscaping, and at least six feet (6') in height except where the
buffer strip adjoins the front lot line. The buffer strip shall not be used for
parking, loading, or unloading, and shall not be included in the measurement of
any minimum yard. Also, no accessory structures, accessory uses, or any other
uses related to the industrial use of the property or the principal or an
accessory structure on the property shall be located within this fifteen foot
(15') buffer strip. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-9-4: REQUIRED YARDS:
   (A)   A front yard shall be required at least sixty feet (60') in depth.
   (B)   Two (2) side yards shall be required, each at least thirty feet (30').
   (C)   A rear yard is required, thirty feet (30') in depth or one-third (1/3)
structure height, whichever is greater. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-9-5: HEIGHT:
No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed fifty four feet
(54') in height. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-9-6: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and loading in the I-1 industrial business district shall be
provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this
title. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
CHAPTER 10
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-10-1: Purpose
10-10-2: General Provisions
10-10-3: Schedule Of Requirements
10-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public
streets and to eliminate the on street parking or storage of vehicles, thereby
promoting the public safety and welfare by requiring, in connection with the
development of land, including any new construction, reconstruction, or
remodeling, that off street parking and loading of motor vehicles be provided
in accordance with the use to which the property is put and its location in the
village. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-10-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Procedure: An application for a zoning use permit for a new or
enlarged building, structure or use shall include therewith a plot plan in
duplicate, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading
facilities to be provided in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Extent Of Control: The off street parking and loading requirements
shall apply as follows:
      1.   All buildings and structures erected and land uses initiated after
the effective date of this zoning code shall provide accessory off street
parking or loading facilities as required hereinafter for the use thereof.
      2.   When a building or structure erected prior to or after the effective
date of this zoning code shall undergo any decrease in number of dwelling
units, gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees, or other unit
of measurement specified hereinafter for required parking or loading facilities
and further, when said decrease would result in a requirement for fewer total
parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this
chapter, thereto, parking and loading facilities may be reduced accordingly,
provided that existing parking or loading facilities shall be so decreased only
when the facilities remaining would at least equal or exceed the parking or
loading requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this
chapter to the entire building or structure as modified.
      3.   When a building or structure shall undergo any increase in the
number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other unit of
measurement specified hereinafter for required parking or loading facilities,
and further, when said increase would result in a requirement for additional
total parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this
chapter thereto, parking and loading facilities shall be increased accordingly
so that the total shall at least equal the parking or loading requirements
resulting from application of the provisions of this chapter to the entire
building or structure as modified.
   (C)   Existing Parking And Loading Spaces: Accessory off street parking and
loading spaces in existence on the effective date of this zoning code may not
be reduced in number unless already exceeding the requirements of this chapter
for equivalent new construction; in which event, said spaces shall not be
reduced below the number required herein for such equivalent new construction.
   (D)   Additional Parking And Loading Spaces: Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the establishment of off street automobile parking or loading
facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, subject to full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, except that off street parking
areas accessory to existing multiple-family structures cannot be located off
the premises containing the main use, unless on a lot adjacent thereto, without
authorization by the village board.
   (E)   Damage Or Destruction: Any building, structure or use which is in
existence and is a nonconforming use on the effective date of this zoning code
and which subsequently shall be damaged or partially destroyed by fire,
collapse, explosion, or other cause shall not be reconstructed, reestablished,
or repaired unless off street parking or loading facilities equivalent to any
maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored and
continued in operation. However, it shall not be necessary to restore or
maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this
chapter for equivalent new construction.
   (F)   Open Area: Except when specifically allowed by the provisions of this
zoning code, parking of any vehicle shall not be permitted on any open area of
a parcel or lot, including a street right of way, unless such vehicle is
properly parked on the designated driveway area or other paved parking area
that is in compliance with this chapter or on the paved portion of a street
right of way in any zoning districts except B-2 general retail business
district. However, during the construction, remodel, alteration, or repair of a
structure or use on any parcel or lot, vehicles may be parked on any open area
of such parcel or lot provided the vehicle does not create a hazardous or
unsafe condition. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-10-3: SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Requirements governing the number of off street parking and loading
spaces in relation to the use of property are as set forth in the following
table and are deemed to be minimum requirements. The requirements for any use
not specified therein shall be the same as for a similar specified use, as
determined by the zoning board.
      Minimum Required   Minimum Required
   Use   Parking Spaces   Loading Spaces
Banks, business or   1 per 400 square feet   1 space per 100,000
professional offices   of floor area   square feet of floor
      area or major fraction
      thereof
Bowling alleys   5 per alley   1 space per 100,000
      square feet of floor
      area or major fraction
      thereof
Churches, school   1 space per 5 individual       0
auditoriums, stadiums,   seats
sports arenas, indoor
theaters
Other places of   1 space per 75 square        0
assembly without   feet gross floor area
fixed seating
Dwellings   2 per dwelling unit       0
Hospitals, sanitariums,   1 for each 4 beds, plus   1 space for 40,000
convalescent homes,   1 for each staff and   square feet of floor
nursing homes   visiting doctor, plus 1   area plus 1 space for
   for each 3 other   each additional
   employees   100,000 square feet
      of floor area
Hotels, motels, clubs   1 per 3 guests or        0
   1 per sleeping unit
Lodging houses   1 per 3 guests, plus 1    0
   for manager
Manufacturing and   1 per 2 employees per    1 for first 40,000
industrial uses,   shift based on the    square feet of floor
warehousing,   largest shift   area plus 1 for each
research and      additional 100,000
test labs      square feet
Medical, dental   5 spaces per doctor    0
clinics   engaged at the clinic
Mobile home courts   2 per mobile home lot   0
Mortuaries, funeral   1 space per 50 square    1
parlors   feet of floor space in
   chapels and parlors
Private clubs (without   Parking spaces equal    1
sleeping rooms)   to 25 percent of total
   membership or 1 space
   for every 400 square
   feet of floor area,
   whichever is greater
Retail stores and   1 per 300 square feet    1 space per 100,000
shops   of floor area   square feet of floor
      area or major fraction
      thereof
   (B)   All required off street parking and loading shall be on the same lot
with the establishment or on an immediately adjacent lot, which may include a
lot across a street therefrom provided the street is not a major thoroughfare,
unless otherwise authorized by the village board.
   (C)   Adequate accessways shall be provided for ingress and egress to the
parking area. The term "accessway" as used in this zoning code shall include
driveways and driveway approaches that cross a street right of way.
   (D)   For the purposes of this chapter, a parking space shall be deemed an
area of not less than one hundred seventy (170) square feet, at least eight
feet six inches (8'6") in width and not less than twenty feet (20') in length.
   (E)   All parking areas and accessways to the parking areas in a B-1 central
business district, a B-2 general retail business district, and an I-
1 industrial district shall be paved and maintained with an all weather durable
and dustless bituminous pavement or concrete pavement surface. Such pavement
shall have adequate cross section and rock base to support the vehicles
expected to use the parking area. Such pavement shall be maintained at all
times in good and safe structural condition. Uncovered parking spaces shall not
be closer than three feet (3') to any street right of way. Any lawful parking
areas and accessways existing at the effective date of the adoption of the
amendment to the zoning code that adopted this provision of the zoning code,
which would not be permitted under the terms of this provision of the zoning
code, or subsequent amendment thereto, is declared to be a legal nonconforming
parking area and accessway. Although property owners are encouraged to comply
with the provisions of this section, any such nonconforming parking area and
accessway shall remain a legal nonconforming use subject to the conditions and
provisions set forth in chapter 11 of this title. Furthermore, in addition to
the conditions and provisions set forth in section
10-11-3 of this title, any changes or reconfiguration made to: 1) a legal
nonconforming use under this section, other than routine maintenance and
upkeep, or 2) the exterior footprint of the main structure on the property upon
which the legal nonconforming use exists, shall terminate the legal
nonconforming use and the requirements of this section must be met for the
changed or reconfigured portion of the parking area or accessway. Additionally,
if the main structure on the property upon which the legal nonconforming use
under this section exists is substantially destroyed by any means to an extent
of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of
destruction, such legal nonconforming use shall terminate and the requirements
of this section must be met for the parking area or accessway on the affected
property.
   (F)   All accessways for residential districts shall comply with the
provisions of section
8-1-9 of this code. All parking areas and accessways in residential districts
shall be clearly marked or defined for use as a parking area or accessway.
   (G)   The parking area and accessways shall be installed and available for
use prior to the establishment of the use of any parcel or lot. Also, parking
areas and accessways shall be properly maintained at all times in good and safe
structural condition for vehicular and pedestrian traffic and shall not emit
dust in a manner that affects adjacent or neighboring properties.
   (H)   Any lighting for the parking area shall be arranged and maintained so
that the light does not shine directly upon any adjacent property or street and
does not produce excessive glare.
   (I)   An adequate paved accessway for pedestrian traffic from each structure
or use to the parking area, street, or alley shall be provided. (Ord. 2005-09,
12-19-2005)
CHAPTER 11
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
10-11-1: Declaration Of Policy
10-11-2: Discontinuance Of Specified Nonconforming Uses
10-11-3: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
10-11-4: Nonconforming Structures And Signs
10-11-5: Nonconforming Uses Of Structures
10-11-6: Nonconforming Use Changes
10-11-7: Repairs And Maintenance
10-11-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
Any lawful use, structure, or lot existing at the effective date of the
adoption of this zoning code or subsequent amendment thereto, and located in a
zoning district in which the use, structure, or lot would not be permitted
under the terms of this zoning code or subsequent amendment thereto, is
declared to be a legal nonconforming use. Except as specifically noted in this
chapter, it is hereby declared to be the intent of this zoning code to permit
these legal nonconforming uses to continue until terminated by voluntary act or
by catastrophic event, and to encourage the conversion of these legal
nonconforming uses to conforming uses wherever and whenever possible. (Ord.
2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-11-2: DISCONTINUANCE OF SPECIFIED NONCONFORMING USES:
The following nonconforming uses of buildings, structures, and land shall be
discontinued and completely removed from the premises, not to be resumed or
otherwise maintained, within two (2) years from the date of the approval of
this title or from the effective date of any subsequent change in this title
that causes the use to thereafter become nonconforming:
   (A)   Any nonconforming use which is conducted primarily on open land and
does not utilize any permanent enclosed building or structure, or where the
only buildings or structures employed are accessory or incidental to such use.
   (B)   Any nonconforming building or structure having an assessed valuation
not in excess of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) on the effective
date of this zoning code.
   (C)   Any nonconforming junkyard or automobile wrecking yard. (Ord. 2005-04,
5-16-2005)
10-11-3: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
Except as set forth in section
10-11-2 of this chapter, where, at the effective date of this zoning code or
any subsequent amendments thereto, a lawful use of land exists that is made no
longer permissible under the terms of this zoning code, such use may be
continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
   (A)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied by such use at the effective
date of adoption of this zoning code;
   (B)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption of this zoning code;
   (C)   If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period
of one year or more, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this zoning code for the district in which such land
is located. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-11-4: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND SIGNS:
Where a lawful structure or sign, other than as set forth in section
10-11-2 of this chapter, exists at the effective date of adoption of this
zoning code or any subsequent amendment thereto that could not be built under
terms of this zoning code by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage,
height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or sign, or its
location on the lot, such structure or sign may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No such structure or sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity.
   (B)   Should such structure or sign be destroyed by any means to an extent
of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at time of destruction
then it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of
this zoning code. A building designed for a nonconforming use, however, may be
constructed or altered beyond the limitations herein provided by action of the
zoning board after public hearing, as required by law in case of variances.
(Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-11-5: NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES:
Except as set forth in section
10-11-2 of this chapter, if a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and
premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption of this
zoning code, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this
zoning code, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this zoning
code in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
   (B)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this zoning code, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building.
   (C)   If a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one year
or more, it shall not be reestablished, unless the nonconforming use was in a
building designed, arranged and intended for such use.
   (D)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, on which or in
which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located
and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   (E)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for twelve (12) consecutive months,
the structure, or structures and premises in combination shall not thereafter
be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it
is located.
   (F)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-11-6: NONCONFORMING USE CHANGES:
Once changed to a conforming use, no building, structure, land, or sign,
billboard or advertising structure shall be permitted to revert to a
nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be substituted or added to
another nonconforming use.
The foregoing provisions of this chapter shall also apply to buildings,
structures, land, uses, or signs, billboards or advertising structures which
hereafter become nonconforming due to any reclassification of districts under
this zoning code or any subsequent changes in the regulations of this zoning
code. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
10-11-7: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may
be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months, on ordinary repairs,
or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing,
to an extent not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the current replacement value
of the building, provided that the cubical content of the building as it
existed at the time of passage or amendment of this zoning code shall not be
increased.
Nothing in this zoning code shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any village official charged with protecting the public safety, upon
order of such official. (Ord. 2005-04, 5-16-2005)
CHAPTER 12
SPECIAL USES
SECTION:
10-12-1: Declaration Of Policy
10-12-2: Definition
10-12-3: Application/Notice Of Hearing
10-12-4: Permitted Uses Of Adjacent Property
10-12-5: Standards For Special Use Permits
10-12-6: Hearing Procedures
10-12-7: Zoning Board Action
10-12-8: Village Board Action
10-12-9: Renewal
10-12-10: Termination Of Special Use
10-12-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
In general, use of land and buildings in the village is substantially uniform
in relation to the adjacent use of land and buildings within the different
zoned areas of the village. It is hereby recognized that special uses may
exist, which by their unique characteristics, cannot be classified in a
particularly zoned area. Thus, the policy and purpose of this chapter is to
provide a flexible means of permitting certain exceptions to the zoning
districts established under this title when certain conditions exist to warrant
such special use. In the case of a permissible special use that would otherwise
be an exception to the zoning rules and regulations adopted herein, the public
benefit of such special use outweighs the potential harm to the public welfare
and to the adjacent property owners under such conditions imposed as are
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and individual
property rights of adjacent property owners. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-12-2: DEFINITION:
A "special use" is a use, which by its unique characteristics and nature, is
necessary or desirable for the public welfare, but which is potentially
incompatible with the uses normally permitted in the zoning districts
established under this title. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-12-3: APPLICATION/NOTICE OF HEARING:
An application for a special use permit may be filed by any person having a
freehold interest in a parcel of property, or a possessory interest entitled to
exclusive possession (with the concurrence of the person holding the freehold
interest), or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, or
an exclusive possessory interest which is otherwise specifically enforceable.
An applicant must submit a special use permit application or petition with all
necessary supporting documentation, including a map or diagram with
measurements and specifications, to the zoning officer at least twenty one (21)
days prior to the zoning board meeting at which the application will be
considered by the zoning board. The applicant must also submit payment of any
required fees or costs with the application.
The special use permit application form shall be available at the village hall
during regular business hours or from the zoning officer. The special use
permit application shall be in a form as established by the zoning board, which
shall include: a) the name and address of applicant and owner, b) the location
of property for which the special use is being sought, c) a description of the
specific special use being sought, d) facts sufficient to demonstrate that the
conditions and standards set forth in this chapter have been met, and e) plans,
data, maps, and documents necessary for the proper understanding of the
application. The zoning officer shall provide a copy of the application and
supporting materials to each zoning board member at least seven (7) days prior
to the zoning board meeting when the application will be considered.
Upon receipt of a special use permit application, the zoning officer shall set
the public hearing on the application on the agenda for the next appropriate
zoning board meeting. The zoning officer shall assist the applicant in causing
notice of the hearing to be published at least once, not more than thirty (30)
days and not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in the "Woodford
County Journal", Roanoke-Benson edition, which is circulated in the village of
Roanoke. The notice shall set forth the date, time, and place of this hearing,
and shall include a description of the particular location for requested
special use and a brief statement describing the requested special use. The
applicant shall pay the publication cost for this notice in addition to the
special use permit application fee.
The applicant shall additionally provide notice of the public hearing to all
property owners located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the subject
property for which the special use is being requested. This notice shall be
personally served on said property owner. If personal service cannot be made on
a particular property owner, this notice may be mailed to the property owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
If an applicant or other interested party requests a special meeting of the
zoning board to review a special use permit application or to hold a public
hearing thereon, then the cost of said special meeting shall be paid by such
requesting person. This cost shall include the salary of each zoning board
member and the zoning officer for attending the special meeting. (Ord. 2004-16,
9-7-2004)
10-12-4: PERMITTED USES OF ADJACENT PROPERTY:
Neither the nonconforming or special use of, or a variance granted for,
neighboring lands or structures in the same district or the permitted use of
lands or structures in other districts shall be considered as justification or
grounds by the village board for the issuance of a special use permit. As such,
these other nonconforming or special uses, variances, or permitted uses shall
not establish a precedent for granting a future or similar special use. (Ord.
2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-12-5: STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
No special use may be authorized by the zoning board unless, in accordance with
the procedures and requirement set forth in this chapter, the zoning board
makes the following findings:
   (A)   That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort or general welfare;
   (B)   That the special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood;
   (C)   That the special use conforms to the applicable regulations and
standards of, and preserves the essential character of, the district in which
it may be located;
   (D)   That the establishment of the special use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district and will not be in conflict with the village's
comprehensive plans for development;
   (E)   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
   (F)   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
and
   (G)   That the special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the village board pursuant to
the recommendations of the zoning board. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-12-6: HEARING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   The chairman (or acting chairman) of the zoning board shall announce
the public hearing on the special use.
   (B)   A summary of the special use shall be provided to the zoning board and
the public by the chairman of the zoning board or his designee, which shall
include whether proof of publication of the notice for the hearing has been
provided and a brief description of both the property and the requested special
use.
   (C)   The applicant for the special use shall then be permitted to describe
the requested special use and provide any evidence, including testimony of
witnesses, to support the special use permit request.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the presentation of the special use request by
the applicant, the chairman shall allow public comment, including evidence and
testimony from any opposition to the special use request. Furthermore, any
parties opposing the special use request shall be allowed to cross examine any
testimony provided by the applicant, and the applicant may likewise cross
examine any testimony provided by the opposing party. The chairman may limit
opposing parties to one or more representatives during the hearing when
appropriate for the proper and efficient conduct of the meeting.
   (E)   During the presentation of evidence and comment in support of or
against the special use request, the chairman may allow zoning board members to
also ask questions or make comment as the chairman determines to be
appropriate.
   (F)   At the conclusion of the presentation of evidence and comment in
support of or against the special use request, the chairman shall allow the
zoning board to further discuss and deliberate on the decision to recommend
approval or disapproval of the special use request.
   (G)   The chairman, or the acting chairman, of the zoning board shall
administer oaths to all witnesses testifying at the hearing and may compel
attendance of witnesses at the hearing.
   (H)   The zoning board may, by majority vote, postpone or adjourn from time
to time any public hearing on the special use application. In the event of such
postponement or adjournment, further publication of such action need not be
made. Furthermore, if the zoning board does postpone or adjourn the public
hearing, no additional costs shall be assessed against the applicant or other
interested party for any subsequent meetings. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-12-7: ZONING BOARD ACTION:
The zoning board shall make a report to the village board on the special use
application and the public hearing held to review the special use application.
The zoning board shall make a recommendation to the village board on the
special use request upon the concurring vote of a majority of the zoning board
members present provided a quorum exists to conduct the hearing. Within thirty
(30) days after the close of the public hearing on a special use application,
the zoning board shall make their report and recommendation to the village
board.
The zoning board may also recommend that reasonable conditions, safeguards, and
restrictions be imposed by the village board if it grants the application for
special use permit in order to protect the neighboring properties or the public
health, safety, and welfare, or to otherwise carry out the general purposes and
intent of this title. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-12-8: VILLAGE BOARD ACTION:
   (A)   Zoning Board Report: The village board shall not act upon a special
use permit application until the village board has received the written report
and recommendation from the zoning board.
   (B)   Evaluation Of Special Use Application: As provided herein, the village
board shall not be bound by the findings or recommendations of the zoning
board. Accordingly, the village board may make findings of fact different from
the zoning board's findings based upon the evidence received at the public
hearing in front of the zoning board. Also, the village board may further
discuss the positions of the applicant and any opposing parties with these
parties during their evaluation of the special use application.
   (C)   Adoption Of Recommendation: The village board may adopt the
recommendation of the zoning board on a special use request upon the concurring
vote of a majority of all village board members. However, the village board can
only take action that is adverse to the zoning board's recommendation on a
special use request by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all village
board members.
   (D)   Use Contingent On Conditions Or Restrictions: The village board may
grant a special use contingent upon the acceptance of certain conditions,
safeguards, or restrictions as imposed by the zoning board, which may be
modified or added by the village board, to protect public welfare or the
neighboring property or carry out the general purposes and intent of this
title. These conditions or restrictions shall be set forth in writing. Such
conditions or restrictions may include or address, without limitation,
landscape screening, fencing, hours of operation, lighting, noise levels,
parking facilities, accessibility, signage, outdoor storage, expansion, and
other such conditions or restrictions deemed necessary to render the use
compatible with the surrounding properties.
   (E)   Written Protest Or Opposition To Special Use Request: If a written
protest or petition against any special use request is:
      1.   Signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
frontage to the subject parcel; or
      2.   Signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
frontage to the subject parcel immediately adjoining or across an alley from
the frontage; or
      3.   Signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
frontage to the subject parcel directly opposite from the frontage;
and properly filed with the village clerk pursuant to this section, the special
use request shall not be approved except by the favorable vote of two-thirds
(2/3) of all village board members. In order to properly file a written protest
or opposing petition, a person must submit the written protest or opposing
petition to the zoning officer prior to the public hearing being held by the
zoning board to review of the special use application, with a copy also being
provided to the village clerk at that time. This provision shall supersede any
other voting requirements established by this chapter.
   (F)   Permit Term: A special use permit granted by the village board shall
remain valid until the beginning of the next fiscal year for the village (the
subsequent May 1) up to one calendar year from the date when the special use
permit was granted by the village board, unless the special use is otherwise
terminated under the provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   Requirements To Begin Use Of Property: If a special use request has
been approved by the village board pursuant to this chapter, the person who
made the special use request must begin use of the property as allowed by the
special use permit or begin construction consistent with the allowed special
use within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date when special use permit
was granted by the village board. Failure to comply with this one hundred
twenty (120) day requirement for any reason shall result in automatic
revocation of the special use permit. If a special use permit is revoked, the
person making the special use request must submit a new application and pay all
related fees in order to gain further approval of the special use. The approval
of the initial special use request shall have no effect and shall be no
guarantee of approval of a subsequent similar special use request. (Ord. 2004-
16, 9-7-2004)
10-12-9: RENEWAL:
Each special use permit granted hereunder shall be valid until the beginning of
the next fiscal year (the subsequent May 1). Thereafter, the special use permit
may be renewed for a one year period, said year to coincide with the fiscal
year of the village. Thus, after the initial approval of a special use permit
by the village board, every special use permit must be renewed annually by the
zoning board, with such decision being made in the discretion of the zoning
board. The person granted the special use permit, or such successor in interest
to the subject parcel of property for which the special use is granted, shall
make the application for renewal of the special use permit and shall pay the
annual renewal fee. The zoning officer shall provide renewal notices to all
special use permit holders prior to each new fiscal year, and the zoning
officer shall present each special use renewal application to the zoning board
for review at the first zoning board meeting after the beginning of a new
fiscal year. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-12-10: TERMINATION OF SPECIAL USE:
Any special use authorized by the village board shall be deemed to have
automatically terminated upon the occurrence of any of the following:
   (A)   Failure to establish the special use within the required time period
set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Nonrenewal of the special use permit by the zoning board during the
annual renewal process.
   (C)   After establishment of a special use, the discontinuation of that use
for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
   (D)   The violation of any condition, stipulation or agreement placed upon
the special use by the village board.
   (E)   Failure to pay the annual renewal permit fee within thirty (30) days
after the beginning of a new renewal period.
In the event that a special use authorized with respect to any parcel of
property within the village is discontinued, abandoned, or terminated as
provided in this section, the only uses which may be established on that parcel
are the permitted uses authorized under the zoning regulations applicable to
that parcel or any special use authorized by the village board which has not
been terminated, discontinued, or abandoned in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
CHAPTER 13
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-13-1: Responsibility For Zoning Administration
10-13-2: Zoning Officer
10-13-3: Zoning Use Permit
10-13-4: Zoning Compliance Certificate
10-13-5: Fees
10-13-6: Variances
10-13-7: Amendments
10-13-8: Validity Of Title/Severability
10-13-9: Violations
10-13-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ZONING ADMINISTRATION:
The authority for administration of this title is hereby vested in the: a) the
zoning officer and b) the joint zoning and planning board. The joint zoning and
planning board may also be designated as the "zoning board" in this title. The
zoning officer shall have the authority and responsibility as set forth in this
title, subject to the authority of the zoning board and the limitations set
forth in this title. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-13-2: ZONING OFFICER:
   (A)   The zoning officer shall be appointed by the village president with
the concurrence of the village board. The zoning officer may be provided with
assistance by other persons as the village board may direct.
   (B)   The zoning officer shall administer and enforce this title and shall
carry out and perform duties as follows:
      1.   Issue zoning use permits and zoning compliance certificates, which
shall not be issued except where the provisions of this title have been
complied with, and shall maintain records of permits and certificates so
issued;
      2.   Conduct inspections to determine if buildings, structures, and use
of land are in compliance with this title;
      3.   Investigate alleged violations of this title;
      4.   Inform persons or entities in violation of this title of the
provisions and requirements of this title with which they are in noncompliance
and the available remedies;
      5.   Notify the chairperson of the village's ordinance committee
regarding persons or entities in violation of this title regarding the
initiation of proceedings against such persons or entities as permitted under
this title and the Illinois municipal code;
      6.   Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including (but
not limited to) all maps, amendments, special uses, variations, appeals, zoning
use permits, zoning compliance certificates, and applications and supporting
documents therefor, maintaining all such records as public records in
cooperation with the village clerk;
      7.   Maintain the necessary forms and application packets for permits,
amendments, special uses, variations, appeals, and other matters required to be
acted upon by the zoning officer, zoning board, or village board;
      8.   Receive, file, and forward to the zoning board all applications for
amendments, special uses, variations, and appeals, such applications and
supporting materials to be provided to each zoning board member at least seven
(7) days prior to the zoning board meeting when the application will be
considered;
      9.   Schedule any public hearings on applications for amendments, special
uses, variations, and appeals requiring review by the zoning board, including
providing assistance to a petitioner with arranging for proper public notice of
a public hearing by publication and to all property owners located within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the subject property when required under this
title;
      10.   Collect fees for zoning use permits and for amendments, special
uses, variations, and appeals, and any other fees authorized by this title,
promptly providing such fees to the village collector for proper deposit in a
village account;
      11.   Annually review, on or about the conclusion of each fiscal year for
the village, all special use permits to determine any noncompliance with the
conditions under which the special use was issued; notify such property owners
of need to renew their special use permit and to pay the permit renewal fee;
and present all renewal applications, with a recommendation to approve or
disapprove, to the zoning board for review and action at the zoning board's
first meeting every May;
      12.   Provide monthly reports to the zoning board indicating all
activities occurring during the previous month, including the number of zoning
use permits issued, the number of zoning compliance certificates issued, a list
and the number of persons applying for a variance, special use, or zoning
change, the amount of fees collected, and any other matters handled by the
zoning officer during the previous month; and
      13.   Initiate, direct, and review from time to time a study of the
provisions of this title and make recommendations to the zoning board and the
village board as such study requires.
   (C)   The zoning officer, at the direction of the zoning board and the
village engineer shall condemn and order closed any building or structure that,
in the opinion of the village engineer, is no longer safe for occupancy or use.
(Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-13-3: ZONING USE PERMIT:
   (A)   When Zoning Use Permit Required: A zoning use permit shall be obtained
from the zoning officer, by the owner, lessee, or other person having the
contractual right to become the owner or lessee or who otherwise has an
exclusive right to possession, or the authorized agent of such person, of any
property or structure before commencing:
      1.   To establish, occupy, or change the use of a structure or land
either by itself or in addition to other uses;
      2.   To construct or erect a new structure or part thereof;
      3.   To extend, or move any structure or part thereof;
      4.   To excavate for the construction, alteration, or extension of any
structure; or
      5.   To change a nonconforming use to a special use; provided, however,
that this chapter shall not apply to those persons, nor property, structures or
uses, exempted from the regulations of this title, except to the extent
specifically provided hereinafter.
   (B)   Application For Zoning Use Permit: Applications for zoning use permits
shall be filed in the office of the zoning officer on forms prescribed by him.
Such applications shall:
      1.   State the location, street number, lot, block and/or tract
comprising the legal description of the property;
      2.   State the name and address of the owner, the applicant, if different
from the owner, and the contractor, if known;
      3.   State the estimated costs;
      4.   Describe the uses to be established or expanded;
      5.   Be accompanied by a plan in duplicate, or duplicate prints thereof,
drawn approximately to scale, showing the:
         (a)   Actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
         (b)   Size, shape and location of the use to be established or the
structure to be constructed;
         (c)   Size, shape and location of all existing structures and uses
located on the lot;
         (d)   Minimum floor elevations and highest known flood level, where
applicable;
         (e)   Ingress and egress;
         (f)   Off street parking spaces and loading berths;
         (g)   Water supply and sewage disposal facilities, including a true
and correct copy of any permit;
         (h)   Other information as may be necessary to provide for the proper
administration and enforcement of this title; and
      6.   Include any accessory structure or use established or constructed at
the same time the main or principal use is established or constructed.
   (C)   Issuance Of Zoning Use Permit:
      1.   If the zoning officer determines that an application for zoning use
permit and the use applied for conform to the applicable regulations and
standards of this title, the zoning officer shall issue a zoning use permit. A
zoning use permit issued in error or lacking conformity to the applicable
regulations and standards of this title shall be null and void from the date of
issuance. An applicant issued a zoning use permit in error or lacking the
required conformity may be required to discontinue the use or may seek a
variance, special use, or zoning amendment under the provisions of this title.
      2.   Each zoning use permit for a main or principal structure, or main or
principal use, shall also cover any accessory structure or accessory use
established or constructed at the same time on the same lot or tract of land.
      3.   The zoning officer shall issue an original and a duplicate copy of
the zoning use permit to the applicant and shall retain another duplicate copy
for his records. The applicant's duplicate copy shall be posted in plain sight
on the premises for which it is issued until the zoning compliance certificate
has been issued.
   (D)   Expiration Of Zoning Use Permit:
      1.   If the work described on any zoning use permit shall not have begun
within one hundred twenty (120) days from the issuance thereof, said permit
shall expire and be canceled by the zoning officer and written notice thereof
shall be given to the applicant.
      2.   If the work described on any zoning use permit shall have begun
within one hundred twenty (120) days but shall not have been substantially
completed within three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days from the
issuance thereof, said permit shall automatically expire. The zoning officer
shall provide written notice to the applicant of the expiration together with
notice that further work as described on the canceled permit shall not proceed
until a new permit shall have been issued; provided, however, that for
commercial and industrial buildings, the permit shall extend for such period as
set forth in the application for the zoning use permit as the time necessary to
complete the building up to a maximum of two (2) years. Any delay in providing
any notice under this provision shall not extend the expiration date of the
zoning use permit.
      3.   If a new zoning use permit is issued granting additional time for
completion of the work, such new permit may require, at the discretion of the
zoning board, a limitation on time allowed for the completion of the work and a
performance bond to insure completion within the time set. Such new permit
shall not, in any case, be valid after three hundred sixty five (365)
consecutive days from the date of issuance thereof.
      4.   A zoning use permit issued for the establishment of the use of land
where no structure is involved, or on which land a structure is accessory to
the main or principal use, such main or principal use not involving any
structure, shall not expire. The land so used shall be inspected by the zoning
officer at one year intervals from the date of issuance of such permit to
ensure compliance with the regulations and standards of this title. (Ord. 2004-
16, 9-7-2004)
10-13-4: ZONING COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE:
   (A)   After the proper and valid issuance of a zoning use permit, no land
shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, altered, or
extended shall be used or changed in use until a zoning compliance certificate
shall have been issued by the zoning officer.
   (B)   All zoning compliance certificates shall be applied for coincident
with the application for a zoning use permit, which may be accomplished by use
of a uniform application form approved by the zoning board, and said
certificate shall be issued within three (3) days after the erection or
alteration shall have been approved by the zoning officer. The applicant shall
notify the zoning officer when the building, structure, or land is ready for
occupation or use as set forth in application form.
   (C)   Zoning compliance certificates for the use of vacant land shall be
applied for, along with the application for a zoning use permit, before any
such land shall be occupied or used, and a zoning compliance certificate shall
be issued within three (3) days after the application has been made, provided
such use is in conformity with the provisions of this title.
   (D)   The zoning officer shall maintain a record of all certificates and
copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having proprietary or
tenancy interest in the building affected.
   (E)   No zoning use permit for excavation for, or the erection of, or
alterations or repairs to any building shall be issued until an application has
been made for a zoning compliance certificate. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-13-5: FEES:
   (A)   The following fees shall be charged for the processing of applications
and the issuance of zoning use permits, which shall be collected by the zoning
officer, and the zoning officer shall be accountable to the village for such
fees and shall promptly provide such collected fees to the village collector
for proper deposit in a village account:
Minimum fee for zoning use permit                       $25.00
 Commercial structure in B-1, B-2, I-1; additional fee $0.06 per square foot
 Residential structure in R-1, R-2, R-3, and accessory $0.05 per square foot
  structure 200 square feet or larger; additional fee
  Other new item (including driveways, accessory
 structures under 200 square feet, permanent pools,    $0.03 per square foot
  aboveground fences, porches, decks, carport);
  additional fee
Underground fences; additional fee                      $0.03 per linear foot
Application or petition for special use:                 
 Initial fee                                           $50.00
 Per annum renewal fee                                 30.00
Applications or petitions for variance or amendments    75.00
Application to establish or change use classification   75.00
Demolition fee; any structure under 200 square feet     No charge
Demolition fee; any structure 200 square feet or larger $25.00
 
   (B)   If construction or such other action covered by this section is
initiated without first obtaining the applicable permit and paying the
applicable fee to the village as provided in this section, the fee shall be
double that set forth in subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   There shall be no refund of any zoning use permit fees paid hereunder
except that on written application the village board may refund, at its
discretion, a portion of the fee which the village board determines exceeds the
cost of zoning administration; provided, that the work authorized by such
zoning use permit is completed within the original time limit.
   (D)   No additional fee shall be charged for a permit renewal unless there
is a change in the plans, in which case the application shall be filed as a new
application with the proper fee. (Ord. 2013-09, 11-18-2013)
10-13-6: VARIANCES:
The zoning board, after public hearing and after following the procedures set
forth in this section, may grant a variance to the regulations and standards of
this title relating to the construction or alteration of structures when in
harmony with the general purposes and intent of this title only in the specific
situations set forth in this section. In doing so, the zoning board shall make
written findings of fact in accordance with the guidelines prescribed in this
section and must find that practical difficulties or particular hardships exist
which prevent compliance with the strict letter of the regulations or standards
of this title.
   (A)   Submission Of Application/Notice Of Hearing: An application for a
variance may be filed by any person having a freehold interest in a parcel of
property, or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession (with the
concurrence of the person holding the freehold interest), or a contractual
interest which may become a freehold interest, or an exclusive possessory
interest which is otherwise specifically enforceable.
An applicant must submit a variance application with all necessary supporting
documentation, including a map or diagram with measurements and specifications,
to the zoning officer at least twenty one (21) days prior to the zoning board
meeting at which the application will be considered by the zoning board. The
applicant must also submit payment of any required fees or costs with the
application.
The variance application form shall be available at the village hall during
regular business hours or from the zoning officer. The variance application
shall be in a form as established by the zoning board. The zoning officer shall
provide a copy of the application and supporting materials to each zoning board
member at least seven (7) days prior to the zoning board meeting when the
application will be considered.
Upon receipt of a variance application, the zoning officer shall set the public
hearing on the application on the agenda for the next appropriate zoning board
meeting. The zoning officer shall assist the applicant in causing notice of the
hearing to be published at least once, not more than thirty (30) days and not
less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in the "Woodford County
Journal", Roanoke-Benson edition, which is circulated in the village of
Roanoke. The notice shall set forth the date, time, and place of this hearing,
and shall include a description of the particular location for requested
variance and a brief statement describing the requested variance. The applicant
shall pay the publication cost for this notice in addition to the variance
application fee.
If the subject property is located in an R-1 or R-2 residential district, the
applicant shall additionally provide notice of the public hearing to all
property owners located adjacent and contiguous to the subject property for
which the variance is being requested, which shall include property sharing a
common corner with the subject property and property only separated from the
subject property by a road, street, or alley that is otherwise adjacent and
contiguous to or shares a common corner with the subject property, and to all
other property owners located within fifty feet (50') of the subject property
for which the variance is being requested. If the subject property is located
in any other zoning district, the applicant shall provide notice of the public
hearing to all property owners located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of
the subject property for which the variance is being requested. This notice
shall be personally served on said property owner. If personal service cannot
be made on a particular property owner, this notice may be mailed to the
property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested.
If an applicant or other interested party requests a special meeting of the
zoning board to review a variance application or to hold a public hearing
thereon, then the cost of said special meeting shall be paid by such requesting
person. This cost shall include the salary of each zoning board member and the
zoning officer for attending the special meeting.
   (B)   Permitted Uses Of Adjacent Property: Neither the nonconforming or
special use of, or a variance granted for, neighboring lands or structures in
the same district or the permitted use of lands or structures in other
districts shall be considered as justification or grounds by the zoning board
for the issuance of a variance. As such, these other nonconforming or special
uses, variances, or permitted uses shall not establish a precedent for granting
a future or similar variance.
   (C)   Standards For Variances: The zoning board shall not grant a variance
pursuant to this section unless, based upon all the records and evidence, all
the following conditions have been met:
      1.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
      2.   The conditions upon which an application for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable,
generally, to other property within the same zoning classification;
      3.   The alleged difficulty or hardship caused by this title has not been
created by any persons presently having an interest in the property;
      4.   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located;
      5.   The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion of the
public street, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood; and
      6.   The granting of the variance is in harmony with the general purposes
and intent of this title, and will not be in conflict with the village's
comprehensive plans for development.
   (D)   Authorized Variances: A variance from the regulations and requirements
of this title shall be granted by the zoning board only in accordance with the
standards established in this section and may be granted only in the following
instances as set forth below:
      1.   To permit any yard, setback, or open space requirement that is less
than the applicable yard, setback, or open space requirement;
      2.   To permit the use of a lot or adjacent lots for a use otherwise
prohibited solely because of the insufficient area or width of the lot or lots,
but in no event shall the respective area and width of the lot or lots be less
than ninety percent (90%) of the required area and width (e.g., the minimum lot
size in an R-1 residential district is 6,000 square feet in order for a
building to be constructed on such lot; thus, under this provision, as long as
the lot size is 5,400 square feet or more (90 percent of 6,000), a variance
would be permissible);
      3.   To reduce the applicable off street parking or loading requirements
for a specific use whenever the character or use of the structure or property
is such that it is unnecessary for the full provision of the parking or loading
facilities;
      4.   To increase by not more than twenty five percent (25%) the maximum
distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use
served;
      5.   To increase the width of driveway or curb cuts in manufacturing
districts with respect to access to parking or loading facilities;
      6.   To permit more than one driveway per residential lot;
      7.   To permit the variance in number, size (excluding height), or
location of an accessory use, accessory area, or an accessory building or
structure; and
      8.   To permit a variance in sign regulations where, due to the unique
conditions or nature of the property on which the sign is to be placed, the
regulations would be inappropriate, except such variance in the sign
regulations shall not be permitted in residential districts.
      9.   To permit a nonconforming building to be structurally altered or
reconstructed within its boundary walls to an extent exceeding, in aggregate
cost, twenty five percent (25%) of its fair market value including land value.
      10.   To permit variance of the regulations pertaining to television
discs or satellite antenna dishes.
   (E)   Hearing Procedures:
      1.   The chairman (or acting chairman) of the zoning board shall announce
the public hearing on the variance.
      2.   A summary of the variance request shall be provided to the zoning
board and the public by the chairman of the zoning board or his designee, which
shall include whether proof of publication of the notice for the hearing has
been provided and a brief description of both the property and the requested
variance.
      3.   The applicant for the variance shall then be permitted to describe
the requested variance and provide any evidence, including testimony of
witnesses, to support the variance request.
      4.   At the conclusion of the presentation of the variance request by the
applicant, the chairman shall allow public comment, including evidence and
testimony from any opposition to the variance request. Furthermore, any parties
opposing the variance request shall be allowed to cross examine any testimony
provided by the applicant, and the applicant may likewise cross examine any
testimony provided by the opposing party. The chairman may limit opposing
parties to one or more representatives during the hearing when appropriate for
the proper and efficient conduct of the meeting.
      5.   During the presentation of evidence and comment in support of or
against the variance request, the chairman may allow zoning board members to
also ask questions or make comment as the chairman determines to be
appropriate.
      6.   At the conclusion of the presentation of evidence and comment in
support of or against the variance request, the chairman shall allow the zoning
board to further discuss and deliberate on the decision to grant or deny the
variance request.
      7.   The chairman, or the acting chairman, of the zoning board shall
administer oaths to all witnesses testifying at the hearing and may compel
attendance of witnesses at the hearing.
      8.   The zoning board may only grant a variance request upon the
concurring vote of a majority of the zoning board members present provided a
quorum exists to conduct the hearing.
   (F)   Variance Request Approval: The zoning board may grant a variance
contingent upon the acceptance of certain conditions or restrictions as imposed
by the zoning board to protect neighboring property or carry out the general
purposes and intent of this title. These conditions or restrictions shall be
set forth in writing along with the zoning board's finding of fact for the
variance application.
If a variance request has been approved by the zoning board pursuant to this
section, the person who made the variance request must begin construction, or
cause construction to begin, on the project within one hundred twenty (120)
days of the date when the variance request was granted by the zoning board.
Failure to comply with this one hundred twenty (120) day requirement for any
reason shall result in automatic revocation of the variance. If a variance is
revoked, the person making the variance request must submit a new application
and pay all related fees in order to gain further approval of the variance
request. The approval of the initial variance request shall have no effect and
shall be no guarantee of approval of a subsequent similar variance request.
(Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-13-7: AMENDMENTS:
The regulations and standards, classifications, restrictions, and district
boundaries set forth in this title may from time to time be amended,
supplemented, changed, or repealed by ordinance as provided by law. No such
action may be taken unless and until:
   (A)   Submission Of Application/Notice Of Hearing: A written application is
submitted to the zoning board. Such application may be initiated by the village
board, zoning board, or any person, firm, organization, partnership, or
corporation having a freehold interest in a parcel of property, or a possessory
interest entitled to exclusive possession (with the concurrence of the person
holding the freehold interest), or a contractual interest which may become a
freehold interest, or an exclusive possessory interest which is otherwise
specifically enforceable. When a land trust is proposing such amendment, the
application must set forth the names of owners of all benefiting interests in
the land trust.
Each application shall be submitted with all necessary supporting
documentation, including a map or diagram with measurements and specifications
when appropriate, to the zoning officer at least twenty one (21) days prior to
the zoning board meeting at which the application will be considered by the
zoning board. Further, such application must be accompanied by the applicable
fees and costs, except when the application is initiated by the village board
or the zoning board.
The zoning amendment application form shall be available at the village hall
during regular business hours or from the zoning officer. The zoning amendment
application shall be in a form as established by the zoning board. The zoning
officer shall provide a copy of the application and supporting materials to
each zoning board member at least seven (7) days prior to the zoning board
meeting when the application will be considered.
Upon receipt of the application, the zoning officer shall set the public
hearing on the application on the agenda for the next appropriate zoning board
meeting. The zoning officer shall assist the applicant in causing notice of the
hearing to be published at least once, not more than thirty (30) days and not
less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in the "Woodford County
Journal", Roanoke-Benson edition, which is circulated in the village of
Roanoke. The notice shall set forth the date, time, and place of this hearing,
and shall include a description of the amendment and the location of the
property when applicable. The applicant shall pay the publication cost for this
notice.
If the applicant seeks a change in the zoning map or the zoning classification
for a specific parcel of property, the applicant shall additionally provide
notice of the public hearing to all property owners located within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the subject property for which the amendment is being
requested. This notice shall be personally served on said property owner. If
personal service cannot be made on a particular property owner, this notice may
be mailed to the property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested.
If an applicant or other interested party requests a special meeting of the
zoning board to review an application for a zoning amendment or to hold a
public hearing thereon, then the cost of said special meeting shall be paid by
such requesting person except when such applicant is the village board or
zoning board. This cost shall include the salary of each zoning board member
and the zoning officer for attending the special meeting.
   (B)   Hearing Procedures:
      1.   The chairman (or acting chairman) of the zoning board shall announce
the public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment.
      2.   A summary of the zoning amendment shall be provided to the zoning
board and the public by the chairman of the zoning board or his designee, which
shall include whether proof of publication of the notice for the hearing has
been provided and a brief description of the proposed zoning amendment and the
property if a change in the zoning map or the zoning classification is being
requested.
      3.   The applicant for the zoning amendment shall then be permitted to
describe the requested zoning amendment and provide any evidence, including
testimony of witnesses, to support the proposed zoning amendment.
      4.   At the conclusion of the presentation of the proposed zoning
amendment by the applicant, the chairman shall allow public comment, including
evidence and testimony from any opposition to the zoning amendment.
Furthermore, any parties opposing the proposed zoning amendment shall be
allowed to cross examine any testimony provided by the applicant, and the
applicant may likewise cross examine any testimony provided by the opposing
party. The chairman may limit opposing parties to one or more representatives
during the hearing when appropriate for the proper and efficient conduct of the
meeting.
      5.   During the presentation of evidence and comment in support of or
against the proposed zoning amendment, the chairman may allow zoning board
members to also ask questions or make comment as the chairman determines to be
appropriate.
      6.   At the conclusion of the presentation of evidence and comment in
support of or against the proposed zoning amendment, the chairman shall allow
the zoning board to further discuss and deliberate on the decision to recommend
approval or disapproval of the zoning amendment.
      7.   The chairman, or the acting chairman, of the zoning board shall
administer oaths to all witnesses testifying at the hearing and may compel
attendance of witnesses at the hearing.
      8.   The zoning board may, by majority vote, postpone or adjourn from
time to time any public hearing on the application for zoning amendment. In the
event of such postponement or adjournment, further publication of such action
need not be made. Furthermore, if the zoning board does postpone or adjourn the
public hearing, no additional costs shall be assessed against the applicant or
other interested party for any subsequent meetings.
   (C)   Zoning Board Action: The zoning board shall make a report to the
village board on the application for zoning amendment and the public hearing
held to review the proposed zoning amendment. The zoning board shall make a
recommendation to the village board on the special use request upon the
concurring vote of a majority of the zoning board members present provided a
quorum exists to conduct the hearing. Within thirty (30) days after the close
of the public hearing on an application for zoning amendment, the zoning board
shall make their report and recommendation to the village board. The zoning
board may make revisions to the zoning amendment in order to protect the
neighboring properties or the public health, safety, and welfare, or to
otherwise carry out the general purposes and intent of this title.
   (D)   Village Board Action:
      1.   Zoning Board Report: The village board shall not act upon an
application for zoning amendment until the village board has received the
written report and recommendation from the zoning board.
      2.   Evaluation Of Zoning Amendment Application: As provided herein, the
village board shall not be bound by the findings or recommendations of the
zoning board. Accordingly, the village board may make findings of fact
different from the zoning board's findings based upon the evidence received at
the public hearing in front of the zoning board. Also, the village board may
further discuss the positions of the applicant and any opposing parties with
these parties during their evaluation of the application for zoning amendment.
      3.   Adoption Of Recommendation: The village board may adopt the
recommendation of the zoning board on a proposed zoning amendment upon the
concurring vote of a majority of all village board members. However, the
village board can only take action that is adverse to the zoning board's
recommendation on a proposed zoning amendment by a favorable vote of two-thirds
(2/3) of all village board members.
      4.   Approval Of Revisions To Zoning Amendment: The village board may
approve revisions to the proposed zoning amendment in order to protect the
neighboring properties or the public health, safety, and welfare, or to
otherwise carry out the general purposes and intent of this title.
      5.   Written Protest Or Opposition To Zoning Amendment: If a written
protest or petition against any proposed change in the zoning map or the zoning
classification for a specific parcel of property zoning amendment is:
         (a)   Signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of
the frontage to the subject parcel; or
         (b)   Signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of
the frontage to the subject parcel immediately adjoining or across an alley
from the frontage; or
         (c)   Signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of
the frontage to the subject parcel directly opposite from the frontage;
and properly filed with the village clerk pursuant to this section, the
proposed zoning amendment shall not be approved except by the favorable vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of all village board members. In order to properly file a
written protest or opposing petition, a person must submit the written protest
or opposing petition to the zoning officer prior to the public hearing being
held by the zoning board to review of the application for zoning amendment,
with a copy also being provided to the village clerk at that time. This
provision shall supersede any other voting requirements established by this
chapter. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-13-8: VALIDITY OF TITLE/SEVERABILITY:
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the
application of any provision of this title to a particular property, structure,
or land, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any
other property, structure, or land not specifically included in said ruling.
   (B)   Should any section, clause, or provision of this title be declared
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect
the validity of this title as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part
so declared to be invalid. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-13-9: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Whenever a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall state
fully the causes and basis thereof and shall be filed with the zoning officer.
The zoning officer shall record properly such complaint, immediately
investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this title. The zoning
officer shall further report any continued violations of this title to the
chairperson of the village's ordinance committee.
   (B)   In case any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted or any structure or land is used in violation of this title the
proper authorities of the village, or any owner or tenant of real property in
the same contiguous district as the structure or land in question, in addition
to other remedies, may institute an appropriate action or proceeding in any
court of competent jurisdiction:
      1.   To prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration,
conversion, maintenance, or use of a structure, land, or premises;
      2.   To prevent the occupancy of the structure, land, or premises;
      3.   To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about
such structure, land, or premises;
      4.   To restrain, correct, or abate the violation.
   (C)   Any person, or any agent, employee, or contractor of such person, who
shall violate, disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply with, or who shall
resist enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall be subject to a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense or to a penalty as provided for by
section
1-4-13 of this code. The chairperson of the village's ordinance committee shall
be permitted to issue administrative citations for violations of this title
under section
1-4-13 of this code. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the village from taking such
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this title.
(Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
CHAPTER 14
JOINT ZONING AND PLANNING BOARD
SECTION:
10-14-1: Organization
10-14-2: Duties
10-14-3: Meetings
10-14-4: Appeals To Zoning Board
10-14-1: ORGANIZATION:
A joint zoning and planning board is hereby established. In addition to other
duties assigned to the joint zoning and planning board under this code, this
board shall act as the board of appeals for the zoning code as set forth in
this title. The joint zoning and planning board shall consist of five (5)
members appointed by the village board. Wherever in this title or this code
reference is made to the "zoning board", the "board of appeals", or the
"planning commission", said reference shall be to the joint zoning and planning
board established hereby.
The members of the joint zoning and planning board shall serve respectively for
the following terms: one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3)
years, one for four (4) years, and one for five (5) years, the successor to
each member so appointed to serve for a term of five (5) years. The village
board shall designate one of the appointed members as chairman of said board,
at the time of his appointment, and said appointed chairman shall hold his
office as chairman until his successor is appointed. Each term shall expire on
the date of the May monthly meeting for that respective year.
The village board shall fill any vacancies on the joint zoning and planning
board for the remaining portion of the unexpired term of the member whose place
has become vacant. The village board shall have the power to remove any member
of the joint zoning and planning board for cause after a public hearing. (Ord.
2011-05, 8-1-2011)
10-14-2: DUTIES:
The joint zoning and planning board shall have the following powers:
   (A)   Hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the zoning officer, and the joint zoning and planning
board may affirm, in whole or in part, reverse, or modify or amend any such
order, requirement, decision, or determination.
   (B)   Review all applications for a variance, determining whether such
variance should be granted or denied (see section
10-13-6 of this title).
   (C)   Hear all applications for special uses and zoning amendments and to
make and submit to the village board such findings and recommendations with
respect thereto (see section
10-13-7 or chapter 12 of this title).
   (D)   Interpret the provisions of this title where the street layout
actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the village
official zoning map fixing the several districts.
   (E)   Interpret this title when an ambiguity exists in its provisions.
   (F)   Hear all other matters referred to the joint zoning and planning board
under this title, making such recommendations or decision as provided.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the joint
zoning and planning board the power or authority to alter or change the zoning
title or the village official zoning map; such power and authority being
reserved to the village board. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-14-3: MEETINGS:
The joint zoning and planning board shall hold meetings at least once every
month. Special meetings may be held at the call of the chairman or as otherwise
requested by the two (2) members of the joint zoning and planning board. All
meetings shall be open to the public. A meeting shall not be held when a quorum
(a majority) of the joint zoning and planning board is not present.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the joint zoning and planning board
is necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of
the zoning officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon
which the joint zoning and planning board is required to pass under this title,
or to effect any variation in this title, or to recommend a special use or a
modification or amendment to this title to the village board.
If the chairman is absent from a meeting, before conducting business, the
remaining members of the joint zoning and planning board who are present shall
nominate and appoint an acting chairman for that meeting only.
The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and
compel attendance of witnesses.
Prior to every meeting, the zoning officer shall post an agenda for the meeting
in compliance with the Illinois open meetings act and shall provide a copy of
the agenda and any minutes from previous meetings that will be reviewed at the
upcoming meeting to all members of the joint zoning and planning board.
The joint zoning and planning board shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member on every question. If any member is absent or
fails to vote, the minutes shall indicate such a fact. The joint zoning and
planning board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with the
statutes or this title. The joint zoning and planning board shall also make
written findings of fact, conclusions, and recommendations when required under
this title.
Every rule, regulation, order, requirement, recommendation, decision, or
determination of the joint zoning and planning board and approved meeting
minutes shall be filed with the office of the village clerk and shall be a
public record. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
10-14-4: APPEALS TO ZONING BOARD:
   (A)   An appeal to the joint zoning and planning board may be taken by any
person aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
the zoning officer or by any office, department, or board of the village. The
appeal shall be taken within forty five (45) days of the action being contested
by filing a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, with the zoning
officer. The zoning officer shall immediately transmit to the joint zoning and
planning board all documents and other materials constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
   (B)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the zoning officer certifies to the joint zoning and planning board
after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril
to life or property. In this event, the proceedings shall not be stayed unless
done so by a restraining order issued by the joint zoning and planning board or
by a court of record after application to the zoning officer and on due cause
shown.
   (C)   The joint zoning and planning board shall select a reasonable time and
place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties.
The joint zoning and planning board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable
time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney. The zoning board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion
ought to be made in the premises and to that end has all the power of the
zoning officer from whom the appeal is taken. (Ord. 2004-16, 9-7-2004)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Title, Purpose, Definitions   1
Procedure   2
Design Standards   3
Required Improvements   4
Plats And Data   5
Official Map   6
Administration; Enforcement   7
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Interpretation Of Terms
11-1-4: Definitions
11-1-5: Incorporation Of Other Titles
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the SUBDIVISION CODE of the
village of Roanoke, Illinois. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
In accordance with division 12 of article 11 of the Illinois municipal code 1
and the Illinois plat act 2 , this title establishes regulations for
subdivision and land development as a means to implement the comprehensive plan
and the official map that have been duly adopted by the village of Roanoke.
Specifically, this title assists in achieving the following objectives and
purposes:
   (A)   Establishing reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for
resubdivision of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to public improvements as herein defined;
   (B)   Establishing reasonable requirements governing the location, width,
course and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage
collection and treatment;
   (C)   Guiding and facilitating the orderly beneficial development of the
village and its environs and to implement the recommendation of this
comprehensive plan; and
   (D)   Establishing procedures for approving maps, plats, subdivisions and
resubdivisions of any block, lot or sublot or any part thereof, thereby
affording the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the
village and the one and one- half (11/2) mile area contiguous thereto and
providing for the harmonious development of the village and its environs. (Ord.
2005-09, 12-19-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4.
2 2. 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION OF TERMS:
In construing the intended meaning of words, terms, and phrases used in this
title, the rules set forth below shall be followed:
Unless expressly stated or the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
following words, terms, and phrases shall, for the purpose of this title, have
the meanings respectively indicated in section
11-1-4 of this chapter. Any pertinent word, term, or phrase not set forth in
section
11-1-4 of this chapter shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to it in
the village's zoning code; and any word, term, or phrase not defined either in
section
11-1-4 of this chapter or in the zoning code shall be construed to have its
usual legal definition or its standard English dictionary meaning as dictated
by the context of the word, term, or phrase.
The present tense includes the future tense and vice versa.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular includes the plural and vice versa.
The word "shall" is always mandatory, the word "may" is always permissive.
The word "person" includes a partnership, association, firm, trust, club,
institution, company or corporation as well as an individual.
The term "plan commission" shall mean the joint zoning and planning board of
the village.
The term "zoning officer" shall include the person designated by the village as
the administrator of this title under the title of "plat officer".
The term "governing body" shall mean the board of trustees of the village.
The word "county" shall mean the county of Woodford, Illinois.
The word "village" shall mean the village of Roanoke, Illinois.
Captions (such as titles of sections, subsections, etc.) are intended merely to
facilitate general reference and in no way limit the substantive application of
the provisions set forth thereunder. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
   ACCESS: The way over which traffic moves to and/or from the property
abutting such street or alley and the way over which traffic moves to and/or
from a major street to a minor street or from a street to an alley.
   ALLEY: A permanent service right of way which affords only a secondary means
of access from such right of way to abutting property and is not intended for
general traffic circulation.
   AREA, LOT: The total area within the lot lines.
   BLOCK: Property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two
(2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or between the nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right of way, waterway,
unsubdivided area or other definite boundary.
   BUILDING: An enclosed structure having a roof supported by columns, walls,
arches or other devices and used for the housing, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or chattels.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The complete plan or any of its parts for the
development of the village and the one and one-half (11/2) mile area contiguous
to the village as prepared by the plan commission and adopted by the village as
the official comprehensive plan for the village.
   CONSTRUCTION: The excavation of earth to provide for a basement or cellar;
and/or the addition to or removal from a lot or tract of land of earth or water
so as to prepare said lot or tract of land for the construction of a structure;
and/or the placing of construction materials in a permanent position and
fastened in a permanent manner; and/or the demolition, elimination or removal
of an existing structure in connection with such construction.
   CUL-DE-SAC: A residential street with only one outlet and entrance with an
appropriate terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   DEDICATE; DEDICATED: To transfer the ownership of a right of way, street,
parcel of land, or improvement to the village or other unit of local government
without compensation.
   DRAINAGEWAY: A watercourse, gully, dry stream, creek bed, or ditch that
carries storm water runoff or which is fed by street or building gutters or by
storm water sewers, or that serves the purpose of draining water from the lands
adjacent to such watercourse, gully, dry stream, creek bed, or ditch.
   DWELLING: A building designed for residential living purposes and containing
one or more dwelling units and/or lodging units.
   DWELLING, DUPLEX: A dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling
units.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling
which are used exclusively as living quarters for one family and not more than
two (2) roomers or boarders, and which contain a stove, sink and other kitchen
facilities.
   EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner of the use of land by the public, a
corporation or persons for specified purposes.
   FAMILY: (A) An individual; or
   (B)   Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption,
including foster children; or
   (C)   Not more than three (3) persons not so related.
   GRADE: The ascending or descending inclination with the horizontal of a site
or street, measured along the centerline of the street or right of way for a
street or right of way, expressed by stating the vertical rise or fall as a
percentage of the horizontal distance.
   LOT: The tract of land within a subdivision marked by the subdivider on the
plat as a numbered, lettered or other identified tract of land to be offered
for sale, dedication or development.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot located:
   (A)   At the junction of and abutting two (2) or more intersecting streets;
or
   (B)   At the junction of and abutting a street and the nearest shoreline or
high water line of a storm or floodwater runoff channel or basin; or
   (C)   At the junction of and abutting two (2) or more storm or floodwater
runoff channels or basins; or
   (D)   At the abutting point of abrupt change of a single street where the
interior angle is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°), and the
radius of the street centerline is less than one hundred feet (100').
   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot.
   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE PLAN: A part of the comprehensive plan which sets forth
the general location, alignment and dimensions and the identification and
classification of existing and proposed streets.
   OWNER, OWNERSHIP: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, company, organization, trust or other legal entity having a
proprietary interest in a use, structure, lot or tract of land.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land which is developed as a unit under a
single ownership or control which includes two (2) or more main or principal
structures.
   PLAT: A map, plan or layout showing the subdivision of land into lots.
   PLAT, FINAL: The final engineering and architectural maps, drawings, and
supporting material indicating a subdivider's plan of a subdivision that, if
approved, may be filed and recorded with the Woodford County recorder's office.
   PLAT OFFICER: The person appointed by the village president with the consent
of the village board as the administrative assistant to the plan commission and
assigned to administering and enforcing the regulations and standards of this
title.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY: The preliminary engineering and architectural maps,
drawings, and supporting material indicating the proposed layout of a
subdivision, but which cannot be recorded.
   PROPERTY: The general term denoting either singularly or in combination, an
area, lot or otherwise designated portion of land.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A constructed system for the acquisition, purification
and transmission of potable water to individual users and which is approved by
the Illinois department of public health.
   RESIDENTIAL COUNTRY ESTATES SUBDIVISION: A subdivision consisting of a
minimum of ten (10) residential lots with no lot being less than one acre in
area and no lot having a frontage less than one hundred feet (100') unless such
lot is on a cul-de-sac, which must have a minimum frontage of fifty feet (50'),
and the streets are constructed as rural profile streets in accordance with
standard road and bridge specifications.
   RESUBDIVISION: Any change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The entire dedicated tract or strip of land that is to be used
by the public for circulation or service.
   ROANOKE SUBDIVISION STANDARDS: The standard detailed drawings of types of
streets, curbs, and sewer appurtenances, etc., which are to be used in
subdivision construction and which are on file in the office of the
superintendent of public works or zoning officer.
   SANITARY SEWER: A constructed conduit for the collection and carrying of
liquid and solid sewage wastes other than stormwaters, to a sewage treatment
plant, and which is approved by the Illinois department of public health.
   SCHOOL: A building or group of buildings and all associated structures,
facilities and grounds in or on which instruction in subjects that are
fundamental and essential in general education, and are under the supervision
of the state of Illinois superintendent of schools.
   SIDEWALK: That paved portion of the right of way designed and intended for
the movement and use of pedestrian traffic.
   SLOPE: See definition of Grade.
   STORM SEWER: A constructed conduit for the collection and carrying of
surface waters to a drainage course.
   STREET: A road or way within a public or private right of way that affords
the principal means of access for vehicular traffic to abutting property.
Streets shall be provided in accordance with the appropriate street sections
contained in the "Roanoke Subdivision Standards". A street may be designated as
an avenue, a boulevard, drive, highway, expressway, lane, parkway, place, road,
thoroughfare or by other appropriate names. Streets are identified according to
type of use as follows:
   (A)   Thoroughfare Or Expressway: A street designed as a partially access
controlled roadway for carrying traffic up to maximum allowable speeds for the
primary purpose of moving high volumes of traffic through the village rather
than within it.
   (B)   Collector: A street generally designed to serve as a secondary traffic
generator for collecting and distributing traffic between thoroughfares or
expressways and minor streets, including principal entrance streets into a
residential development or streets for circulation within a residential
development.
   (C)   Minor: A street primarily designed to provide access to abutting
property; and to gather individual trips for delivery to a collector street.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
surface of the ground or underground, or affixed to something having a fixed
location on the surface of the ground whether temporary, semipermanent, or
permanent. Among other things, structures include buildings, walls, fences,
billboards, and signs.
   SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate,
or other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide
land in a manner that constitutes a "subdivision" as defined in this title.
Includes any agent of the subdivider who acts on behalf of or for the
subdivider in selling, leasing, or developing any interest, lot, parcel, unit,
site, or plat in the subdivision.
   SUBDIVISION; SUBDIVIDE: Any division or development of any part, lot, area
or tract of land by the subdivider into lots two (2) or more in number for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of conveyance, transfer, improvement or
sale, with the appurtenant streets, alleys and easements, dedicated or intended
to be dedicated to public use or for the use of the purchasers or owners within
the part, lot, area or tract divided. The division of land into lots two (2) or
more in number, each lot with area greater than five (5) acres, and not
involving any new street, alley, easement or other means of access, shall not
be deemed a subdivision for the purpose of this title.
   ZONING CODE: The village zoning code as set forth in title 10 of this code.
(Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005; amd. Ord. 2013-01, 1-21-2013)
11-1-5: INCORPORATION OF OTHER TITLES:
In addition to the provisions of this title, every subdivision made pursuant to
this title shall comply with all other provisions of this code, including the
zoning code and title 8 of this code. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
CHAPTER 2
PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-2-1: Preliminary Considerations
11-2-2: Preapplication Procedure
11-2-3: Conditional Approval Of Preliminary Plat
11-2-4: Approval Of Final Plat
11-2-5: Small Subdivisions
11-2-6: Completion Of Public Improvements
11-2-7: Acceptance Of Public Improvements
11-2-8: Resubdivisions
11-2-9: Vacation Of Plats
11-2-1: PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS:
   (A)   Regulatory:
      1.   No land which is located within the village or which is located
entirely or in part within the one and one-half (11/2) miles of the nearest
limits of the village shall, after the effective date of this title, be
subdivided and filed for record, nor any street laid out, nor any improvements
made to the land until the plat or plats of the subdivision shall have been
certified to and approved by action as specified herein.
      2.   The layout of the proposed subdivision shall be in conformity with
the comprehensive plan and the official map.
      3.   No land shall be subdivided for any use unless streets exist or will
be provided by the subdivider to provide access to all the subdivided parcels
of land.
   (B)   Advisory: The owner or subdivider may consult with the plat officer or
the plan commission prior to the preparation of the tentative plan of the
subdivision as set forth in section
11-2-2 of this chapter. Requirements for streets, school and recreational
sites; shopping centers; community facilities; sanitation, water supply and
drainage; and relationship to other developments, existing and proposed, in the
vicinity, will be analyzed in advance of the preparation of the preliminary
plat as part of the preapplication process.
   (C)   Application For Approval: A subdivider desiring approval of a plat of
any land lying within the jurisdiction of this title shall submit a written
application therefor to the plan commission. Such application shall be
submitted in compliance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-
19-2005)
11-2-2: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Previous to the filing of an application for conditional approval of
the preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit to the plat officer
preapplication plans and data as specified in section
11-5-1 of this title. This step is not mandatory and shall not require a formal
application, or any fee or the filing of a plat with the plan commission.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the plans and data as described in subsection (A) of
this section, the plat officer shall review the plans and data and then shall
inform the subdivider whether the plans and data, as submitted or as modified,
meet the requirements of this title. When the plans and data do not meet such
objectives, the plat officer shall state the reasons in writing and deliver a
copy to the subdivider. The plat officer shall provide this response within
fifteen (15) working days after receipt of the preapplication plans and data.
   (C)   Upon the request of the subdivider, the plat officer shall also submit
the plans and data to the plan commission for review at its next regularly
scheduled meeting. The plat officer shall inform the subdivider of the time and
place of this meeting, and the subdivider shall be encouraged to attend that
meeting. Within thirty (30) days after the plan commission's meeting, the plan
commission shall inform the subdivider whether the plans and data, as submitted
or as modified, meet the requirements of this title. When the plan commission
finds that the plans and data do not meet such objectives, the plat officer, on
behalf of the plan commission, shall state the reasons in writing and deliver a
copy to the subdivider. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-2-3: CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   (A)   Preliminary Plat: The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat
together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified
in section
11-5-2 of this title.
   (B)   Application For Submission: The subdivider shall complete a written
subdivision application for submission to the plan commission with the
preliminary plat. The subdivision application form shall be available at the
village hall during regular business hours or from the plat officer. The
subdivision application shall be in a form as established by the plan
commission.
   (C)   Submission Of Application: The subdivider shall submit three (3) full
size copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified herein
and ten (10) reduced sized copies of the main preliminary plat, along with a
written subdivision application, to the plat officer for transmittal to the
plan commission at least ten (10) working days prior to the plan commission
meeting at which the preliminary plat and subdivision application are to be
considered by the plan commission. The subdivider shall also submit payment of
any fees or costs with the preliminary plat and application.
   (D)   Public Hearing: The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on the
preliminary plat and subdivision application.
   (E)   Review Of Preliminary Plat: The plat officer shall inform the
subdivider of the time and place of the hearing when the plan commission shall
review the preliminary plat and subdivision application. If the subdivider or
other interested party requests a special meeting of the plan commission to
review a subdivision application, then the cost of said special meeting shall
be paid by such requesting person. This cost shall include the salary or
stipend of each plan commission member and the plat officer for attending the
special meeting.
   (F)   Plan Commission Meeting; Copies Needed: The plat officer shall provide
a copy of the application and the preliminary plat and supporting materials to
each plan commission member at least seven (7) days prior to the plan
commission meeting when the preliminary plat and subdivision application will
be considered.
   (G)   Hearing Procedures:
      1.   The chairman (or acting chairman) of the plan commission shall
announce the public hearing on the proposed subdivision.
      2.   A summary of the proposed subdivision shall be provided to the plan
commission and the public by the chairman of the plan commission or his
designee, which shall include a brief description of the location of the
property and the proposed subdivision.
      3.   The subdivider shall then be permitted to describe the proposed
subdivision and any supporting information or documents, including the
preliminary plat and subdivision application, and to provide any evidence or
testimony supporting the proposed subdivision request.
      4.   During the subdivider's presentation in support of the proposed
subdivision, the chairman may allow plan commission members to also ask
questions or make comment as the chairman determines to be appropriate.
      5.   At the conclusion of the presentation of the proposed subdivision by
the subdivider, the chairman shall allow public comment, including evidence and
testimony from any opposition to the proposed subdivision. The chairman may
limit opposing parties to one or more representatives during the hearing when
appropriate for the proper and efficient conduct of the meeting.
      6.   At the conclusion of the presentation of evidence and comment in
support of or against the proposed subdivision, the chairman shall allow the
plan commission to further discuss and deliberate on the decision to recommend
approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat and subdivision application.
      7.   The plan commission may only recommend approval or disapproval of
the preliminary plat and subdivision application upon the concurring vote of a
majority of the plan commission members present provided a quorum exists to
conduct the hearing.
   (H)   Recommendation: After the public hearing, the plan commission shall
make a recommendation to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat and
subdivision application, provided that such recommendation shall be made within
ninety (90) days from the date of application or the filing of the last item of
required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time period is
extended by mutual consent. Such recommendation shall be provided to the
village board within seven (7) days in writing, which shall include any
findings or conditions of such recommendation, if any.
   (I)   Disapproval Of Preliminary Plat: If the plan commission recommends
disapproval of the preliminary plat and subdivision application, the plan
commission shall provide the subdivider with a statement in writing setting
forth the reasons for its recommendation, specifying in detail how the proposed
subdivision does not meet the requirements of this title or fails to comply
with the official map. This written statement shall be provided to the
subdivider within the same ninety (90) day period. At the subdivider's request,
the subdivider may revise the preliminary plat and subdivision application and
resubmit these documents to the plan commission for approval without paying an
additional filing fee. Upon the subdivider's request to resubmit the
preliminary plat and subdivision application, this action shall constitute a
mutual agreement to extend the time periods for reviewing the preliminary plat
and subdivision application. The subdivider shall resubmit the revised
preliminary plat and subdivision application, including any necessary
supporting documents, at least seven (7) days prior to the next scheduled plan
commission meeting in order for the plan commission to review the revised
preliminary plat and subdivision application. During the resubmission process,
negotiations between the subdivider and the plan commission or the plat officer
may occur as to the type and extent of revisions to be made by the subdivider.
   (J)   Village Board Action: The village board shall have thirty (30) days
after its next regularly scheduled meeting following the plan commission's
recommendation to review the plan commission's recommendation and decide
whether to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat and subdivision
application. The village board may adopt the recommendation of the plan
commission upon a concurring vote of a majority of all village board members.
The village board can only take action that is adverse to the plan commission
by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all board members. If the preliminary plat and
subdivision application are approved by the village board, the subdivider may
proceed with preparing the final plat. If the preliminary plat and subdivision
application are disapproved, the subdivider may make revisions in the
preliminary plat or subdivision application and resubmit the revised
preliminary plat and subdivision application for approval. The revised
preliminary plat and subdivision application must first be resubmitted for
review by the plan commission in accordance with the procedures set forth
herein for the plan commission's recommendation before further review by the
village board. However, the plan commission shall have the discretion to
determine whether a new public hearing is necessary on the revised preliminary
plat and subdivision application prior to the plan commission's review of the
revised preliminary plat and subdivision application depending on the scope and
scale of revisions being made.
   (K)   Approval; Copies Needed: Upon the village board's approval of the
preliminary plat, two (2) copies of the original preliminary plat shall be
endorsed by the village president, with one copy being provided to the
subdivider and one copy being provided to the village clerk. The village
board's conditional approval of the preliminary plat does not qualify it for
recording, but shall be construed as an expression of approval of the general
layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the final plat and an
assurance to the subdivider that the final plat will be approved if it conforms
to the terms of the conditionally approved preliminary plat.
   (L)   Fee: The subdivision application shall be accompanied by cash, a
check, or money order, in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). Such payment
shall be made payable to the village and provided to the plat officer, who
shall promptly provide the payment to village collector for deposit into the
general corporate fund of the village. A revised preliminary plat and
subdivision application shall not require the payment of an additional fee.
(Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-2-4: APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
   (A)   Within one year after conditional approval of the preliminary plat,
the subdivider shall submit the final plat and other supplementary material in
compliance with section
11-5-3 of this title, along with the appropriate fee, to the plat officer. If
the application for approval of the final plat is not submitted within this one
year period, it shall become null and void unless an extension of time is
applied for by the subdivider and granted by the village board.
   (B)   The subdivider shall complete a written application for approval of
the final plat for submission to the plan commission with the final plat. The
application form shall be available at the village hall during regular business
hours or from the plat officer. The application shall be in a form as
established by the plan commission.
   (C)   The subdivider shall submit four (4) full size copies of the final
plat and supplementary material specified herein and ten (10) reduced sized
copies of the main final plat, along with a written application, to the plat
officer for transmittal to the plan commission at least ten (10) working days
prior to the plan commission meeting at which the final plat and application
are to be considered by the plan commission. The final plat shall conform to
the preliminary plat as approved and it may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop
at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements
of this title. The subdivider may delay applying for approval of other parts of
the proposed subdivision beyond the initial one year period with approval from
the village board. If only a partial application is submitted, only the
portions receiving final approval shall be recorded.
   (D)   The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on the final plat and
application. The plat officer shall inform the subdivider of the time and place
of the hearing when the plan commission shall review the final plat. If the
subdivider or other interested party requests a special meeting of the plan
commission to review the final plat and application, then the cost of said
special meeting shall be paid by such requesting person. This cost shall
include the salary or stipend of each plan commission member and the plat
officer for attending the special meeting.
   (E)   The plat officer shall provide a copy of the application and the
preliminary plat and supporting materials to each plan commission member at
least seven (7) days prior to the plan commission meeting when the preliminary
plat and subdivision application will be considered.
   (F)   The public hearing procedures shall follow an abbreviated process
similar to the procedures set forth above for the preliminary plat and
subdivision application with same voting requirements. After the public
hearing, the plan commission shall make a recommendation to approve or
disapprove the final plat and application. The plan commission's review shall
focus on whether the final plat conforms with the preliminary plat and
subdivision application, with the technical requirements in chapters 4 and 5 of
this title, including the seal of a registered Illinois land surveyor or
engineer, and with the comprehensive plan and the official map in existence at
the time when the preliminary plat was approved. Such recommendation from the
plan commission shall be provided to the village board within seven (7) days in
writing, which shall include any findings or conditions of such recommendation,
if any.
   (G)   The village board shall review the plan commission's recommendation at
its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the plan commission's
recommendation and shall decide whether to approve or disapprove the final plat
and application. The village board's review shall be confined to the same
considerations reviewed by the plan commission in accordance with the
provisions set forth in subsection (F) of this section. The review process of
the final plat and application shall not exceed sixty (60) days after
submission of the completed final plat and application unless a longer period
is mutually agreed upon by the subdivider and the village board.
   (H)   Upon the village board's approval of the final plat, four (4) copies
of the final plat shall be endorsed by the village president, with two (2)
copies being provided to the subdivider, one copy being provided to the village
clerk, and one copy being provided to the plat officer. Within ninety (90) days
after the approval of the final plat by the village board, the subdivider shall
file one copy of the final plat with the county recorder of Woodford County,
and if not so filed, it shall have no validity and shall not be recorded
without recertification by the village board. Upon demonstration of unique
circumstances or hardship, the village board may extend this ninety (90) day
period.
   (I)   The application for approval of the final plat shall be accompanied by
cash, a check, or money order, in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). Such
payment shall be made payable to the village and provided to the plat officer,
who shall promptly provide the payment to the village collector for deposit
into the general corporate fund of the village. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-2-5: SMALL SUBDIVISIONS:
A subdivider of any proposed subdivision having fewer than five (5) lots
fronting on an existing street that complies with the standards of this title
may, at the discretion of the plat officer, submit a subdivision application
and final plat for approval under the process set forth in section
11-2-4 of this chapter, along with any supplementary material and the
appropriate fee, without going through the steps required for the preliminary
plat set forth in section
11-2-3 of this chapter. However, the review by the plan commission and the
village board may include all aspects of the proposed subdivision (similar to
the review of a preliminary plat) rather than just the technical issues
described in the review process set forth in section
11-2-4 of this chapter. Furthermore, the village board may determine, in its
complete discretion, that the full review process as set forth in sections 11-
2-3 and 11-2-4 of this chapter must be followed. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-2-6: COMPLETION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider shall substantially complete construction of all public
improvements set forth in the final plat no later than two (2) years after the
village board's approval of the final plat. Upon a showing of undue hardship by
the subdivider or circumstances beyond the control of the subdivider, the
subdivider may request that the village board grant an extension of the
completion period for up to an additional one year period. Provided no danger
to the health, safety, or general welfare would be created by this extension,
the extension may be granted at the complete discretion of the village board
and upon any conditions set forth by the village board. If at the expiration of
the two (2) year completion period, or any approved extension thereof, the
public improvements have not been completed or properly installed, the village
may proceed to properly complete the public improvements utilizing the surety
bond or other financial security provided by the subdivider. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-
19-2005)
11-2-7: ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The approval of the final plat by the plan commission or the village board
shall not constitute acceptance by the village of any public improvements set
forth in a final plat, irrespective of any act by any officer, agent,
representative, or employee of the village with regard to the public
improvements. Upon completion of the public improvements, the subdivider shall
submit to the village a signed certification of compliance from a properly
licensed engineer that all public improvements set forth on the final plat have
been properly installed in accordance with the requirements of this title.
Provided the village board concludes that the certification of compliance is
accurate, which shall include review of the public improvements by the village
engineer, the village board shall take formal action to accept the public
improvements. If, upon the completion of the one year guarantee period set
forth in subsection
11-5-3(D) of this title, the public improvements are free of defects, the
village board shall take action to release the bond or other financial security
provided by the subdivider under subsection
11-5-3(D) of this title. The village engineer shall confirm whether the public
improvements are free of defects upon the completion of the one year guarantee
period before the village board takes any action to release the subdivider's
bond or other financial security provided under subsection
11-5-3(D) of this title. If, upon the completion of the one year guarantee
period set forth in subsection
11-5-3(D) of this title, the public improvements are not free of defects as
determined by the village engineer, the village board shall take action to
remedy such defects utilizing the surety bond or other financial security
provided by the subdivider. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-2-8: RESUBDIVISIONS:
If changes are made in any approved or recorded subdivision plat to: a) any
street layout, b) any area reserved therein for public use, or c) any lot line,
or if the changes being made to any approved or recorded subdivision plat
affect another legally recorded plat, then such changes shall be approved by
the plan commission and the village board by the same procedures, rules, and
regulations provided in this title for approval of subdivisions. (Ord. 2005-09,
12-19-2005)
11-2-9: VACATION OF PLATS:
A subdivider of any proposed subdivision may seek to vacate a plat or a portion
of a plat at any time before the sale of any lot therein by a written
instrument declaring the subdivision plat to be vacated, with a copy of the
subdivision plat attached thereto. Such vacation instrument must then be
approved by the plan commission and the village board by the same procedures,
rules, and regulations provided in this title for approval of subdivisions. The
village board may reject any vacation request if approving the vacation would
abridge or destroy any public rights in any public uses, improvements, streets,
or alleys provided in the subdivision plat. If the vacation request is properly
approved by the village board, the vacation instrument shall then be recorded
and shall thereby divest the public of any rights in any public uses,
improvements, streets, or alleys provided in or dedicated by the subdivision
plat. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Streets
11-3-2: Easements
11-3-3: Blocks
11-3-4: Lots
11-3-5: Street Names
11-3-1: STREETS:
The course, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the
comprehensive plan and the official map and shall be considered in their
relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses
of the land to be served by such streets and shall conform to the following
design standards:
   (A)   Where not shown on the comprehensive plan, the arrangement of streets
in a subdivision shall be revised by the plan commission and shall either:
      1.   Provide for the continuation or projection of existing principal
streets in surrounding areas; or
      2.   Conform to the major thoroughfare plan where applicable; or
      3.   Conform to topographic or other conditions where continuance or
projection of existing streets is impractical.
   (B)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
   (C)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
expressway or a railroad right of way or rail crossings, access thereto shall
be limited to a minimum number of intersections and such access intersections
with expressways and/or rail crossings shall be determined with due regard for
sight distance, distance between intersections, approach grades and
requirements for future grade separations. No street grade shall be less than
one- half of one percent (0.5%) or more than ten percent (10%).
   (D)   Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than one hundred
feet (100') shall be prohibited.
   (E)   A tangent at least one hundred feet (100') long shall be introduced
between curves on arterial and collector streets where the curve radius is less
than five hundred feet (500').
   (F)   Where connecting street lines deflect from each other more than ten
degrees (10°), they shall be connected with a curve with a radius adequate to
assure sight distance.
   (G)   Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than seventy
degrees (70°).
   (H)   Alleys shall not be permitted on property intended or zoned for
residential districts. Alleys may be provided on property intended or zoned for
commercial or industrial use subject to the following provisions:
      1.   The alley is set at the rear of the subject lot or tract and shall
be paved.
      2.   The minimum right of way shall be twenty feet (20').
      3.   Where the alley intersects with another street or alley, corners
shall be constructed in a manner to permit safe vehicular movement.
      4.   No construction of any type shall be permitted on the right of way.
      5.   Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable,
shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities as determined by the
village engineer. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
   (I)   The minimum street right of way widths and pavement widths shall be as
follows:
 Right Of Way Width (Feet) Pavement Width (Feet)
                                Right Of Way Width (Feet) Pavement Width (Feet)
Alleys                          20                        16
Minor street                    60                        30
Minor commercial/industrial     60                        30
street
Collector street                60                        30
Commercial/industrial collector 60                        32
street
Thoroughfare                    80                        44
Residential country estates     60                        60
street
 
Any modification to these provisions governing street widths as approved under
chapter 7 of this title shall conform to the standards for urban roads as
specified in the Illinois department of transportation "Manual Of Street And
Highway Improvement Standards". (Ord. 2013-01, 1-21-2013)
   (J)   Dead end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer
than six hundred feet (600') and shall be provided with a turnaround having an
outside surface diameter of at least ninety feet (90') and a right of way line
diameter of at least one hundred feet (100').
   (K)   Private streets and reserve strips shall not be permitted in platting
subdivisions except as set forth in this section. Every subdivision shall be
served from a publicly dedicated street. Reserve strips controlling access to
streets, shall be placed under the control of the village or township and be
under such conditions as approved by the governing body. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-
2005)
11-3-2: EASEMENTS:
Easements across lots, centered on rear or side lot lines, or where necessary
for utilities, watercourse, drainageway channel or stream shall not be less
than ten feet (10') wide, and shall be shown on the plat. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-
2005)
11-3-3: BLOCKS:
   (A)   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites for the special type of use
contemplated.
      2.   Requirements as to lot size and dimensions.
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
      4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   (B)   Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty feet
(1,320') nor be less than five hundred feet (500').
   (C)   In cases where the block length exceeds six hundred feet (600') and
where deemed essential by the plan commission to provide pedestrian circulation
to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community facilities, an
easement dedicated to the village or township for a crosswalk shall be provided
of not less than ten feet (10') wide.
   (D)   Block width shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of a
minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-3-4: LOTS:
   (A)   All provisions of the zoning code concerning lots shall apply
including lot area, width and depth. The standards of the specific zoning
district of the area at the time of submission of the final plat shall be
followed in determining minimum lot requirements.
   (B)   The lot shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of
the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
   (C)   Double frontage, and reverse frontage lots, shall be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from major
streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
   (D)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-3-5: STREET NAMES:
A proposed street which is in alignment with or joins an existing and named
street shall bear the name of the existing street. In no case shall the
proposed name of the street duplicate the name of an existing street within the
village or the area covered by the comprehensive plan and the official map. The
village clerk shall maintain a list of all street names for the village and the
area covered by the comprehensive plan and the official map, which shall be
available for public inspection.
The use of the suffix "street", "avenue", "boulevard", "driveway", "place" or
"court" or similar description shall not be a distinction sufficient to
constitute compliance with this section. House numbers shall be assigned in
accordance with the provisions of the village or Woodford County, depending
upon the location of the subdivision. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
CHAPTER 4
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Monuments
11-4-2: Streets And Utilities
11-4-3: Sanitary Sewers
11-4-4: Water
11-4-5: Storm Drainage
11-4-6: Sump Pump Drainage
11-4-7: Completion Of Required Improvements
11-4-1: MONUMENTS:
Metal markers or monuments shall be placed by an Illinois registered land
surveyor at all lot corners, block corners, angle points, points of tangency or
curves in streets, and at such intermediate points as shall be required by the
plat officer. Metal markers, which may be metal pipes or rods, shall be a
minimum of one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and eighteen inches (18") in
length.
At least two (2) permanent reference monuments shall be placed at locations
within each subdivision. The monuments shall be made of stone or reinforced
concrete, being at a minimum three feet (3') in length and six inches (6")
thick with a suitable centerpoint, except as otherwise may be approved by the
plat officer. Such monuments, as near as possible, shall be placed so as to be
flush with the established finished grade in a manner that they cannot be moved
by frost.
All markers and monuments shall be set in the ground before streets and alleys
are accepted by the village. The placement of all markers and monuments shall
be the responsibility of the subdivider. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-4-2: STREETS AND UTILITIES:
   (A)   Streets (and alleys where provided) shall be completed to grades shown
on plats, profiles and cross sections as needed and approved by the plan
commission.
   (B)   Streets and alleys shall be graded, surfaced, and improved to the
dimensions and standards herein.
   (C)   Prior to placing the street surface, adequate subsurface drainage for
the streets and all utilities under the streets shall be provided or installed
by the subdivider. Upon the completion of the street and alley improvements,
plats and profiles as built shall be filed with the plan commission.
   (D)   Streets shall have such right of way and pavement widths as specified
in chapter 3 of this title. When existing streets are located within the
subdivision or adjacent to the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide for
additional right of way width to equal the minimum required by subsection
11-3-1(I) of this title; provided, however, that when such existing streets
abut the subdivision on one side only, only one-half (1/2) of the difference
between the existing right of way width and the width as specified in chapter 3
of this title shall be provided by the subdivider. The plan commission shall
make such requirements as to type of pavement and as to the type of
construction for curbs, gutters and sidewalks as it deems to be necessary for
such street; provided, such requirements are consistent with this title and the
Illinois department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction".
   (E)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with street signs, the
type, height, and design as approved by the plan commission, at the
intersections of all streets. The plan commission may have the village install
the street signs with the subdivider being required to pay the cost of all
materials.
   (F)   Utility and street improvements shall be provided for each new
subdivision in accordance with standards and requirements described in the
following provisions:
      1.   Unless the subdivision is unable to connect to village water and
sewer systems as determined by village officials, water supply and sanitary
sewer disposal shall be provided as follows:
 
Dwelling Type Sanitary Sewage Disposal Water Supply
All dwellings village sewer system     village water supply
 
      2.   Street cross sections shall comply with the specifications and
standards provided herein and the Illinois department of transportation
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", unless otherwise
determined by the plan commission, the township road commission or the county
superintendent of highways. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
      3.   Grading and improving of streets, except streets in a residential
country estate subdivision and thoroughfares, shall be as per approved plans
and profiles, equal to the minimum widths required by subsection
11-3-1(I) of this title, and constructed in accordance with the "Roanoke
Subdivision Standards". Streets in a residential country estate subdivision and
thoroughfares shall otherwise comply with the specifications and standards
provided herein and the Illinois department of transportation "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". (Ord. 2013-01, 1-21-2013)
      4.   Pavement base, subbase, and surface of streets shall meet the
minimum standards and specifications as set forth in the Illinois department of
transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction",
including any supplements or revisions thereto. Streets constructed outside the
corporate limits of the village but within the jurisdiction of this title shall
also conform to any standards or regulations applicable to the township or
county as applicable.
      5.   Storm sewer system and other drainage improvements shall be provided
as per approved plans and profiles.
      6.   Curbs shall be provided for all streets along the outside pavement
line, except as noted below for an approved residential country estate
subdivision, and shall be constructed as follows: Portland cement concrete curb
integral with gutter. A residential country estate subdivision shall be
required to provide curbs and gutters as set forth under this provision if such
subdivision is created through the extension of an existing street with curbs
and gutters or if, as determined by the plan commission or village board,
drainage or other characteristics of the property create an unreasonably
dangerous impact on persons or vehicles using the streets or on adjoining
properties; otherwise, the residential country estate subdivision will not be
required to provide curbs and gutters provided that ample drainage is provided
along the streets that are constructed in accordance with the standards for
rural profile streets as set forth in accordance with the Illinois department
of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
(Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
      7.   Sidewalks shall be provided on two (2) sides of all streets, except
sidewalks shall not be required in an approved residential country estate
subdivision. Sidewalks shall be at least five feet (5') in width, of portland
cement concrete four inches (4") thick, placed on suitably compacted base,
located within the dedicated right of way. Sidewalks in a commercial or
industrial area where the buildings are built immediately adjacent to the front
or street property line shall be at least ten feet (10') in width outward from
the curb line. Sidewalk alignment on lots abutting other subdivisions or lots
having existing sidewalks shall be so constructed to provide continuous and
contiguous pavement. The construction of sidewalks in a subdivision approved
under this title shall be done by the subdivider and section
 8-1-1 of this code shall not apply to the construction or maintenance of
sidewalks required under this title until two (2) years after the sidewalk has
been constructed in accordance with this provision of this title and the
sidewalk has been accepted by the plat officer. (Ord. 2013-01, 1-21-2013)
      8.   All utility lines, including electrical and gas lines,
telecommunication lines, and cable television lines, shall be installed
underground and along either the front or rear lot lines. All main lines shall
be installed in a utility easement. All transfer boxes and junctions shall be
located on a rear lot utility easement whenever possible so as not to be
unsightly and hazardous to the public.
      9.   Street lighting shall be provided for each residential subdivision
with either streetlights or yard lights. If streetlights are installed, they
shall be installed at every intersection and along straightaways at a minimum
spacing of one every five hundred feet (500'). Alternatively, the subdivider
can impose a restrictive covenant requiring a yard light be placed in every
lot, which shall operate automatically from sunset to sunrise. Such restrictive
covenant shall require all yard lights to be located in the yard ten feet (10')
from the front lot line and within three feet (3') of the driveway. All wiring
for street or yard lights shall be buried underground.
   (G)   When all of the streets and other facilities required above are
completed within the platted area in accordance with the above provisions and
approved by the authorities having jurisdiction, they shall be submitted for
acceptance for maintenance by either the village or the township highway
commissioner; this acceptance to be evidenced by a stipulation and
certification of completion of work executed by the village or the township
highway commissioner, which shall be recorded in the office of the recorder of
deeds of Woodford County. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-4-3: SANITARY SEWERS:
   (A)   A public sanitary sewage collection and treatment system shall be
provided as follows:
      1.   Where the subdivision is reasonably accessible to the village
sanitary sewer system and is so located that it can be annexed to the village,
the subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewage
collection system connected to such existing public sanitary sewer system.
      2.   Where no such connection to the village system can be made, the
subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewage
collection system and treatment plant, approved by the Illinois environmental
protection agency, with adequate provision for the maintenance of such plant.
   (B)   The sanitary sewer system shall be installed in accordance with the
plans and specifications that have been submitted by the subdivider and
approved by the duly appointed village engineer, which shall comply with the
most recent edition of the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois".
   (C)   Upon completion of the sanitary sewer system installation, a
registered professional engineer shall certify that the sanitary sewer system
complies with all the standards required by the village and the Illinois
environmental protection agency. One certified copy of the plans for such
sanitary sewer system as built shall be filed with the village. The subdivider
shall obtain any required permits from any other agency having jurisdiction,
including the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   (D)   Storm sewers and sump pump drainage lines shall not be connected to
sanitary sewers. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-4-4: WATER:
   (A)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water
main supply system consisting of mains at least six inches (6") in diameter,
which shall be connected to the village water system. The water supply system
shall also include appropriate fittings, valves, and fire hydrants.
   (B)   The plans for the installation of a water main supply system shall be
prepared by the subdivider with the cooperation of the village water department
and the village engineer. Upon completion of the water supply installation, one
copy of the plans for such system as built shall be filed with the village. The
subdivider shall obtain any required permits from any other agency having
jurisdiction, including the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   (C)   The water supply system shall be installed in accordance with the
plans and specifications that have been submitted by the subdivider and
approved by the duly appointed village engineer, which shall comply with the
most recent edition of the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois".
   (D)   Fire hydrants shall be provided at no more than six hundred foot
(600') intervals.
   (E)   The maximum line tap for a residence into the village waterline is a
one inch (1") tap line. No tap line to a residence of any type, single-family
or multiple-family, may exceed one inch (1") unless specific permission is
granted by the modification process as set forth in chapter 7 of this title.
(Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-4-5: STORM DRAINAGE:
The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with an adequate storm water
drainage system to properly drain the subdivision and all areas upstream that
are tributary to the subdivision in accordance with the following
specifications:
   (A)   The storm water runoff rate from the subdivision shall not exceed the
storm water runoff rate from the area in its natural undeveloped state.
   (B)   The storm water runoff rate shall not exceed the available capacity of
the downstream drainage system. Existing natural waterways in a subdivision
shall be preserved or improved as part of the storm water drainage system.
   (C)   Easements necessary for the storm water drainage system shall be
provided by the subdivider for portions of the storm water drainage system not
included within a street right of way.
   (D)   If any existing natural waterways, swales, creeks, or storm sewer
systems will become overburdened with storm water because of any proposed new
subdivision or development, then the subdivider will be required to construct
"on site" improvements consisting of the following:
      1.   A "storm water detention area" shall be constructed on property of
the subdivision or development that will ensure that peak storm water runoff
flow rates after development are not in excess of those that prevailed prior to
said subdivision or development.
      2.   The "storm water detention area" shall be self-draining so that no
water pools remain after the draining process and shall drain in such a manner
as to minimize the impact of the storm water on the downstream property.
   (E)   No structures shall be constructed within the storm water discharge
channels or a detention area.
   (F)   The drainage line shall be installed in accordance with the plans and
specifications that have been submitted by the subdivider and approved by the
duly appointed village engineer.
   (G)   The subdivider shall obtain any required permits from any other agency
having jurisdiction, including the Illinois environmental protection agency.
(Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-4-6: SUMP PUMP DRAINAGE:
The subdivider shall provide a sump pump drainage line that serves each lot in
the subdivision, and each lot shall be provided with a connection to the sump
pump drainage line. The sump pump drainage line shall be designed to receive
effluent from sump pumps and shall meet the following specifications:
   (A)   The drainage line shall be constructed of PVC pipe having a minimum
diameter of six inches (6"), unless the anticipated effluent shall require a
larger diameter, and shall be installed below the frost line.
   (B)   The drainage line shall be designed to discharge into either a storm
sewer or a drainage ditch.
   (C)   Manholes or clean out shall be provided on the drainage line at a
maximum spacing of five hundred feet (500') and shall be located in the street
right of way or an easement accessible for maintenance. For subdivisions
outside the village limits, the maintenance of the drainage line shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
   (D)   The drainage line shall be installed in accordance with the plans and
specifications that have been submitted by the subdivider and approved by the
duly appointed village engineer.
   (E)   The subdivider shall obtain any required permits from any other agency
having jurisdiction, including the Illinois environmental protection agency.
(Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-4-7: COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
No building of any type may be begun and no zoning use permit issued under the
zoning code until all sewer, water, and drainage systems of said subdivision
are completed, inspected, and approved by the duly appointed village engineer.
(Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
CHAPTER 5
PLATS AND DATA
SECTION:
11-5-1: Preapplication Plans And Data
11-5-2: Preliminary Plat
11-5-3: Final Plat
11-5-4: Subdivider Accompanied By Engineer
11-5-1: PREAPPLICATION PLANS AND DATA:
If the subdivider submits preapplication information for a proposed subdivision
previous to the filing of an application for approval of the preliminary plat,
the subdivider shall submit to the plat officer and the plan commission the
following plans and data as part of the preapplication information:
   (A)   General information data and location map, which shall include the
general topography of the site and shall describe or outline existing
covenants, zoning, land characteristics, community facilities and utilities,
streets, schools, parks, playgrounds, and commercial and industrial
developments.
   (B)   Sketch plan showing in simple sketch form the proposed layout of
streets, lots, utilities, and other features and improvements in relation to
existing conditions. This information shall also include any proposed
protective covenants, capital improvements, and public sites in addition to the
streets and other public service facilities. This sketch may be freehand on a
print of a topographic map. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-5-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A preliminary plat of the subdivision shall be accurately drawn to a scale of
one hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1"). The preliminary plat shall be
eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") in size or in six inch (6")
multiples thereof.
   (A)   The following data shall be included on the preliminary plat:
      1.   Public Land Survey: The preliminary plat shall be tied to at least
one point of the public land survey system.
      2.   Existing Boundary Lines, Monuments, And Lot Lines: By bearings and
distances, shown in number of feet to the nearest hundredth expressed in
decimals (not fractions).
      3.   Existing Easements: Location, width, and purpose.
      4.   Existing Streets: On and adjacent to the tract by name, right of way
width, location, type, street width, and elevation of surfacing; plus bridges,
curbs, gutters, culverts, and sidewalks.
      5.   Existing Utilities: On and adjacent to the tract; location, size and
invert elevation of sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water mains; location of
gas lines; fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines and poles, television
cable and telecommunication lines, and streetlights; if any of the above are
not available at site indicate direction and distance to the nearest ones and
furnish statements of availability.
      6.   Other Existing Conditions: Watercourses, bodies of water, marshes,
rock outcrop, wooded areas, parks, dwellings, buildings, facilities, public and
quasi-public uses, and other significant features.
      7.   Proposed Public Improvements: Streets or other major improvements
planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
      8.   Adjacent Property: Names of adjacent subdivisions and tract names
with name of record owner(s), conditions of the adjacent land with approximate
gradient and direction of elevations and slope.
      9.   Ground Elevations: On mean sea level datum plane show contours at
vertical intervals as follows:
         Slope of three percent (3%) or less: one foot (1') interval contour
map.
         Slope over three percent (3%) but less than six percent (6%): two foot
(2') interval contour map.
         Slope over six percent (6%): five foot (5') interval contour map.
      10.   Title And Certificates: Present tract designation; present zoning
classification; official designation under which subdivision is to be recorded;
names and addresses of owners of subdivision tract(s); acreage, scale, north
point, datum, bench marks, and certification of registered professional
engineer or registered professional surveyor and date of survey.
   (B)   The preliminary plat shall show all existing conditions required above
in topographic data and show all proposals, including, but not necessarily
limited to, the following:
      1.   Streets: Names, right of way and street widths, approximate grades
and gradients.
      2.   Easements: Location, width, and purpose.
      3.   Utilities: Location, type and approximate size; this information may
be shown on a separate exhibit.
      4.   Lots: Lot lines, area in acreage, numbers, and block numbers.
      5.   Sites (Nonpublic): If any, for shopping centers, churches, industry,
multi-family dwellings, or any other nonpublic use exclusive of single-family
dwellings.
      6.   Sites (Public): If any, to be dedicated or reserved for parks,
playgrounds, schools, or other public uses.
      7.   Setback Lines: Give dimensions of minimum setback lines.
      8.   Side Data: Including number of residential lots, typical lot size,
and acres in other public and nonpublic land uses.
      9.   Indicators: Title, scale, north arrow and plat date. (Ord. 2005-09,
12-19-2005)
      10.   Other Preliminary Plans: The preliminary plat shall be accompanied
by preliminary construction plans showing existing ground surface and proposed
street grades; typical cross sections of the streets and sidewalks; a
preliminary plan of proposed sanitary sewers, storm and surface water drainage
systems and sewers, and water mains with grades and size indicated and
construction details.
The village engineer shall review the construction plans. The subdivider shall
reimburse the village for the cost of the engineering fees for reviewing the
construction plans, prior to preliminary plan approval. (Ord. 2013-01, 1-21-
2013)
      11.   Draft Of Protective Covenants: Whereby the subdivider proposes to
regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development.
      12.   Zoning: Show proposed new zoning classification of the subdivision
and adjacent area. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-5-3: FINAL PLAT:
The final plat shall meet the following specifications:
   (A)   Proposed Preliminary Plat: The final plat may include all or only a
part of the area of the preliminary plat as proposed in the application.
   (B)   Drawing: The original drawing of the final plat of the subdivision
shall be eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24"), or in six inch (6")
multiples thereof. It shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred feet (100') to
the inch. Four (4) black or blue line prints and one reproducible print shall
be submitted with the original final plat.
   (C)   Required Data: The following information shall be shown on the final
plat:
      1.   Primary control points or descriptions and "ties" to such control
points to the public land survey system, to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings and similar data on the final plat shall be referred.
      2.   Tract boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, easements and
other rights of way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites;
with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and
central angle of all curves.
      3.   Name and right of way width of each street or other rights of way.
      4.   Location and right of way widths of existing and/or platted streets
adjacent to the tract.
      5.   Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements.
      6.   Consecutive numbers for each lot or site within all subdivisions
having the same name.
      7.   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated
or reserved.
      8.   Minimum setback line on all lots and other sites.
      9.   Location and description of monuments.
      10.   Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
      11.   Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land
by book and page.
      12.   Certification by Illinois registered land surveyor as to accuracy
of survey and plat.
      13.   Statement of owner certifying that he has title to land being
subdivided.
      14.   Statement by owner dedicating streets, rights of way, easements and
any sites for public uses.
      15.   Title, scale, north arrow and date.
      16.   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as
may be required by applicable codes, ordinances and/or statutes pertaining to
zoning, dedicated streets and drainage facilities.
   (D)   Performance Bonding: At the time when an application for final plat
approval is submitted under the provisions of this title, the subdivider shall
also submit proof that a good and sufficient surety bond has been filed with
the village clerk in a penal sum sufficient to cover the estimate by a
qualified engineer of the probable expenditures, with such estimate approved by
the village engineer, necessary to enable the subdivider to construct all
public improvements in a manner that shall conform with the standards of
construction established pursuant to the provisions of this title and
guaranteeing the public improvements against faulty materials and workmanship
for a one year period following written acceptance of the public improvements
by the village board. The bond shall be conditioned upon faithful adherence to
the rules and regulations contained in this title. In lieu of a surety bond,
upon approval by the village board (which shall be completely within the
discretion of the village board), the subdivider may provide a cash bond or
other financial security or surety payable to the village in an equivalent
amount to the amount required for the surety bond, which will be held by the
village until the successful completion of the one year guarantee period.
   (E)   Protective Covenants: Whenever the subdivider imposes any protective
covenants on subsequent owners of any portion of the area covered by the final
plat, a copy of the protective covenants in recordable form shall be submitted
with the final plat. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-5-4: SUBDIVIDER ACCOMPANIED BY ENGINEER:
Whenever a subdivider is to appear before the plan commission or the village
board on a matter related to subdivision request or application, including any
public hearings or review of preliminary or final plats, the subdivider should
be accompanied by an engineer in order that said engineer can answer any
questions posed by the plan commission or the village board. If said subdivider
is not accompanied by an engineer, then the plan commission or the village
board shall, at their discretion, postpone any matters concerning the
subdivider's subdivision, until the subdivider's engineer is available for such
meeting. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
CHAPTER 6
OFFICIAL MAP
SECTION:
11-6-1: Purpose
11-6-2: Designation Of Public Sites, Open Spaces
11-6-3: Amendments Of Official Map
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
The official map is hereby made a part of this title by reference and is
intended to designate public sites and streets that may be required by the plan
commission or the village board in any proposed subdivision plats. The
designation of such public sites on final subdivision plats may be required
prior to approval provided that such public site is indicated on the official
map for fifteen (15) days prior to the date of application for final approval
of the subdivision plat. Limits to which such areas designated for public use
on the official map may be restricted from development are as specified herein.
(Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-6-2: DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC SITES, OPEN SPACES:
Whenever the requirements provided by this title, including the official map,
shall indicate the necessity for providing a school site, park site, roadway,
or street or other public lands within any proposed subdivision for which
approval has been requested, and no such provision has been made therefor, the
plan commission or the village board may require that lands be designated for
such public purpose before approving such plat. Factors that may be reviewed by
the plan commission or the village board in determining the need for such
public sites in a proposed subdivision shall include the size, scope,
population density, or other characteristics of the proposed subdivision.
Whenever a final plat of subdivision, or part thereof, has been approved by the
village board as complying with the official map and a public site is
designated therein, the subdivider shall dedicate the subdivider's
proportionate share of the land comprising the public site to the appropriate
governmental body. The village board shall determine the subdivider's
proportionate share of land to be dedicated under this provision based upon the
size and population density of the proposed subdivision. Thereafter, the
corporate authorities of the governmental body having jurisdiction over the
particular public site shall purchase the remainder of such land comprising the
designated public site, at fair market value, within one year from date of
approval of such plat, and if it does not do so within such period of one year,
the land so designated may then be used by the owners thereof in any other
manner consistent with this title, including the official map and the zoning
code. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-6-3: AMENDMENTS OF OFFICIAL MAP:
Amendments to the official map shall be made in the manner prescribed by law,
which shall include a public hearing on the proposed amendment before either
the plan commission or the village board. Any public or semipublic agency may
request the establishment of a future public site or easement on the official
map. When such proposed site is not included in the comprehensive plan, the
requesting agency shall indicate to the plan commission the need for the site
in the particular location specified. The plan commission shall study the
request and shall report to the village board as to the consistency of the
proposed site with the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-7-1: Responsibility For Administration
11-7-2: Plat Officer
11-7-3: Interpretation
11-7-4: Conflict
11-7-5: Validity; Severability
11-7-6: Saving Provision
11-7-7: Amendment
11-7-8: Modification
11-7-9: Violations; Penalties
11-7-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The authority for administration of this title is hereby vested in the: a) plat
officer and b) joint zoning and planning board. The joint zoning and planning
board may also be designated as the "plan commission" in this title. The plat
officer shall have the authority and responsibility as set forth in this title,
subject to the authority of the plan commission and the limitations set forth
in this title. Also, the duly appointed village engineer shall provide
assistance as indicated in the respective provisions of this title. (Ord. 2005-
09, 12-19-2005)
11-7-2: PLAT OFFICER:
   (A)   The plat officer shall be the village's zoning officer as properly
appointed by the village president in accordance with the zoning code. The plat
officer may be provided with assistance by other persons as the village board
may direct.
   (B)   The plat officer shall administer and enforce this title and shall
carry out and perform duties as follows:
      1.   Receive and file for public record all applications and pertinent
data for preliminary and final plats, including the preliminary and final
plats, and providing such information and documentation to the plan commission;
      2.   Schedule any public hearings for the plan commission for
consideration of applications or petitions for amendments or modifications to
this title;
      3.   Conduct inspections to determine compliance with this title;
      4.   Investigate alleged violations of this title;
      5.   Inform subdividers and other persons or entities in violation of
this title of the provisions and requirements of this title with which they are
in noncompliance and the available remedies;
      6.   Notify the chairperson of the village's ordinance committee
regarding subdividers and other persons or entities in violation of this title
regarding the initiation of proceedings against such subdividers and other
persons or entities as permitted under this title and the Illinois municipal
code; and
      7.   Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including
preliminary and final plats, maintaining all such records as public records in
cooperation with the village clerk. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-7-3: INTERPRETATION:
The interpretation and application of the regulations and standards of this
title, the provisions of these regulations and standards shall be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and
general welfare. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-7-4: CONFLICT:
   (A)   Public Provisions: The regulations and standards of this title are not
intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other rule, regulation,
statute, or any other provision of law. Where any provision of these
regulations and standards imposes restrictions different from those imposed by
any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, statute, or any other provision of law, whichever provisions are
more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
   (B)   Private Provisions: The regulations and standards of this title are
not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement
or restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations and
standards are more restrictive or impose higher regulations or standards than
such easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction, the
requirements of these regulations and standards shall govern. (Ord. 2005-09,
12-19-2005)
11-7-5: VALIDITY; SEVERABILITY:
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the
application of any provision of this title to a particular property, structure,
or land, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any
other property, structure, or land not specifically included in said ruling.
   (B)   Should any section, clause, or provision of this title be declared
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect the
validity of this title as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so
declared to be invalid. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-7-6: SAVING PROVISION:
The regulations and standards of this title shall not be construed as abating
any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision
regulations and standards, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering
any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any
person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity, or as waiving any right of
the village under any section or provision existing at the time of the adoption
of these regulations and standards, or as vacating or annulling any rights
obtained by any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity, by lawful
action of the village, except as shall be expressly provided for in these
regulations and standards. (Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-7-7: AMENDMENT:
For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and welfare, the
regulations, standards, and restrictions set forth in this title may from time
to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed by ordinance, as
provided by law. No such action may be taken unless and until a request is made
to the plan commission for a change by any person, by the plan commission, or
by the village board, and public hearing is held thereon in the same fashion as
is provided in title 10, chapter 13 of this code for amendments to the zoning
code, except that the provisions in title 10, chapter 13 of this code regarding
notice to property owners located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the
subject property and regarding a written protest or petition against any
proposed amendments or changes shall not apply to amendments to this title.
(Ord. 2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-7-8: MODIFICATION:
Where the plan commission finds that extraordinary hardships, other than purely
financial or practical difficulties, may result from strict compliance with
this title, it may recommend to the village board a modification of the
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured; provided, that such modification will not have the effect of
nullifying the purpose of the comprehensive plan or this title.
   (A)   Approval Of Modification: Neither the plan commission nor the village
board shall approve a modification to this title unless it finds in each
specific case, based upon the evidence presented by the petitioner, that all of
the following criteria have been met:
      1.   The granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the
public safety, health, or welfare, or injurious to other property;
      2.   The conditions upon which the modification request is based are
unique to the property for which the modification is sought and are not
applicable generally to other property;
      3.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out; and
      4.   The modification will not in any manner vary the provisions of the
zoning code.
   (B)   Large Scale Development: The standards and requirements of this title
may be modified by the village board upon the recommendation of the plan
commission in case of a plan or a program for a planned development for a
community, or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment of the plan commission
shall exceed the minimum requirements for adequate public space and
improvements for circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the
tract when fully developed and populated and which also provides such covenants
or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to the purposes of the
comprehensive plan.
   (C)   Procedure For Seeking Modifications: Applications for any such
modification, except those initiated by the plan commission, shall be submitted
in writing by the subdivider with the subdivision application at the time when
the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration of the plan commission. The
petitions shall state fully the grounds for the modification request and all
the facts relied upon by the petitioner to make the modification request.
   (D)   Review By The Plan Commission And Village Board: In recommending a
modification as provided in this section, the plan commission or village board
may prescribe such conditions, as will, in their judgment, secure substantially
the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations and this
title in general. The recommendation of a modification by the plan commission
shall be conditional and subject to the final approval of the village board. In
reviewing a request for modification, the review and approval process shall be
the same as that provided in section
11-2-3 of this title at the same time the preliminary plat is reviewed by the
plan commission and the village board. However, the village board can take
action adverse to the plan commission by a majority vote rather than the two-
thirds (2/3) vote as set forth in subsection
11-2-3(J) of this title when the plan commission has voted to recommend
approval of a modification. If the plan commission votes to not recommend
approval of a modification, then the village board can only take adverse action
to the plan commission by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all board members. (Ord.
2005-09, 12-19-2005)
11-7-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   (A)   Whenever a violation of this title occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall state
fully the causes and basis thereof and shall be filed with the plat officer.
The plat officer shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate,
and take action thereon as provided by this title. The plat officer shall
further report any continued violations of this title to the chairperson of the
village's ordinance committee.
   (B)   In case any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted or any structure or land is used in violation of this title, the
proper authorities of the village, or any owner or tenant of real property in
the same contiguous district as the structure or land in question, in addition
to other remedies, may institute an appropriate action or proceeding in any
court of competent jurisdiction:
      1.   To prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance, or use of a structure;
      2.   To prevent the occupancy of the structure or land;
      3.   To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about
such structure or land;
      4.   To restrain, correct or abate the violation.
   (C)   Any person, or any agent, employee, or contractor of such person, who
shall violate, disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply with, or who shall
resist enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall be subject to a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense or to a penalty as provided for by
section
 1-4-13 of this code. The chairperson of the village's ordinance committee
shall be permitted to issue administrative citations for violations of this
title under section
1-4-13 of this code. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the village from taking such
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this title.
   (E)   No subdivider, or owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land
located in a proposed subdivision, shall transfer or sell such parcel before
final plat of the subdivision has been approved by the village board and
properly recorded with the Woodford County recorder of deeds. (Ord. 2005-09,
12-19-2005)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
Flood Damage Prevention   1
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Purpose
12-1-2: Definitions
12-1-3: Base Flood Elevation
12-1-4: Duties Of The Zoning Officer
12-1-5: Development Permit
12-1-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
12-1-7: Protecting Buildings
12-1-8: Subdivision Requirements
12-1-9: Public Health And Other Standards
12-1-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
12-1-11: Variances
12-1-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
12-1-13: Penalty
12-1-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-1-15: Severability
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this village
by the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
12-1-3 of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure that is principally aboveground,
including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage
tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers
installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:
   (A)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
   (B)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   (C)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
   (D)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   (E)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
   (F)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   (G)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
   FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the village of Roanoke, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village of Roanoke, or that may be annexed
into the village of Roanoke, that are subject to inundation by the base flood.
The floodplains of the village of Roanoke are generally identified as such on
panel number(s) 0225D of the countywide flood insurance rate map of Woodford
County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated September
17, 2010. Floodplain also includes those areas of known flooding as identified
by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Woodford County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village of Roanoke or that may
be annexed into the village of Roanoke are generally identified as such on the
flood insurance rate map prepared for Woodford County by the federal emergency
management agency and dated September 17, 2010.
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency
management agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodways for each of the floodplains of the village of Roanoke
shall be according to the best data available from federal, state, or other
sources.
   FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   (C)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   (D)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
   IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water
resources.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
12-1-7 of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
   NFIP: National flood insurance program.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss buildings" (see definition of Repetitive Loss).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
   (A)   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
   (B)   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. The term does
not include:
   (A)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   (B)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
12-1-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Woodford County shall
be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide flood
insurance study of Woodford County prepared by the federal emergency management
agency and dated September 17, 2010.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of
Woodford County shall be according to the best data available from federal,
state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must
be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Woodford County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village of Roanoke, or that may be annexed into the village
of Roanoke, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood
insurance study of Woodford County prepared by the federal emergency management
agency and dated September 17, 2010. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
12-1-4: DUTIES OF THE ZONING OFFICER:
The zoning officer shall be responsible for the general administration of this
chapter and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains under
the jurisdiction of the village of Roanoke meet the requirements of this
chapter. Specifically, the zoning officer shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with section
12-1-5 of this chapter;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
12-1-6 of this chapter;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
12-1-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built"
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
12-1-8 of this chapter;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
12-1-9 of this chapter;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
12-1-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
12-1-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
12-1-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the zoning officer. The zoning officer shall not issue
a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements
of this chapter.
   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
12-1-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the zoning
officer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown by the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher
than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the
date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is not in the floodplain and
therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any
development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and
hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current flood insurance rate map,
is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
The zoning officer shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
The zoning officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies
of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit not
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The zoning
officer shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
12-1-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources, office of
water resources statewide permit number 2:
         (a)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of 1.0 foot, and
         (b)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half foot (0.5') at a point one thousand
feet (1,000') upstream of the proposed structure.
         (c)   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile.
         (d)   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
         (e)   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the state of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit.
         (f)   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 3:
         (a)   The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other
similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. army corps of
engineers.
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 4:
         (a)   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         (b)   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         (c)   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         (d)   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         (e)   All disturbed areas shall be returned to preconstruction grades
and revegetated.
         (f)   All Illinois commerce commission, national electrical safety
code, and federal requirements must be met.
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 5:
         (a)   The boat dock must not extend more than fifty feet (50') into a
waterway and no more than one-fourth (1/4) of the width of the waterway and
shall not extend beyond the navigational limit established by the IDNR and
corps of engineers.
         (b)   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet
(10').
         (c)   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landowner's shoreline frontage nor fifty feet (50').
         (d)   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet (10') of the projected
property line.
         (e)   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         (f)   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         (g)   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with flotation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         (h)   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         (i)   Nonfloating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow.
         (j)   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or corps of engineers.
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6:
         (a)   The following activities (not involving fill or positive change
in grade) are covered by this permit:
            (1)   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or
septic tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
            (2)   The construction of light poles, signposts, and similar
structures.
            (3)   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
            (4)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
            (5)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension.
Only one such building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
            (6)   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are
made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7:
         (a)   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection.
         (b)   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the
use of riprap or other design measures.
         (c)   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         (d)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8:
         (a)   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of
the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet (3') of cover shall be provided.
The river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition.
         (b)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (c)   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the environmental protection act 1 , shall be provided
with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed.
         (d)   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior
to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9:
         (a)   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. "Urban
areas" are defined as: areas of the state where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban.)
         (b)   In addition to the materials listed in subsection (A)8(a) of
this section, other materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be utilized in rural
areas provided all other conditions of this permit are met.
         (c)   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 2 .
         (d)   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand
feet (1,000').
         (e)   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         (f)   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         (g)   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of
the bank.
         (h)   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full width
and cross sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe of
the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross sectional
area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) nor the
volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of the
stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and
to lessen the quantity of material required.
         (i)   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         (j)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (k)   In the case of sea walls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            (1)   It is constructed in alignment with an existing sea wall(s)
or gabion structure(s), and
            (2)   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot.
         (l)   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10:
         (a)   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with
the requirements of the local floodplain ordinance.
         (b)   The principal structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         (c)   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another
property, and
         (d)   Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
         (e)   No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty feet
(50') of the bank of the stream channel.
         (f)   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         (g)   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition
must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         (h)   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11:
         (a)   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed one thousand feet (1,000').
         (b)   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel, and
         (c)   The cross sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
         (d)   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            (1)   Removed from the floodway;
            (2)   Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials
would be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross
sectional area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than ten
percent (10%), nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per
linear foot of stream bank;
            (3)   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain
area such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            (4)   Used to stabilize an existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            (5)   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            (6)   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         (e)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            (1)   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the
backwater induced by the existing structure, and
            (2)   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         (b)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects, the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         (c)   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR.)
         (d)   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the department's statewide permit number 9 (minor shoreline, channel and
stream bank protection activities) or statewide permit number 11 (minor
maintenance dredging activities).
         (e)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 13:
         (a)   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
         (b)   The term "temporary" shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         (d)   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         (e)   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or
stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents
that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of special condition
number 3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a
minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the
backwater induced by the temporary structure.
         (f)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         (g)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         (h)   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution
as defined by the environmental protection act 3 .
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in subsection (A) of this
section may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5.
2 1. 415 ILCS 5.
3 1. 415 ILCS 5.
12-1-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section
12-1-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
12-1-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         (e)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation, and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation's wall must not exceed
four feet (4') at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, flood walls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection (B) of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tie-down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection (D) of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred (500) square feet.
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
12-1-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The Roanoke village board shall take into account hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
12-1-6 and
12-1-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
12-1-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
 12-1-6 and
12-1-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
12-1-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-
7-2010)
12-1-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the village of Roanoke shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
12-1-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the joint zoning and planning
board for a variance. The joint zoning and planning board shall review the
applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the
Roanoke village board of trustees. The Roanoke village board of trustees may
attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to
further the intent of this chapter.
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   The joint zoning and planning board shall notify an applicant in
writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protections
standards of section
12-1-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
12-1-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
12-1-6 and
12-1-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
12-1-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the village of Roanoke or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
12-1-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the zoning officer may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The
zoning officer shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The zoning officer shall make application to the circuit court for
an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order
as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      4.   The zoning officer shall record a notice of violation on the title
of the property.
   (B)   The zoning officer shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
The zoning officer is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of
the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing, indicate the
reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve
the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the joint zoning and planning board. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the joint zoning and
planning board shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or
revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village of Roanoke from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-
7-2010)
12-1-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Roanoke
village board of trustees to fulfill the requirements of the national flood
insurance program including: ordinance 1987-04 regulating development in
special flood hazard areas. However, this chapter does not repeal the original
resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does
this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants
or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
12-1-15: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions and 3sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable and the
invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 2010-04, 6-7-2010)
 
