ROCHESTER, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through:
Ord. 25-07, passed 3-10-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: www.amlegal.com
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
VILLAGE OFFICIALS
President       Joseph C. Suerdieck
Clerk           Lynn Langdon
Treasurer       James Theis
Trustees        Matt Butcher
               Maribeth Eandi
               Harry Hendrickson
               Joe Hill
               Stacia Munroe
               Douglas Zobrist
Village Manager Deborah R. Elderton
Office Manager  Erica Marsh
Police Chief    Kaleb Johnson
Superintendent  James Foster
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
10.01   Title
   
10.02   Acceptance
   
10.03   Amendments
   
10.04   Code alteration
   
10.05   Jurisdiction
   
10.06   Catchlines
Saving Clause
   
10.20   Repeal of general ordinances
   
10.21   Public utility ordinances
   
10.22   Court proceedings
   
10.23   Severability of provisions
   
10.24   Village Clerk’s certificate
Definitions
   
10.35   Construction of words
   
10.36   Definitions
 
   
10.99   General penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.01 TITLE.
   Upon the adoption by the Village Board of Trustees, this code of ordinances
is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official “Code of
Ordinances of the Village of Rochester”. The code of ordinances shall be known
and cited as the “village code”, “code of ordinances” and “code”, and it is
hereby published by authority of the Village Board and shall be kept up-to-date
as provided in §
10.03 under the direction of the Village Attorney, acting for said Village
Board. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter
and subchapter heading and to the general penalty section relating thereto as
well as to the section itself when reference is made to this village code by
title in any legal document.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-3
§ 10.02 ACCEPTANCE.
   The village code as hereby presented in printed form shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in §
10.20.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-6
§ 10.03 AMENDMENTS.
   Any ordinance amending this village code shall set forth the chapter,
subchapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and
this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement
pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this
village code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be forwarded
to the codifiers on an annual basis and the ordinance material shall be
prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this village code.
Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted
in each individual copy of the village code on an annual basis.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-3
§ 10.04 CODE ALTERATION.
   (A)   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace
or deface in any way, any section or any page of this code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement
pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized
by the Village Board. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk.
   (B)   Any person having in his or her custody an official copy of this code
shall make every effort to maintain said code in an up-to-date and efficient
manner. He or she shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement
pages when such are delivered to him or her or made available to him or her
through the office of the Village Clerk. Said code books, while in actual
possession of officials and other interested persons shall be and remain the
property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the Clerk upon
termination of office or separation of duties.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-4)
§ 10.05 JURISDICTION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, this code applies to acts performed within
the corporate limits of the village. Provisions of this code also apply to acts
performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by law,
where the law confers power on the village to regulate such particular acts
outside the corporate limits.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-5)
§ 10.06 CATCHLINES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-17)
SAVING CLAUSE
§ 10.20 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this
code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still
in force or are, by necessary implication, herein reserved from repeal (subject
to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), from which are
excluded the following ordinances, which are not hereby repealed:
   (A)   Tax levy ordinances;
   (B)   Appropriation ordinances;
   (C)   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   (D)   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   (E)   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   (F)   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   (G)   Improvement ordinances;
   (H)   Bond ordinances;
   (I)   Ordinances relating to elections;
   (J)   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the village; and
   (K)   All special ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-8)
§ 10.21 PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and
other public ways or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of
public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by
virtue of §
10.20, excepting as this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or
ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-9)
§ 10.22 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any claim
arising under the former ordinance or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the
party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-10)
§ 10.23 SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   Each section, division, sentence, clause and provision of this code is
severable, and if any provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any
reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this code, nor any part
thereof, other than that part affected by such decision.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-11)
§ 10.24 VILLAGE CLERK’S CERTIFICATE.
   The Village Clerk’s certificate shall be substantially in the following
form:
VILLAGE CLERK’S CERTIFICATE
VILLAGE CLERK’S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS       )
COUNTY OF SANGAMON   ) ss.                   VILLAGE CLERK’S OFFICE
VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER   )
   I, _____________________, Village Clerk of the Village of Rochester, Illinois,
do hereby certify that the following Revised Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Rochester, Illinois of 20___, published by authority of the Village Board of
Trustees were duly passed by the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of
Rochester, Illinois, approved by the President and published in book form
according to law on this date, and that these ordinances are true and perfect
copies of the ordinances, as passed, approved and now of record and on file in my
office as provided by law.
 
   In witness whereof, I have set my hand and affixed the corporate seal of the
Village of Rochester, Illinois, this ____ day of ___________, 20____.
                                          ___________________________________
         VILLAGE CLERK
         VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER
(SEAL)
 
(2009 Code, § 1-1-12)
DEFINITIONS
§ 10.35 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.
   (A)   Whenever any word in any section of this code, importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used.
   (B)   When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code
by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several
matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate
shall be deemed to be included; provided that these rules of construction shall
not be applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be
repugnant thereto.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-15)
§ 10.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. As used in this code, shall mean a person acting on behalf of
another.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES. Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the President and
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Rochester.
   CODE or THIS CODE. The code of ordinances of the Village of Rochester.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The President and the Village Board of Trustees. See
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2(2).
   COUNTY. The County of Sangamon.
   EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
village”.
   FEE OR FEES. A sum of money charged by the village for carrying on of a
business, profession or occupation.
   FISCAL YEAR. Begins on May 1 of each year and end on April 30 of the
following year. See 65 ILCS 5/1-1-2(5).
   KNOWINGLY. Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act
or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
   LEGAL HOLIDAY. The holidays as authorized and recognized by the Village
Board in the employee agreement.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   MAY. Is permissible.
   MISDEMEANOR. Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
   NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT and NEGLIGENTLY. Imports a want of such
attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act of omission as a
prudent human ordinarily bestows in acting in his or her own concern.
   NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village or any act or thing repugnant to or creating a
hazard to or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
   OCCUPANT. As applied to a building or land shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS and EMPLOYEES.
      (1)   Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer or
employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words
“of the village” and shall be taken to mean the officer or employee of this
village having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated.
      (2)   No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided in this code for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the Village Board to impose such a fine or penalty on
such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty.
   OFFICIAL TIME. Central Standard Time shall be the official time for the
transaction of village business, except during applicable Daylight Savings Time
set by national or state standards when the official time shall be advanced one
hour. All clocks and other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other
premises maintained by or at the expense of the village shall be set and run at
the OFFICIAL TIME prescribed by this definition.
   OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER. As applied to a building or land shall include any part-owner, joint-
owner, tenant-in-common, joint-tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation in his, her or its own capacity as administrator, conservator,
executor, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the court.
Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section of this code prescribing a
penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or any such word as applied to
corporations, it shall include the officers, agents or employees thereof who
are responsible for any violation of said section.
   RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   STATE or THIS STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
   TENANT. As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   VILLAGE PRESIDENT or PRESIDENT. The President of the Village Board of
Trustees.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2.1)
   WILLFULLY. When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another or to acquire an advantage.
   WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Includes printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he or she is unable to write,
by his or her proper mark.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-16)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-1-2
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty.
      (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code of
ordinances shall be fined not less than $75 nor more than $750 for any one
offense.
      (2)   Any minor or person designated a juvenile by this state convicted
of a violation of any section of this code shall be fined not less than $75 nor
more than $750 for any one offense, but may not be confined except by
provisions of the Juvenile Court Act of the state.
      (3)   Whoever commits an offense against the village or aids, abets,
counsels, commands, induces or procures its commission is punishable as a
principal.
      (4)   Whoever willfully causes an act to be done which, if directly
performed by him, her or another would be an offense against the village, is
punishable as a principal.
      (5)   All municipal ordinance offenses may be satisfied without a court
appearance by written plea of guilty and payment of the minimum fine, plus
court costs, unless a court appearance is required by the ordinance violated.
See 65 ILCS 5/1-2-7 and 65 ILCS 5/1-2-8.
      (6)   A penalty imposed for the violation of any section of this code may
include, or consist of, a requirement that the defendant perform some
reasonable public service work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of
litter in public parks or along public highways or the maintenance of public
facilities.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-20)
   (B)   Service by certified mail. In all actions for violation of any
municipal ordinance where the fine would not be in excess of $750 and no jail
term could be imposed, service of summons may be made by the Police Department,
by certified mail return receipt requested, whether service is to be within or
without the state. See 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-21)
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   The penalty provided in this section shall be applicable to every
section of this village code, the same as though it were a part of each and
every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of
this village code, where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where
any act which is of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act
continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this village code.
       (2)   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is
created by different clauses or sections of this village code, the prosecuting
officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall
be had against the same person for the same offense; provided that the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty
so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
      (3)   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this village code, and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this code shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or
continues.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-22)
   (D)   Liability of officers. The failure of any officer or employee to
perform any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject such officer
or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this code, unless a penalty
is specifically provided for.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-23)
   (E)   License. When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of
this code, any license previously issued to him or her by the village may be
revoked by the court or by the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 1-1-24)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-
1.1
   Limitations on penalties, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
      
32.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS
      
33.   VILLAGE MEETINGS
      
34.   VILLAGE ORGANIZATIONS
      
35.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
36.   VILLAGE POLICIES
      
37.   CIVIL EMERGENCY
      
38.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Corporate seal
   
30.02   Election procedure
   
30.03   Appointment of elected officials
   
30.04   Municipal officers; regulations
   
30.05   Resignation of appointed officials
   
30.06   Qualifications; elective office
   
30.07   Bonds of village officers
   
30.08   Liability insurance
   
30.09   Bidding and contract procedures
   
30.10   Salaries regulation
   
30.11   Claims
   
30.12   Municipal year
   
30.13   Expenses; reimbursement
   
30.14   Official records
   
30.15   Federal Old Age and Survivor’s Insurance system
   
30.16   Certificates of insurance
   
30.17   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
Salaries
   
30.30   Salaries of village officials
Illinois Municipal League Risk
   
30.45   Participation
   
30.46   Contribution
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 CORPORATE SEAL.
   (A)   (1)   The corporate seal of the village shall be the same as that
heretofore provided and used by the village.
      (2)   It shall be circular in form with the words, “Village of Rochester,
Illinois” in the exterior circle, and the words “Incorporated Feb. 1869” in the
interior circle.
   (B)   (1)   The corporate seal shall be used as such seal in all cases
provided for by law or by the ordinances of the village and in all other cases
in which, by law and custom, it is usual and necessary for the corporation to
use a seal.
      (2)   The seal shall be and remain with the Village Clerk who shall be
the legal custodian.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-18)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/2-2-12 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90
§ 30.02 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   The provisions of the 10 ILCS concerning municipal elections shall govern
the conduct of the village elections.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-19)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-10
§ 30.03 APPOINTMENT OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   (A)   No Trustee of this village, during the term of office for which he or
she is elected, may accept or be appointed to or hold any office appointed by
the President except if such Trustee is granted a leave of absence from such
office. However, such Trustee may serve as a volunteer firefighter and receive
compensation for such service. Any appointment in violation of this section is
void.
   (B)   One member may serve on the Library Board, if one exists.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-20)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 50 ILCS 105/2, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-15 and 75 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 30.04 MUNICIPAL OFFICERS; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Effect. The provisions of this section shall apply alike to all
officers and employees of the village regardless of the time of creation of the
office or position or the time of the appointment of the officer or employee.
   (B)   Qualifications; appointive office.
      (1)   No person shall be eligible for any appointive municipal office
unless that person is a qualified elector of the municipality or otherwise
provided by law.
      (2)   The residency requirements do not apply, however, to municipal
engineers, health officers, attorneys or other officers who require technical
training or knowledge, to appointed village treasurers, or to appointed village
collectors (unless the village has designated by ordinance that the Village
Clerk shall also hold the office of collector).
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-6)
   (C)   Bond. Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Village
Board upon entering upon the duties of his or her office, give a bond in such
amount and with such sureties as may be determined by the Board, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office or position.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30)
   (D)   Books delivered to successor. Every officer shall, upon going out of
office, deliver to his or her successor, all books, papers, furniture and other
things appertaining to such office, and which are the property of the village.
Within five days after notification and request, any person who has been an
officer of a municipality is required to deliver to his or her successor in
office, all property, books and effects in his or her possession belonging to
the municipality, or pertaining to the office he or she has held. Upon his or
her refusal to do so, he or she shall be liable for all damages caused thereby,
and shall, upon conviction, be penalized according to the provisions of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. He or she shall not receive his or her final
check until his or her village code book and keys are turned over to the
Village Clerk.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-35)
   (E)   Books open to inspection. Every officer shall, at all times when
required, submit the books and papers of his or her office to the inspection of
the President or any committee or member of the Board of Trustees.
   (F)   Fees; report of fees. No officer of the municipality shall be entitled
to charge or receive any fees as against the village. All officers of the
village entitled to receive fees shall keep a correct account thereof, and make
a report thereof under oath to the Village Board prior to the regular meeting
of each month. In the report, they shall specify from whom such fees were
received, for what service and when received. All fees received shall be paid
over into the village treasury.
   (G)   Other rules and regulations. Every officer of the village shall
perform such other duties and be subject to such other rules and regulations as
the Village Board may provide by law.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40)
   (H)   Conservators of peace.
      (1)   After receiving a certificate attesting to the successful
completion of a training course administered by the State Law Enforcement
Training Standards Board, the President, Trustees and police officers in
municipalities shall be conservators of the peace. Those persons and others
authorized by ordinance shall have power:
         (a)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all
persons who break the peace or are found violating any municipal ordinance or
any criminal law of the state;
         (b)   To commit arrested persons for examination;
         (c)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody over night
or Sunday in any safe place or until they can be brought before the proper
court; and
         (d)   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace
prescribed by the corporate authorities.
      (2)   All warrants for the violation of municipal ordinances or the state
criminal law, directed to any person, may be served and executed within the
limits of a municipality by any police officer of the municipality. For that
purpose, police officers have all the common law and statutory powers of
sheriffs.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25)
   (I)   Oath.
      (1)   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all
municipal officers, whether elected or appointed shall take and subscribe to
the following oath:
      “I, ___________________, do solemnly swear that I will support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of
____________________, according to the best of my ability.”
      (2)   The President and the Clerk shall have the power to administer this
oath or affirmation upon all lawful occasions.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-20)
(2009 Code, § 1-2-21)
Cross-reference:
   Administration of oaths, see §
32.037
§ 30.05 RESIGNATION OF APPOINTED OFFICIALS.
   Any officer of the village may resign from office. If such officer resigns
he or she shall continue in office until his or her successor has been chosen
and has qualified. If there is a failure to appoint a village officer, or the
person appointed fails to qualify, the person filling the office shall continue
in office until his or her successor has been chosen and has qualified.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50) (2009 Code, § 1-2-22)
§ 30.06 QUALIFICATIONS; ELECTIVE OFFICE.
   (A)   A person is not eligible for an elective municipal office unless that
person is a qualified elector of the municipality and has resided in the
municipality at least one year next preceding the election.
   (B)   A person is not eligible for an elective municipal office if that
person is in arrears in the payment of a tax or other indebtedness due to the
municipality or has been convicted in any court located in the United States of
any infamous crime, bribery, perjury or other felony until completion of his or
her sentence.
   (C)   A person is not eligible for the office of Trustee unless that person
has resided in the municipality, at least one year next preceding the election
or appointment, except as provided in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-75(b).
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5 and 730 ILCS 5/5-5-5(b)) (2009 Code, § 1-2-23)
§ 30.07 BONDS OF VILLAGE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Amount. Bonds of village officers required under 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30
shall be executed in the following penal sums:
      (1)   President: $50,000;
      (2)   Village Treasurer: $50,000;
      (3)   Village Clerk: $50,000;
      (4)   Office Manager/Bookkeeper: $50,000; and
      (5)   Office Assistant: $50,000.
   (B)   Premium payment by village. The surety bonds required by law shall be
paid by the village.
(5 ILCS 270/1)
   (C)   Surety. The Village Board shall not receive or approve any bond or
security whereon the name of the Village Board, any one of the Board of
Trustees or any elected or appointed officer of the village appear as bondsman
or security. If, by mistake, a bond containing the name of any such officer is
approved by the Village Board or if any bondsman, after becoming such is
elected or appointed to any village office, this section shall not act as a
release of any such obligation incurred.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-24)
§ 30.08 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   Purchase of. The Village Board shall have the power to purchase
liability insurance covering and insuring all municipal officers, employees and
elected officials; said insurance to cover incidents occurring while in the
performance of their duties, which insurance may insure, cover and protect any
liability which the municipal corporation, officer, employee or elected
official may incur. When the insurance has been purchased, the village shall be
responsible for all premiums and deductible charges called for by any valid
liability insurance policy covering the municipal corporation, officer,
employee or elected official.
   (B)   Indemnification.
      (1)   If the Village Board elects not to purchase liability insurance
covering and insuring municipal officers, elected officials and employees as
provided in this section, then the village shall indemnify and cause to defend
municipal officers, elected officials and employees from any claim filed by an
individual, partnership or corporation when the claim is founded on any act or
omission of the municipal officers, elected officials or employees while in the
performance of their official duties, except the village shall not indemnify,
but shall defend any municipal officer, elected official or employee from any
claim made by an individual, partnership or corporation wherein the claim
alleges that the municipal officer, elected official or employee acted
intentionally, maliciously or wantonly and further, shall not indemnify or
cause to defend the officials or employees where the claim is directly or
indirectly related to the negligent care or use of a vehicle as defined by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, and the village shall not indemnify any municipal
officer, elected official or employee from any claim made by a municipal
officer, elected official or employee.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, the village
shall not indemnify or cause to defend any municipal officers, elected
officials or employees if the municipal officers, elected officials or
employees have liability insurance insuring the municipal officers, elected
officials or employees from the alleged claim; however, the village shall
indemnify the municipal officer, elected official or employee the personal
deductible limits of his or her personal policy.
(745 ILCS 10/2-201 et seq.) (2009 Code, § 1-2-25)
§ 30.09 BIDDING AND CONTRACT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Competitive bidding required. Any work or other public improvement
which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or
special taxation, and all purchases of and contracts for supplies, materials
and services shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based whenever
possible on competitive bids.
   (B)   Formal contract procedure. All work or other public improvement which
is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation, and all purchases, orders or contracts for supplies, materials,
equipment or contractual services except as otherwise provided herein, when the
estimated cost thereof shall exceed $20,000, shall be purchased from the lowest
responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding
is waived by a vote of two-thirds of the Trustees then holding office.
   (C)   Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least
once in a newspaper with general circulation within the village. The village
shall also advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the
public bulletin board in the Village Hall.
   (D)   Scope of notice. The newspaper notice required herein shall include a
general description of the work to be performed or the articles to be
purchased, shall state where specifications may be secured, and the time and
place for opening bids.
   (E)   Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the Board of Trustees, bid
deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful
bidders shall be entitled to the return of their bid deposits upon the award of
the contract by the Board of Trustees. A successful bidder shall forfeit any
bid deposit required by the Board of Trustees upon failure on his or her part
to enter into a contract within ten days after the award.
   (F)   Bid opening procedure.
      (1)   Sealed. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the village and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope.
      (2)   Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place
stated in the public notice.
      (3)   Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the
Board of Trustees or by a village employee, in which event, a tabulation of the
bids shall be furnished to the Board of Trustees at its next regular meeting.
   (G)   Rejection of bids. The village shall have the authority to reject all
bids or parts of all bids when the public interest will be served thereby.
   (H)   Bidders in default to village. The village shall not accept the bid of
a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other
monies due the village.
   (I)   Award of contract.
      (1)   Authority in village. The Board of Trustees shall have the
authority to award contracts within the purview of this section.
      (2)   Lowest responsible bidder.
         (a)   Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder on
the basis of the bid that is in the best interest of the village to accept.
         (b)   In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the Board of
Trustees shall consider:
            1.   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract to provide the service required;
            2.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
            3.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
            4.   The quality of the performance of previous contracts or
services;
            5.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract or service;
            6.   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
            7.   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
            8.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract;
            9.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid; and
            10.   Whether the bidder has furnished a certificate of insurance
indicating worker’s compensation and employers’ liability coverage and the
policy limits for such coverage.
      (3)   Performance bonds. The Board of Trustees shall have the authority
to require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such amounts
as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the
village.
   (J)   Open market procedure. All work and purchases of supplies, materials
and services of less than the estimated value of $20,000 shall be made in the
open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the
procedure prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts.
   (K)   Professional services exempt from bidding requirements. All contracts
for professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers,
real estate appraisers and architects and any other profession whose ethical
code involved prohibits or discourages involvement in normal bidding
procedures, may be entered into by the village without observing the bidding
procedures prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts.
   (L)   Emergency purchases. In case of an apparent emergency which requires
immediate work or purchase of supplies, materials or services, the Board of
Trustees shall be empowered to secure by open market procedure as herein set
forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials or
services regardless of the amount of the expenditure.
   (M)   Cooperative purchasing. The village shall have the authority to join
with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best
interests of the village would be served thereby.
(65 ILCS 5/8-9-1 and 65 ILCS 8-9-2)
(2009 Code, § 1-2-26)
§ 30.10 SALARIES REGULATION.
   (A)   Elected. No salary or compensation of any elected municipal officer
who is elected for a definite term of office shall be increased or diminished
during such term.
   (B)   Appointed. No salary or compensation of any appointed official who is
appointed for a definite term of office shall be decreased during such term,
but may be increased.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-5 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-10) (2009 Code, § 1-2-27)
Editor’s note:
   The salary of appointed officials and employees may be established in the
appropriation ordinance or annual budget. The salary of elected officials must
be established in an ordinance other than the appropriation ordinance at least
180 days before the beginning of the terms of the officers whose compensation
is to be filed.
§ 30.11 CLAIMS.
   (A)   Presentation. All claims against the village for goods purchased,
damaged or originating in any other way, except for claims for salaries and
other allowances that are fixed by ordinance shall be presented on or before
the Thursday preceding the monthly meeting of each month to the Village Clerk.
All such claims must be in writing and items shall be specified.
   (B)   Exception. This does not prohibit the Village Board from passing on
any claims not previously presented to the Village Clerk if, in the opinion of
the Board, justice to the claimant requires it.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-28)
§ 30.12 MUNICIPAL YEAR.
   The municipal year shall commence on May 1 and shall end on the following
April 30. No appointments shall be made during the last month of the municipal
year in the year of a mayoral election.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-29)
§ 30.13 EXPENSES; REIMBURSEMENT.
   Each member of the corporate authorities may receive reimbursement from the
municipality for expenses incurred by the member in attending committee
meetings of the corporate authorities or for other expenses incurred by the
member in the course of performing official duties.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-15(b)) (2009 Code, § 1-2-30)
§ 30.14 OFFICIAL RECORDS.
   All official records, including the corporate seal, shall be kept in the
Village Hall.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-31)
§ 30.15 FEDERAL OLD AGE AND SURVIVOR’S INSURANCE SYSTEM.
   (A)   ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES shall mean all employees of the village, eligible
under the Federal Act, except persons elected to office by popular election and
also the Village Treasurer and Village Attorney.
   (B)   Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the purpose
provided in sections hereof are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and
at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or
regulations, and shall be paid quarterly.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-32)
§ 30.16 CERTIFICATES OF INSURANCE.
   All contractors and subcontractors doing work for the village shall first
provide a certificate of insurance indicating worker’s compensation and
employers’ liability coverage and the policy limits for such coverage.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-33)
§ 30.17 ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND.
   (A)   Election. The village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois
Municipal Retirement Fund.
   (B)   Special tax. The village includes in its levy and appropriation
ordinance provision for the levying of a special tax to pay the village’s cost
of participating in the Retirement Fund and appropriate therefrom funds to pay
the cost of participation.
   (C)   Coverage. To be eligible to be included in the IMRF a person shall
have to work a minimum of 1,000 hours per year.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-34)
SALARIES
§ 30.30 SALARIES OF VILLAGE OFFICIALS.
   The following salaries are hereby established for elected village officials:
   (A)   President. The President shall receive $6,000 per year.
   (B)   Trustees. The Village Trustees shall receive $2,600 per year. In
addition, Village Trustees shall be entitled to a stipend of $30 per village
committee meeting attended if the Village Trustee is a member of said village
committee or per other meeting attended if ordered to attend by the Village
President. Village Trustees may earn up to a maximum total yearly stipend
amount of $1,200.
   (C)   Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall be paid a salary of $2,600 per
year. In addition, the Village Clerk shall be entitled to a stipend of $30 per
village committee meeting attended if the Village Clerk is required to attend
said meeting or per other meeting attended if ordered to attend by the Village
President. The Village Clerk may earn up to a maximum total yearly stipend
amount of $1,200.
   (D)   Village Treasurer. The Village Treasurer shall be paid the sum of
$2,500 per year.
   (E)   Deputy Clerk stipend. Beginning May 1, 2017, the Deputy Clerk shall be
paid $30 per village or committee meeting clerked.
   (F)   Village appointed committee stipend changes. Beginning May 1, 2017, a
village appointed committee Chair shall be paid $30 per committee meeting
attended. A village appointed committee Vice Chair shall be paid $30 per
committee meeting attended. Village appointed committee members shall be paid
$20 per committee meeting attended.
   (G)   Village Code Inspector. The Village Code Inspector shall be paid $30
per Planning and Zoning Committee meeting attended. The Village Code Inspector
may, at his or her discretion, choose to receive overtime pay in lieu of
receiving the stipend provided that the Village Code Inspector is a full- time
employee of the village.
   (H)   Village appointed committees. It is hereby acknowledged that the only
village appointed committee currently in existence is the Planning and Zoning
Committee. Any additional committee formed by the Board must be designated as a
village appointed committee for this section to be applicable to its Chair and
members.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-5, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-10 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-15) (2009 Code, §
1-3-1) (Ord. 02-10, passed 10-15-2002; Ord. 07-04, passed 5-14-2007; Ord. 16-
20, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 16-21, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 16-22, passed 10-11-
2016; Ord. 16-23, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 16-24, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 17-40,
passed 11-13-2017 ; Ord. 20-18, passed 9-14-2020 )
Editor’s note:
   The salaries of elected officials who hold elective office for a definite
term shall neither be increased nor diminished during that term and shall be
fixed at least 180 days before the beginning of the terms of the officers whose
compensation is to be filed.
   The ordinance fixing compensation for members of the corporate authorities
shall specify whether those members are to be compensated (i) at an annual
rate; or (ii) for each meeting of the corporate authorities actually attended
if public notice of the meeting was given.
ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL LEAGUE RISK
§ 30.45 PARTICIPATION.
   The Village Board of Trustees does hereby authorize and approve membership
in the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association and directs the
President and Clerk to execute an intergovernmental cooperation contract with
the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association for membership for a
period of one year beginning the date the Association commences providing risk
coverage to its members and each year thereafter unless this ordinance is
repealed.
(2009 Code, § 1-4-1)
§ 30.46 CONTRIBUTION.
   Each member hereby agrees to contribute to the Association a sum of money to
be determined by the Association at the time of application based on the needs
of the Association and the loss experience of the member, which sum shall
constitute the cost of the member’s first year contribution for membership in
the Association. Membership contributions for second and subsequent years shall
be calculated in accordance with the loss experience of the village, and the
needs of the Association including total losses and expenditures of the Self-
Insured Retention Fund of the Association.
(2009 Code, § 1-4-2)
CHAPTER 31: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Composition and general powers
   
31.02   Regular meetings
   
31.03   Special meetings
   
31.04   Vacancy
   
31.05   Committees
   
31.06   Special committees
   
31.07   Quorum
   
31.08   Inauguration of municipal officers
   
31.09   Administrative functions
Rules of Procedure
   
31.20   Rules of procedure
   
31.21   Agenda
Ordinances
   
31.35   Ordinances
   
31.36   Reconsideration; passing over veto
   
31.37   No vote to be reconsidered at special meeting
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 COMPOSITION AND GENERAL POWERS.
   The Village Board shall consist of six Trustees, elected in conformity with
this code and state laws governing elections in villages and shall have such
powers as are granted by 65 ILCS, as amended. The term of office shall be for
four years or until their successors are elected and have qualified.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-5 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50(d)) (2009 Code, § 1-2-1)
§ 31.02 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The regular stated meetings of the Village Board shall be held in the
Village Hall Building on the second Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. When the
meeting date falls upon a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the
second Tuesday at the same hour and place, unless otherwise designated.
Adjourned and reconvened meetings may be held at such times as may be
determined by the Trustees. (65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25 and 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.)
(2009 Code, § 1-2-2) (Ord. 13-21, passed 12-9-2013)
§ 31.03 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the Village Board may be called by the President or any
three Trustees by giving at least 48 hours’ notice thereof by emailing to them
personally of the time of such meeting to the Trustees. Said notices and agenda
shall specify the purpose of said special meeting and the business to be taken
up at that time and place. Such notice shall be posted at the Village Hall and
on the village website.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25, 5 ILCS 120/2.02 and 5 ILCS 120/2.03) (2009 Code, § 1-2-3)
§ 31.04 VACANCY.
   When a vacancy occurs, if more than 28 months remain in the term and the
vacancy occurs not less than 130 days before the general municipal election,
next scheduled under the general election law, the office shall be filled for
the remainder of the term at that general municipal election. During the period
from the time that the vacancy occurs until the next election of Trustees, the
President shall appoint a qualified person to the office subject to the advice
and consent of the Village Board.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50(c)) (2009 Code, § 1-2-4)
§ 31.05 COMMITTEES.
   The following standing committees of the Village Board are hereby
established, to-wit:
   (A)   Committee of the Whole.
      (1)   Village committee business shall be handled during the the
Committee of the Whole meeting. Such meeting shall take place at 7:00 p.m. on
the fourth Monday of each month. Additional committees, including ad hoc
committees, may be established by the Village Board which shall in such case
operate under the provisions of this Chapter and/or the procedures of the
committee enacting ordinance.
      (2)   All powers, duties and functions previously committed to some
standing committee in this code, by other ordinance or by custom, are
henceforth committed to the Committee of the Whole.
      (3)   The Village Clerk. Deputy Clerk, or staff shall attend all
committee meetings and shall keep a record of all proceedings. The Village
Clerk, Deputy Clerk, or staff shall prepare the minutes of each committee
meeting. A copy of the minutes shall be available at the next committee
meeting. The Committee of the Whole shall review the minutes, may amend the
minutes and shall approve the minutes.
   (B)   Additional committees shall be appointed annually by the President
with the advice and consent of the Village Board. In addition the President
shall appoint the Chairperson of each committee. The following additional
committees are hereby created:
      (1)   Sparks in the Park;
      (2)   Arboretum; and
      (3)   Community Room.
   (C)   The President shall be ex officio member of each and every standing
committee.
   (D)   So far as is practicable, reports of committees shall be in writing.
   (E)   As provided by law, any report of a committee of the Board shall be
deferred for final action thereon to the next regular meeting of the same after
the report is made, upon the request of any two Trustees present.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-35)
   (F)   Each standing committee of the Village Board shall exercise a general
supervision over the affairs of the department of municipal government with
which it is connected; shall ascertain the condition and needs of said
department; shall, from time to time, report the same to the President and
Village Board so that a full understanding thereof may be had, and generally,
shall do all acts necessary to promote the efficiency of the department.
   (G)   All committee meetings are subject to the Open Meeting Act
requirements and minutes shall be taken.
(5 ILCS 120/1 and 5 ILCS 120/2.06)
(2009 Code, § 1-2-5) (Ord. 17-31, passed 8-14-2017; Ord. 21-12, passed 5-10-
2021; Ord. 21-22, passed 9-13-2021)
§ 31.06 SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
   Special committees may be appointed by the President, subject to the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees, as may be needed from time to time.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-6)
§ 31.07 QUORUM.
   At all meetings of the Village Board, a majority of the corporate
authorities shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and if
no such quorum attends such meeting of the Board, the Trustees may adjourn from
day to day until a quorum is present; and shall have power to compel the
attendance of absent members, except when such members are physically unable to
attend such meetings.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-20) (2009 Code, § 1-2-7)
Editor’s note:
   When the Board has a President and six Trustees, a quorum is four, which may
consist of the President and three Trustees, or four Trustees.
§ 31.08 INAUGURATION OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS.
   (A)   The date of inauguration of the municipal officers of the village,
other than those elected at a special election, shall be the first regular or
special meeting of the village in the month of May, following the election of
the municipal officers.
   (B)   For those municipal officers elected at any special election, such
officers shall be inaugurated at the first regular or special meeting following
the proclamation of results at such special election.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-15) (2009 Code, § 1-2-8) (Ord. 97-5, passed 3-10-1997)
§ 31.09 ADMINISTRATIVE FUNCTIONS.
   (A)   The functions of the village shall be divided in the following areas
for purposes of management, planning, budgeting, personnel, expenditures and
reporting to the Village Board of Trustees:
      (1)   Personnel and Finance;
      (2)   Streets;
      (3)   Economic Development;
      (4)   Parks;
      (5)   Water and Sewer.
   (B)   One Trustee shall be assigned to each of those areas and the President
shall make those appointments during the month of May in odd numbered years
following the April municipal election, in each case subject to confirmation by
the Village Board of Trustees.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-9)
RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 31.20 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations
and meetings of the Village Board.
   (A)   Order of business.
      (1)   The order of business shall be as follows:
         (a)   Call to order by presiding officer;
         (b)   Roll call;
         (c)   The reading of the journal of the proceedings of the last
preceding meeting or meetings, and correction and approval of the same, unless
dispensed with by the Board of Trustees and correction of the journal of the
proceedings of previous meetings;
         (d)   Reports and communications from the President and other village
officers;
         (e)   Visitors;
         (f)   Reports of standing committees;
         (g)   Reports of special committees;
         (h)   Presentation of communications, petitions, resolutions, orders
and ordinances by the Board of Trustees;
         (i)   Unfinished business; and
         (j)   Miscellaneous business.
      (2)   All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided
by the Chair without debate, subject to appeal.
   (B)   Duties of presiding officer. The presiding officer shall preserve
order and decorum and may speak to points of order in preference to other
Trustees, and shall decide all question of order, subject to appeal.
   (C)   Duties of members.
      (1)   While the presiding officer is putting the question, no member
shall walk across or out of the Board Chamber.
      (2)   Every member, prior to his or her speaking, making a motion or
seconding the same shall not proceed with his or her remarks until recognized
and named by the Chair. He or she shall confine himself or herself to the
question under debate, avoiding personalities and refraining from impugning the
motives of any other Trustee’s argument or vote.
   (D)   Visitors. All public comment shall be governed by §§
33.35 through
33.41 of ths code of ordinances. No person other than a member of the Board of
Trustees shall address that body on the same question unless such person has
been recognized by the presiding officer.
   (E)   Presentation of new business. When a Trustee wishes to present a
communication, petition, order, resolution, ordinance or other original matter,
the member shall read such matter when reached in its proper order.
   (F)   Debate.
      (1)   No Trustee shall speak more than once on the same question, except
by consent of the presiding officer or unless three-fourths of the corporate
authorities agree that one’s right to debate should be limited to speak only
once and then not until every other Trustee desiring to speak shall have had an
opportunity to do so; provided, however, that the proponent of the matter under
consideration, as the case may be, shall have the right to open and close
debate.
      (2)   The Village Board, by motion, may limit debate. The presiding
officer shall have the right to participate in debate.
      (3)   While a member is speaking, no Trustee shall hold any private
discussion, nor pass between the speaker and the Chair.
   (G)   Call of Trustees to order. A Trustee, when called to order by the
Chair, shall thereupon discontinue speaking and take his or her seat and the
order or ruling of the Chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to
the right to appeal.
   (H)   Appeals from decision of the Chair.
      (1)   Any Trustee may appeal to the Board from a ruling of the Chair, and
if the appeal is seconded, the Trustee making the appeal may briefly state his
or her reason for the same, and the Chair may briefly explain his or her
ruling; but there shall be no debate on the appeal and no other person shall
participate in the discussion. The presiding officer shall have the right to
participate in debate.
      (2)   The Chair shall then put the question, “Shall the decision of the
Chair be sustained?”. If a majority of the Trustees present vote “No”, the
decision of the Chair shall be overruled; otherwise, it shall be sustained.
   (I)   Question of personal privilege. The right of a member to address the
Board on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which
his or her integrity, character or motives are assailed, questioned or
impugned.
   (J)   Voting. Every other member who shall be present when a question is
stated from the Chair shall vote thereon, unless he or she is personally
interested in the question, in which case, he or she shall take whatever steps
are necessary to ensure that his or her vote is not taken.
   (K)   Special order of business. Any matter before the Village Board may be
set down as a special order of business at a time certain if two-thirds of the
Trustees present vote in the affirmative, but not otherwise.
   (L)   Seconding of motions required; written motions. No motion shall be put
or debated in the meeting or in committee unless it be seconded. When a motion
is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before debate, and
every motion in the Board, except motions of procedure, shall be reduced to
writing if required by a member, and the proposer of the motion shall be
entitled to the floor.
   (M)   Division of questions. If any question under consideration contains
several distinct propositions, the Trustees, by a majority vote of the Trustees
present, may divide such question.
   (N)   Record of motions. In all cases where a resolution or motion is
entered in the journal, the name of the Trustee moving the same shall be
entered also.
   (O)   Announcement and changes of vote. The result of all votes by yeas and
nays shall not be announced by the Clerk, but shall be handed by him or her to
the Chairperson for announcement, and no vote shall be changed after the tally
list has passed from the hands of the Clerk.
   (P)   Precedence of motions. When a question is under debate, the following
motions shall be in order and shall have precedence over each other in order,
as listed:
      (1)   To adjourn to a day certain;
      (2)   To adjourn;
      (3)   To take a recess;
      (4)   To lay on the table;
      (5)   The previous question;
      (6)   To refer;
      (7)   To amend;
      (8)   To defer or postpone to a time certain;
      (9)   To defer or postpone (without reference to time); and
      (10)   To defer or postpone indefinitely. Divisions (P)(2), (P)(4), and
(P)(5) above to be decided without debate.
   (Q)   Motions to adjourn.
      (1)   A motion to adjourn the Village Board shall always be in order,
except:
         (a)   When a Trustee is in possession of the floor;
         (b)   While the yeas and nays are being called;
         (c)   When the members are voting;
         (d)   When adjournment was the last preceding motion; and
         (e)   When it has been decided that the previous question shall be
taken.
      (2)   A motion simply to adjourn shall not be subject to amendment or
debate, but a motion to adjourn to a time certain shall be.
      (3)   The Village Board may, at any time, adjourn over one or more
regular meetings on a vote of a majority of all the Trustees authorized by law
to be elected.
   (R)   Previous question. When the previous question is moved on the main
question and seconded, it shall be put on this form: “Shall the main question
now be put?”. If such motion be carried, all further amendments and all further
motions and debate shall be excluded, and the question put without delay upon
the pending amendment in proper order and then upon the main question.
   (S)   Motions to lay on the table and to take from the table.
      (1)   A motion simply to lay the question on the table shall not be
debatable, but a motion to lay on the table and publish, or with any other
condition shall be subject to amendment and debate.
      (2)   A motion to take any motion or other proposition from the table may
be proposed at the same meeting at which such motion or proposition was laid
upon the table, provided two-thirds of the Trustees vote therefor.
      (3)   A motion to lay any particular motion or proposition on the table
shall apply to that motion or proposition only. An amendment to the main
question or other pending question may be laid on the table and neither the
main question nor such other pending question shall be affected thereby.
   (T)   Indefinite postponement; motion to defer or postpone without any
reference to time.
      (1)   When consideration of a motion or other proposition is postponed
indefinitely, it shall not be again taken up at the same meeting.
      (2)   A motion to postpone indefinitely shall not open the main question
to debate.
      (3)   A motion to defer or postpone without any reference to time shall
not be construed as a motion to postpone indefinitely, but shall be considered
to be of the same general nature and to possess the same general attributes so
far as applicable under these rules, as a motion to postpone indefinitely or to
a time certain.
   (U)   Motion to refer. A motion to refer to a standing committee shall take
precedence over a similar motion to refer to a special committee.
   (V)   Motion to amend.
      (1)   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend
an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.
      (2)   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order;
but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.
      (3)   On an amendment to “Strike Out and Insert”, the paragraph to be
amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be
stricken out, then those to be inserted, and finally, the paragraph as it will
stand if so amended shall be read.
      (4)   An amendment to the main question or other pending questions may be
referred to a committee and neither the main question nor such other pending
question shall be affected thereby.
   (W)   Filling of blanks. When a blank is to be filled and different sums or
times proposed, the question shall be taken first on the least sum or the
longest time.
   (X)   Motion to substitute. A substitute for any original proposition under
debate or for any pending amendment or such proposition may be entertained
notwithstanding that at such time, further amendment is admissible; and if
accepted by the Trustees by a vote shall entirely supersede such original
proposition or amendment, as the case may be, and cut off all amendments
appertaining thereto.
   (Y)   Reconsideration.
      (1)   (a)   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the
same meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter.
         (b)   A motion for reconsideration having been once made and decided
in the negative shall not be renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be
reconsidered.
      (2)   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by Trustees who
voted on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless
otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that where a motion has received
a majority vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the ground
that a greater number of affirmative votes is required by statute for the
passage or adoption of such motion, then in such case, a motion to reconsider
may be made and seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on such
question to be reconsidered.
   (Z)   Adoption of Robert’s Rules of Order Revised. The rules of
parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published edition of Robert’s
Rules of Order Revised shall govern the Board in all cases to which they are
applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the special rules of the
Board.
   (AA)   Temporary suspension of rules; amendment of rules. These rules may be
temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds of the corporate authorities
entitled by law to be elected and shall not be repealed, altered or amended,
unless by concurrence of two-thirds of all the corporate authorities entitled
by law to be elected.
   (BB)   Censure of Trustees; expulsion of Trustees. Any Trustee acting or
appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner, or who uses opprobrious, obscene and
insulting language to or about any member of the Board, or who does not obey
the order of the Chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a majority vote of the
members present, or expelled by a two-thirds vote of all Trustees elected.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-15)
(2009 Code, § 1-2-11) (Ord. 17-22, passed 4-10-2017)
§ 31.21 AGENDA.
   (A)   An itemized agenda, along with all necessary supporting documentation
shall be furnished to each member of the Village Board no later than 48 hours
prior to the regular Village Board meeting.
   (B)   In the case of matters of emergency which could not have been
reasonably foreseen in sufficient time to comply with this section, a revised
agenda shall be furnished to each member of the Village Board prior to the
opening of the Board meeting.
(5 ILCS 120/2.02) (2009 Code, § 1-2-12)
ORDINANCES
§ 31.35 ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Attorney. It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to prepare such
ordinances as may be required by the Village Board.
   (B)   Introduced. When a proposed ordinance is introduced, it may be read
one time by title only and referred to the proper committee unless the Board of
Trustees shall otherwise specifically direct.
   (C)   Vote required; yeas and nays record.
      (1)   The passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose, and of any
resolution or motion:
         (a)   To create any liability against a village; or
         (b)   For the expenditure or appropriation of its money, shall require
the concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office on the Village
Board, including the President, unless otherwise expressly provided by the code
or any other act governing the passage of any ordinance, resolution or motion;
provided that, where the Board consists of an odd number of Trustees, the vote
of the majority of the Trustees shall be sufficient to pass an ordinance.
      (2)   The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage
of the designated ordinances, resolutions or motions and recorded in the
journal of the Village Board. In addition, the corporate authorities at any
meeting may by unanimous consent to take a single vote by yeas or nays on the
several questions of the passage on any two or more of the designated
ordinances, orders, resolutions or motions placed together for voting purposes
in a single group. The single vote shall be entered separately in the journal
under the designation “omnibus vote”, and in such event the Clerk may enter the
words “omnibus vote” or “consent agenda” in the journal in each case in lieu of
entering names of the members of Village Board voting “yea” and of those voting
“nay” on the passage of each of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions
and motions included in such omnibus group or consent agenda. The taking of
such single or omnibus vote and such entries of the words “omnibus vote” or
“consent agenda” in the journal shall be a sufficient compliance with the
requirements of this section to all intents and purposes and with like effect
as if the vote in each case had been separately by yeas and nays on the
question of the passage of each ordinance, order, resolution and motion
included in such omnibus group, and separately recorded in the journal.
Likewise, the yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of
any other resolution or motion at the request of any Trustee and shall be
recorded in the journal.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40)
   (D)   Ordinances; approval; veto.
      (1)   All resolutions and motions:
         (a)   Which create any liability against the village;
         (b)   That provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money;
or
         (c)   To sell any village property, and all ordinances, passed by the
Village Board shall be deposited with the Village Clerk.
      (2)   If the President approves an ordinance or resolution, the President
shall sign it. Those ordinances, resolutions and motions which the President
disapproves shall be returned to the Village Board, with the President’s
written objections, at the next regular meeting of the Village Board occurring
not less than five days after their passage. The President may disapprove of
any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution or motion making
an appropriation, and, if so, the remainder shall be effective. However, the
President may disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution or motion making
an appropriation. If the President fails to return any ordinance or any
specified resolution or motion with his or her written objections, within the
designated time, it shall become effective despite the absence of the
President’s signature.
(65 ILCS 5/3.140-45) (2009 Code, § 1-2-14)
§ 31.36 RECONSIDERATION; PASSING OVER VETO.
   Every resolution and motion, specified in §
31.35 and every ordinance, that is returned to the Village Board by the
President, shall be reconsidered by the Village Board at the next regular
meeting following the regular meeting at which the Village Board receives the
President’s written objection. If, after reconsideration, two-thirds of all the
Trustees then holding office on the Village Board agree at that regular meeting
to pass an ordinance, resolution or motion, notwithstanding the President’s
refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote on the question of
passage over the President’s veto shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be
recorded in the journal.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-50) (2009 Code, § 1-2-15)
§ 31.37 NO VOTE TO BE RECONSIDERED AT SPECIAL MEETING.
   No vote of the Village Board shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special
meeting unless there are present at the special meeting at least as many
Village Trustees as were present when the vote was taken.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-55) (2009 Code, § 1-2-16)
CHAPTER 32: VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Section
President
   
32.001   Election
   
32.002   President pro tem; temporary Chairperson
   
32.003   Vacancy
   
32.004   Chief executive officer
   
32.005   President’s signature
   
32.006   Appointment of officers
   
32.007   Supervise conduct of officers; removal of officers
   
32.008   Designation of officers’ duties
   
32.009   Formal occasions
   
32.010   General duties
   
32.011   Business License Commissioner
   
32.012   Local Liquor Commissioner
   
32.013   Health Commissioner
   
32.014   Deciding vote; President
   
32.015   Spending authority of up to $20,000
Village Clerk
   
32.030   Elected
   
32.031   Vacancy
   
32.032   Publication of ordinances; Board minutes; records
   
32.033   Delivery of papers to officers
   
32.034   Preparation of documents, commissions and licenses
   
32.035   Report of licenses
   
32.036   Delivery of licenses
   
32.037   Administration of oaths
   
32.038   Outstanding bonds
   
32.039   Reports
   
32.040   Successor
   
32.041   Payments
   
32.042   Notification to persons appointed to office
   
32.043   Other duties
   
32.044   Deputy Clerk
Village Treasurer
   
32.055   Personnel and Finance Committee
   
32.056   Treasurer appointed; vacancy
   
32.057   Money; warrants; accounts; payments
   
32.058   Warrant register
   
32.059   Personal use of funds
   
32.060   Bond
   
32.061   Special assessments
   
32.062   Bookkeeping
   
32.063   Statements
   
32.064   Report delinquent officers
   
32.065   Year-end report
   
32.066   Submit appropriation to Village Board
   
32.067   Deposit of funds
Village Attorney
   
32.080   Appointment of attorney
   
32.081   Duties
   
32.082   Prosecutor’s fee
Village Engineer
   
32.095   Appointment
   
32.096   Duties; salary
Village Manager
   
32.110   Position established
   
32.111   Reports
   
32.112   Summary of duties
   
32.113   Specific duties
PRESIDENT
§ 32.001 ELECTION.
   The President shall be elected for a four-year term and shall serve until a
successor is elected and has qualified.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-15) (2009 Code, § 1-2-40)
§ 32.002 PRESIDENT PRO TEM; TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON.
   (A)   If the President is temporarily absent because of an incapacity to
perform official duties, but the incapacity does not create a vacancy in the
office, the corporate authorities shall elect one of their members to act as
President pro tem. The President pro tem, during this absence or disability,
shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the President
but shall not be entitled to vote both as President pro tem and as a Trustee.
   (B)   In the absence of the President, or President pro tem, the corporate
authorities may elect one of their members to act as a temporary Chairperson.
The temporary Chairperson shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and
a right to vote only in the capacity as Trustee on any ordinance, resolution or
motion.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35) (2009 Code, § 1-2-41)
§ 32.003 VACANCY.
   If a vacancy occurs in the office of the President and there remains an
unexpired portion of the term of at least 28 months and the vacancy occurs at
least 130 days before the general municipal election next scheduled under the
general election law, the vacancy shall be filled at that general municipal
election. The Village Board shall elect one of its members as “Acting
President” who shall perform the duties and shall possess all the rights and
powers of the President until a successor to fill the vacancy has been elected
and has qualified.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50) (2009 Code, § 1-2-42)
§ 32.004 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.
   The President shall be the chief executive officer of the village and shall
see to the enforcement of all laws and ordinances. The President shall preside
over the meetings of the Board of Trustees and perform such duties as may be
required of him or her by statute or law. The President shall have supervision
over all of the executive officers and village employees; provided, however,
his or her control is subject to the power of the Village Board to prescribe
the duties of various officers and employees. The President shall have the
power and authority at any reasonable time to inspect all books, papers and
records pertaining to village affairs and kept by any officer of the village.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-10 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-20) (2009 Code, § 1-2-43)
§ 32.005 PRESIDENT’S SIGNATURE.
   (A)   The President shall sign all village warrants, commissions, permits
and licenses granted by authority of the Village Board, except as otherwise
provided, and such other acts and deeds as law or ordinance may require his or
her official signature.
   (B)   (1)   The President may designate another to affix his or her
signature to any written instrument that requires the President’s signature.
      (2)   The President must send written notice of this designation to the
Village Board stating:
         (a)   The name of the person whom he or she has selected; and
         (b)   What instrument the person will have authority to sign.
   (C)   A written signature of the President executed by the person so
designated with the signature underneath the signature of the person so
designated shall be attached to the notice. The notice with the signature
attached shall be recorded in the journal of the Village Board and then filed
with the Village Clerk. When the signature of the President is placed on a
written instrument at the direction of the President in the specified manner,
the instrument, in all respects, shall be as binding on the village as if
signed by the President in person.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-30) (2009 Code, § 1-2-44)
§ 32.006 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Appointed. At the first annual meeting in May, the President shall
appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Village Board, all officers
of the village whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for, and
said officers shall hold their offices for the ensuing month or year, and until
their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Any vacancy occurring
in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner. The President shall
issue a commission or certificate of appointment to all persons appointed to
office in the municipality.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5)
   (B)   Filling vacancies. The President shall appoint, by and with the advice
and consent of the Village Board, all officers of the village whose appointment
will not otherwise be provided for by law; and whenever a vacancy shall occur
in any office, which by law or ordinance the President is empowered and
required to fill, the President shall, at the next regular meeting of the
Village Board, communicate to it the name of the appointee to such office and
pending the concurrence of the Village Board in such appointment, the President
may designate some suitable person to discharge the functions of such office.
(50 ILCS 105/2) (2009 Code, § 1-2-45)
§ 32.007 SUPERVISE CONDUCT OF OFFICERS; REMOVAL OF OFFICERS.
   The President shall supervise the conduct of all officers of the village and
see that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties of their
respective offices. Except where otherwise provided by statute, the President
may remove any officer appointed by the President under this code, on any
written charge, whenever the President is of the opinion that the interests of
the municipality demand removal. The President shall report the reasons for the
removal to the corporate authorities at a meeting to be held not less than five
days nor more than ten days after the removal. If the President fails or
refuses to report to the corporate authorities the reasons for the removal, or
if the corporate authorities by a two-thirds vote of all members authorized by
law to be elected disapprove of the removal, the officer thereupon shall be
restored to the office from which the officer was removed. The vote shall be by
yeas and nays, which shall be entered upon the journal of the corporate
authorities. Upon restoration, the officer shall give a new bond and take a new
oath of office. No officer shall be removed a second time for the same offense.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-10) (2009 Code, § 1-2-46)
§ 32.008 DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS’ DUTIES.
   Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any
appointed officer of the village, this dispute shall be settled by the
President, after consultation with the Village Attorney; and the President
shall have the power to delegate to any appointive officer, any duty which is
to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that
duty.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-47)
§ 32.009 FORMAL OCCASIONS.
   The President shall act for and on behalf of the village on formal occasions
and receptions, but in the absence or inability to attend any such function,
the President may select any other village officer to so act.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-48)
§ 32.010 GENERAL DUTIES.
   (A)   The President shall perform all the duties which are prescribed by law
and shall take care that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed.
   (B)   The President from time to time, may and annually shall give the
Village Board information relative to the affairs of the village, and may
recommend for their consideration such measures as he or she believes
expedient.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5) (2009 Code, § 1-2-49)
§ 32.011 BUSINESS LICENSE COMMISSIONER.
   The President is hereby designated as License Commissioner to issue and
revoke any and all business licenses as prescribed by law, with the advice and
consent of the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-50)
§ 32.012 LOCAL LIQUOR COMMISSIONER.
   The President is hereby designated as Local Liquor Commissioner with all the
powers to license and/or revoke any village liquor license according to state
and village laws.
(235 ILCS 5/4-2) (2009 Code, § 1-2-51)
§ 32.013 HEALTH COMMISSIONER.
   The President is hereby declared to be Health Commissioner with all powers
to abate and remove all nuisances or health hazards within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the village authority as prescribed by law.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-52)
§ 32.014 DECIDING VOTE; PRESIDENT.
   (A)   The President shall preside at all meetings of the Village Board.
   (B)   The President shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or motion,
except:
      (1)   Where the vote of the Trustees has resulted in a tie;
      (2)   Where one-half of the Trustees elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no tie; or
      (3)   Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities
is required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes to adopt an ordinance, resolution
or motion.
   (C)   (1)   In each instance specified, the President shall vote.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall deprive an Acting President or
President pro tem from voting in his or her capacity as Trustee, but he or she
shall not be entitled to another vote in his or her capacity as Acting
President or President pro tem.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-5) (2009 Code, § 1-2-53)
§ 32.015 SPENDING AUTHORITY OF UP TO $20,000.
   The President is hereby authorized to expend, at his or her discretion, on
programs and/or projects previously approved by the Board of Trustees, up to
$20,000.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-54) (Ord. 15-06, passed 6-8-2015)
VILLAGE CLERK
§ 32.030 ELECTED.
   The Village Clerk shall be elected at the same election as the President for
a four-year term and shall serve until a successor is elected and has
qualified.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-90) (2009 Code, § 1-2-56)
§ 32.031 VACANCY.
   Whenever a vacancy in the office of Village Clerk and more than 28 months
remain in the term and the vacancy occurs not less than 130 days before the
general municipal election, next scheduled under the general election law, the
office shall be filled for the remainder of the term at that general municipal
election. During the period from the time that the vacancy occurs until the
next election of Trustees, the President shall appoint a qualified person to
the office subject to the advice and consent of the Village Board.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50(c)) (2009 Code, § 1-2-57)
§ 32.032 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES; BOARD MINUTES; RECORDS.
   (A)   Ordinances. The Village Clerk shall cause all ordinances passed by the
Village Board and approved by the President, imposing any fine, penalty,
imprisonment or forfeiture, or making any appropriation to be published or
printed in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of the corporate
authorities, or be published at least once within 30 days after passage, in one
or more newspapers published in the village.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-5)
   (B)   Minutes; records.
      (1)   Open meetings. The Village Clerk shall attend all meetings of the
Village Board and shall keep in a suitable book to be styled “The Journal of
the Village Board”, a full and faithful record of its proceedings. The Village
Clerk shall record and properly index in a book kept for that purpose, all
ordinances passed by the Village Board, and at the foot of the record of each
ordinance so recorded, the Clerk shall make a memorandum of the date of the
passage, when published and a memorandum of the publication of such ordinance.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90)
      (2)   Closed meetings. The Clerk shall prepare and preserve the minutes
of closed meetings according to the provisions of the Closed Meetings Act. At
least twice a year, corporate authorities shall meet to review minutes of all
closed sessions and make a public statement as to whether there is still a need
to maintain such matters in confidence or whether minutes or portions of
minutes from closed meetings no longer require confidential treatment and are
available for public inspection.
(5 ILCS 120/2.06(c))
   (C)   Bonds. The Clerk shall also record in proper books for the purpose,
all official bonds and note upon each bond so recorded when the same was
entered of record and the book and pages where recorded.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-110)
   (D)   Issue notices. The Clerk shall issue and cause to be served upon all
Trustees, notices of all special meetings of the Village Board; also notices to
the members of the different committees of that body and all persons whose
attendance may be required before any such committee, when so directed by the
Chairperson thereof.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-4, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-5 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90)
(2009 Code, § 1-2-58)
§ 32.033 DELIVERY OF PAPERS TO OFFICERS.
   The Clerk shall deliver to the several committees of the Village Board and
to the officers of this village, all petitions, communications, reports and
resolutions, orders, claims and other papers referred to those committees or
officers by the Board on demand therefor. The Clerk shall also, without delay,
deliver to the President, all ordinances or resolutions, orders and claims in
his or her charge which may require to be approved or otherwise acted upon by
the President.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90) (2009 Code, § 1-2-59)
§ 32.034 PREPARATION OF DOCUMENTS, COMMISSIONS AND LICENSES.
   The Clerk shall prepare all commissions, licenses, permits and other
official documents required to be issued by him or her under this Code and
shall attest the same with the corporate seal, and the Clerk shall, in like
manner, attest all deeds for the sale of real estate owned and conveyed by this
village.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-60)
§ 32.035 REPORT OF LICENSES.
   The Clerk shall report to the Village Board at its regular meeting each
month and more often if the Board so requires the data contained in the license
register with respect to licenses issued during the previous month.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-61)
§ 32.036 DELIVERY OF LICENSES.
   In all cases where the village requires a license to be obtained for the
purpose of engaging in or carrying on any business or occupation, and the
licensee is required to obtain plates, tags or stickers from the Clerk, it
shall be the duty of the Clerk to deliver such plates, tags or stickers to the
person paying the license fee.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-62)
§ 32.037 ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS.
   The Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths or affirmations for all
lawful purposes.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-20) (2009 Code, § 1-2-63)
§ 32.038 OUTSTANDING BONDS.
   The Clerk shall keep in his or her office in a book or books kept expressly
for that purpose a correct list of all the outstanding bonds of the village,
showing the number and amount of each, for and to whom the bonds are issued;
and when the village bonds are issued, or purchased, or paid, or cancelled, the
book or books shall show that fact; (and in the annual report, the Clerk shall
describe particularly the bonds sold during the year and the terms of sale with
each and every item of expense thereof).
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-110) (2009 Code, § 1-2-64)
§ 32.039 REPORTS.
   The Clerk shall, on or before the regular meeting in each month, make out
and submit to the Village Board a statement or report in writing of all the
monies received and warrants drawn during the preceding month, showing therein
from or what sources and on what account monies were received, and for what
purposes and on what account the warrants were drawn or paid.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-65)
§ 32.040 SUCCESSOR.
   The Village Clerk shall carefully preserve all books, records, papers, maps
and effects of every detail and description belonging to the village or
pertaining to the office, and not in actual use and possession of other village
officers; and upon the expiration of his or her official term, the Clerk shall
deliver all such books, records, papers and effects to the successor in office.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-35) (2009 Code, § 1-2-66)
§ 32.041 PAYMENTS.
   The Clerk shall prepare monthly an itemized list of all monies received and
shall deliver a copy of the same to the Village Treasurer and shall also pay
over to the Treasurer all monies received in the office and take a receipt
therefor.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-67)
§ 32.042 NOTIFICATION TO PERSONS APPOINTED TO OFFICE.
   (A)   Within five days after an appointment is made, the Clerk shall notify
all persons appointed to office of their appointment.
   (B)   The office becomes vacant unless the person appointed qualifies within
ten days after such notice.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-68)
§ 32.043 OTHER DUTIES.
   In addition to the foregoing duties, the Clerk shall perform all such other
duties pertaining to the office as are or may be imposed upon the office by law
or resolution or ordinance of the Village Board.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40) (2009 Code, § 1-2-69)
§ 32.044 DEPUTY CLERK.
   (A)   (1)   The Village Clerk, when authorized by the Village Board, may
appoint the Deputy Clerk who shall have the power and duty to execute all
documents required by any law to be executed by the Clerk and affix the seal of
the village thereto whenever required.
      (2)   In signing any documents, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of
the Village Clerk followed with the word, “By” and the Deputy Clerk’s name and
the words, “Deputy Clerk”.
   (B)   The powers and duties herein described shall be executed by such
Deputy Clerk only in the absence of the Village Clerk from the Village Clerk’s
office in the Village Hall, and only when either written direction has been
given by the Village Clerk to such Deputy Clerk to exercise such power or the
Village Board has determined by resolution that the Village Clerk is
temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such functions.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-10, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-45 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-95) (2009 Code,
§ 1-2-70)
VILLAGE TREASURER
§ 32.055 PERSONNEL AND FINANCE COMMITTEE.
   The standing Committee on Personnel and Finance shall exercise a general
supervision over the affairs of the Finance Department. It shall ascertain the
condition and needs thereof; shall, from time to time, report the same to the
President and Village Board so that a full understanding thereof shall be had
and generally, shall do all the acts necessary to promote the efficiency of the
department.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-73)
§ 32.056 TREASURER APPOINTED; VACANCY.
    The Treasurer shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice
and consent of the Village Board, for the four-year term of the President,
unless sooner removed for cause, and shall serve until a successor is appointed
and has qualified. All vacancies shall be filled in the manner prescribed for
the Village Clerk in §
32.031.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5) (2009 Code, § 1-2-74) (Ord. 21-12, passed 5-10-2021)
§ 32.057 MONEY; WARRANTS; ACCOUNTS; PAYMENTS.
   The Village Treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to this village and
shall pay all warrants signed by two of the following: President; Treasurer; or
the Finance Trustee not otherwise; and shall keep a separate account of each
fund or appropriation and the debits and credits belonging thereto. The
Treasurer shall give to every person paying money into the village treasury a
receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment, and upon what account paid,
and shall file copies of such receipts with the Clerk with the monthly reports.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40) (2009 Code, § 1-2-75)
§ 32.058 WARRANT REGISTER.
   The Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants redeemed and paid,
showing the number, date and amount of each, the fund from which paid, and the
name of the person to whom and when paid; and the Treasurer shall cancel all
warrants as soon as they are redeemed.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-45) (2009 Code, § 1-2-76)
§ 32.059 PERSONAL USE OF FUNDS.
   The Village Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the municipality and
in the Treasurer’s custody separate and distinct from the Treasurer’s own money
and shall not use, either directly or indirectly, the municipality’s monies or
warrants for the personal use and benefit of the Treasurer or of any other
person. Any violation of this provision shall subject the Treasurer to
immediate removal from office by the corporate authorities, who may declare the
Treasurer’s office vacant.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-55) (2009 Code, § 1-2-77)
§ 32.060 BOND.
   The Treasurer shall give bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of
his or her duties and to indemnify the village for any loss due to neglect of
duty or wrongful act on his or her part; and the amount of such bond shall not
be less than 10% of the highest amount of taxes and special assessments
received by the Treasurer during any fiscal year in the preceding five fiscal
years, nor less than one and one-half times the largest amount which the Board
estimates will be in his or her custody at any one time, nor less than three
times the number of residents of the village, as determined by the last Federal
Census. Such bond shall be filed with the Clerk as required by statute.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30) (2009 Code, § 1-2-78)
§ 32.061 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The Treasurer shall collect all payments on special assessments and shall
see to it that the same are properly recorded and credited to the particular
account entitled thereto.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-85) (2009 Code, § 1-2-79)
§ 32.062 BOOKKEEPING.
   The Treasurer shall keep the books and accounts in such a manner as to show
with accuracy, all monies received and disbursed for the village, stating from
whom and on what account received, and to whom and on what account paid out,
and in such a way that the books and accounts may be readily investigated and
understood, and the books and accounts and all files and papers of the office
shall be, at all times, open to examination by the President or the Finance
Committee of the Board.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40) (2009 Code, § 1-2-80)
§ 32.063 STATEMENTS.
   The Treasurer shall report to the corporate authorities at the regular
monthly meeting, a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures
of the municipality as shown by his or her books up to the time of the report.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-45) (2009 Code, § 1-2-81)
§ 32.064 REPORT DELINQUENT OFFICERS.
   It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to report to the Village Clerk any
officer of the village authorized to receive money for the use of the village
who may fail to make a return of the monies received by the Treasurer at the
time required by law or by ordinances of the village.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-82)
§ 32.065 YEAR-END REPORT.
   (A)   Within six months after the end of each fiscal year, the Treasurer
shall prepare and file annually with the Village Clerk an account of monies
received and expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year as
specified in this section.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall show the following in such account:
      (1)   All monies received by the village, indicating the total amounts in
the aggregate received in each account of the village, with a general statement
concerning the source of such receipts; provided, however, for the purposes of
this division (B)(1), the term ACCOUNT shall not be construed to mean each
individual taxpayer, householder, licensee, utility user or such other persons
whose payments to the village are credited to the general account;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) below all monies paid out by
the village where the total amount paid during the fiscal year exceeds $2,500,
giving the name of each person to whom paid, on what account paid, and the
total amount in the aggregate paid to each person from each account;
      (3)   All monies paid out by the village as compensation for personal
services, giving the name of each person to whom paid, on what account paid,
and the total amount in the aggregate paid to each person from each account;
and
      (4)   A summary statement of operations for all funds and account groups
of the village as excerpted from the annual financial report, as filed with the
appropriate state agency of the state.
   (C)   Upon receipt of such account from the Village Treasurer, the Village
Clerk shall publish the account at least once in one or more newspapers
published in the village.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-65) (2009 Code, § 1-2-83)
Editor’s note:
   The Treasurer shall file a copy of the report with the County Treasurer as
provided in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-70.
§ 32.066 SUBMIT APPROPRIATION TO VILLAGE BOARD.
   The Treasurer shall on or before the May 15, and before the annual
appropriations to be made by the Village Board, submit to the Village Board a
report of the estimates as nearly as may be of monies necessary to defray the
expenses of the corporation during the current fiscal year. The Treasurer
shall, in said report, classify the different objects and branches of
expenditures, giving as nearly as may be the amount required for each; and for
the purpose of making such a report, the Treasurer is hereby authorized to
require of all officers their statement of the condition and expenses of their
respective offices or departments with any proposed improvements, and the
probable expense thereof, all contracts made and unfinished and the amount of
any and all unexpended appropriations of the preceding year.
The Treasurer shall, in such report, show the aggregate income of the preceding
fiscal year, from all sources, the amount of liabilities outstanding upon which
interest is to be paid, the bonds and debts payable during the year, when due
and when payable; and in such report, shall give such other information to the
Village Board as he or she may deem necessary to the end that the Village Board
may fully understand the money exigencies and demands upon the corporation for
the current year.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-115) (2009 Code, § 1-2-84)
§ 32.067 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Designation by Board. The Treasurer is hereby required to keep all
funds and monies in his or her custody belonging to the village in such places
of deposit as have been designated by division (F) below. When requested by the
Treasurer, the corporate authorities shall designate a bank or banks in which
may be kept the funds and monies of the village in the custody of the
Treasurer. When a bank or savings and loan association has been designated as a
depository, it shall continue as such depository until ten days have elapsed
after a new depository is designated and has qualified by furnishing the
statements of resources and liabilities as required by this section. When a new
depository is designated, the corporate authorities shall notify the sureties
of the Village Treasurer of that fact in writing at least five days before the
transfer of funds. The Treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for
all funds or money that the Treasurer deposits in a designated bank or savings
and loan association while the funds and money are so deposited.
   (B)   Security. The Village Treasurer may require any bank or savings and
loan association to deposit with the Treasurer securities or mortgages that
have a market value at least equal to the amount of the funds or monies of the
municipality deposited with the bank or savings and loan association that
exceeds the insurance limitation provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation.
   (C)   Agreements. The Village Treasurer may enter into agreements of any
definite or indefinite term regarding the deposit, redeposit, investment,
reinvestment or withdrawal of municipal funds.
   (D)   Options.
      (1)   Each Village Treasurer may:
         (1)   Combine monies from more than one fund of a single municipality
for the purpose of investing those funds; and
         (b)   Join with other municipal treasurers or municipalities for the
purpose of investing the municipal funds of which the Treasurer has custody.
      (2)   Joint investments shall be made only in investments authorized by
law for the investment of municipal funds. When monies of more than one fund of
a single municipality or monies of more than one municipality are combined for
investment purposes, the monies combined for that purpose shall be accounted
for separately in all respects and the earnings from investments shall be
separately and individually computed, recorded and credited to the fund or
municipality, as the case may be, for which the investment was acquired.
   (E)   Public funds. No bank or savings and loan association shall receive
public funds as permitted by this section unless it has complied with the
requirements established by § 6 of the Public Funds Investment Act.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-50 and 30 ILCS 235/6)
   (F)   Depositories. The following bank(s) are herewith designated as places
of deposit where the Treasurer of the village is required to keep all funds and
monies in his or her custody belonging to this municipality: any bank
designated by the Village Board by ordinance.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-85)
VILLAGE ATTORNEY
§ 32.080 APPOINTMENT OF ATTORNEY.
   The Attorney shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advise and
consent of the Village Board for the four-year term of the President, unless
sooner removed for cause, and until a successor shall have been appointed and
qualified. The Attorney shall have full charge of the law affairs of the
village and shall be known as the Village Attorney, and shall receive
reasonable fees for services rendered when, in his or her judgment, or in the
judgment of the President or Village Board, the same are necessary or are for
the best interests of the village.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5) (2009 Code, § 1-2-88)
§ 32.081 DUTIES.
   (A)   Prosecute for village. The Village Attorney shall prosecute or defend
on behalf of the Village in all cases in which the interests of the corporation
or any officer thereof are involved; and the Village Clerk shall furnish him or
her with certified copies of any ordinance, bond or paper in keeping necessary
to be filed or used in any suit or proceedings.
   (B)   Preparation of ordinances. The Attorney shall, when required, advise
the Village Board or any officer in all matters of law in which the interests
of the corporation are involved, and shall draw such ordinances, bonds, forms
and contracts, or examine and pass upon the same, as may be required by the
President, the Village Board or any committee thereof.
   (C)   Judgments. The Attorney shall direct executions to be issued upon all
judgments recovered in favor of the village, and shall direct their prompt
service. The Attorney shall examine all the bills of the officers of courts,
and of other officers of the law, and shall certify to their correctness and
the liability of the village therefor.
   (D)   Violations of ordinances. The Attorney shall institute and prosecute
an action in every case of violation of a village ordinance when instructed to
do so by the President or the Village Board.
   (E)   Prosecution of suits. The Attorney shall not be required to prosecute
any suit or action arising under the ordinances of the village when, upon
investigation of the same, the Attorney shall become satisfied that the
complaint was instituted maliciously, vexatiously or without just cause; and
shall dismiss or discontinue any such suit or proceeding upon such terms as he
or she may deem just or equitable.
   (F)   Collection of taxes. The Attorney is hereby authorized and instructed
to enforce the collection of any and all taxes and special assessments in the
collection of which the village is interested and to attend all sales of real
or personal property made to enforce the collection of such taxes or special
assessments and to bid thereat on behalf of the village.
    (G)   Commissions. The Village Attorney shall act as the legal advisory for
the utilities systems, for the Planning and Zoning Commission, for the Zoning
Board of Appeals and for all other boards and commissions hereafter established
by the Village Board. The Attorney shall perform all legal services as may be
required for those boards and commissions.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-89)
§ 32.082 PROSECUTOR’S FEE.
   (A)   For each complaint that is prosecuted on behalf of the village to
enforce the provisions of general ordinances of the village and also to enforce
provisions of state statutes, statutes affecting the affairs of the village,
there shall be added as costs to be assessed against the defendant in each case
the sum of $75 to be known as the Village Prosecutor’s fee.
   (B)   Upon said defendant being found guilty of the charges as set up in the
complaint that is filed on behalf of the village in any of the two above named
situations, it shall be the duty of the court before whom such matter is heard
to assess a Village Prosecutor’s fee in the sum of $75, which shall be paid
directly to the Prosecutor by the Clerk of the Circuit Court, and that the fine
or penalty as assessed by the Court for the violation of the complaint shall be
paid to the Village Clerk.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-90)
VILLAGE ENGINEER
§ 32.095 APPOINTMENT.
   With the advice and consent of the Village Board, the President may appoint
an engineer for the village, who shall serve for the term of the President or
for such period not exceeding the term of the President, as may be designated
by the President and Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-94)
§ 32.096 DUTIES; SALARY.
   (A)   The Village Engineer, or consulting engineer designated by the Village
Board to act in this capacity, shall prepare and/or submit technical reviews of
property plats, engineering calculations, construction plans, project cost
estimates, bidding documents, technical specifications, shop drawings and
material certifications for any public work which may be proposed or ordered by
the Village Board. The Village Engineer shall also examine all public works
under his or her charge, as directed by the Village Board, and see that the
property plats, engineering calculations, construction plans, project cost
estimates, bidding documents, technical specifications, shop drawings and
material certifications for the same are properly executed, to the extent
allowed by village ordinance. The Village Engineer shall receive reasonable
compensation for his or her services and the same will be provided for in the
annual appropriation ordinance on an estimated basis.
   (B)   The Village Engineer shall hold paramount the safety, health and
welfare of the public as a part of his or her responsibilities. The Village
Engineer, or consulting engineer designated by the Village Board to act in this
capacity, shall be a licensed professional engineer in the state and maintain
such status throughout his or her appointment.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5) (2009 Code, § 1-2-95)
VILLAGE MANAGER
§ 32.110 POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established the position of Village Manager who shall be
appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Village Board of
Trustees.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-98)
§ 32.111 REPORTS.
   The Manager shall report to the corporate authorities and shall supervise
the Police Chief, Public Works Maintenance Superintendent and Office Manager/
Bookkeeper.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-99)
§ 32.112 SUMMARY OF DUTIES.
   (A)   Under the direction of the President and Board of Trustees, the
Village Manager shall act as the administrative arm of President; assist each
Trustee within that Trustee’s area of responsibility.
   (B)   He or she shall assist the department heads to accomplish the goals
and objectives set forth by the Board of Trustees of the village.
   (C)   This shall be a part-time or full-time position.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-100)
§ 32.113 SPECIFIC DUTIES.
   The Manager shall have the following specific duties:
   (A)   Acts for President and Trustees in daily operations, including
management, public relations, intergovernmental affairs and communications;
   (B)   Supervises department heads; assists department heads in formulating
departmental and personal goals and objectives, and advises department heads in
management concerns;
   (C)   Attends regular and special meetings of Village Board, board
committees, community groups and other governmental agencies when appropriate,
and other meetings as necessary to accomplish goals and objectives of village;
   (D)   In concert with village legal counsel, monitors village compliance
with state and federal laws, local ordinances and precedents. Advises Village
Board and staff in application of sound local government practices, and fair
and equal treatment under municipal law;
   (E)   Advocates for village in relations with other governments, community
groups and individuals;
   (F)   Assists citizens in resolving local issues as appropriate to village
policy and goals;
   (G)   Works with Finance Trustee and Village Treasurer to initiate and lead
annual budget process, and annual village levy formulation; and
   (H)   Manages relationship with Rochester Public Library District in matters
of co-ownership and tenancy of building and grounds; promotes and monitors
ongoing intergovernmental cooperation to continue cost-savings intended by
original coalition.
(2009 Code, § 1-2-101)
CHAPTER 33: VILLAGE MEETINGS
Section
Recording Closed Meetings
   
33.01   Recording closed sessions
   
33.02   Responsibility for recording closed sessions and maintaining recordings
   
33.03   Closed session minutes
   
33.04   Procedure for recording
   
33.05   Back-up equipment/procedure for equipment malfunction
   
33.06   Procedure for review of closed session minutes and recordings
   
33.07   Maintenance and public release of recordings and access to tapes
   
33.08   Procedure for destruction of recordings
Remote Meeting Participation
   
33.20   Statutory authority for participation
   
33.21   Definition of meeting
   
33.22   Amendment of previous terms
   
33.23   Remote participation policy
Public Comment
   
33.35   Public comment
   
33.36   Addressing Village Board
   
33.37   Public comment sheet
   
33.38   Acknowledging speakers
   
33.39   Answers
   
33.40   Behavior
   
33.41   Meetings
   
Appendix A: Governmental unit remote attendance policy
RECORDING CLOSED MEETINGS
§ 33.01 RECORDING CLOSED SESSIONS.
   The village shall keep a verbatim record of all closed or executive session
meetings of the corporate authorities of the village or any subsidiary “public
body” as defined by the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1. The verbatim
record shall be in the form of an audio or video recording as determined by the
corporate authorities.
(5 ILCS 120/2) (2009 Code, § 1-7-1)
§ 33.02 RESPONSIBILITY FOR RECORDING CLOSED SESSIONS AND MAINTAINING
RECORDINGS.
   The Village Clerk or his or her designee shall be responsible for arranging
for the recording of such closed or executive sessions. In the absence of the
Village Clerk or his or her designee, the meeting Chair will arrange for the
audio or video recording of the closed or executive session of the Village
Board. Each subsidiary public body of the village shall designate an individual
who will be responsible for the recording of any and all closed or executive
sessions of the subsidiary body and for providing the Village Clerk with a copy
of such recording. The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall securely
maintain the verbatim recordings of all closed sessions of the corporate
authorities of the village and all subsidiary public bodies of the village.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-2)
§ 33.03 CLOSED SESSION MINUTES.
   In addition to the recordings of the closed and executive session as
addressed in this subchapter, the village will keep minutes of all closed
meetings in accordance with the requirements of the Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS
120/2.06.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-3)
§ 33.04 PROCEDURE FOR RECORDING.
   (A)   At the beginning of each closed session, those present shall identify
themselves by voice for the audio recording.
   (B)   If the meeting is videotaped, those present shall individually appear
on camera and identify themselves by voice at the beginning of the closed
session.
   (C)   The meeting Chair shall also announce the times the closed session
commences and ends at the appropriate points on the recording.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-4)
§ 33.05 BACK-UP EQUIPMENT/PROCEDURE FOR EQUIPMENT MALFUNCTION.
   The village shall maintain sufficient tapes, batteries and equipment for the
village to comply with this subchapter. The Village Clerk or his or her
designee shall periodically check the equipment to confirm that it is
functioning. In the event that anyone present at a closed session determines
that the equipment is not functioning properly, the closed session will be
temporarily suspended to attempt to correct any malfunction. In the event that
an equipment malfunction cannot be corrected immediately, the closed session
will terminate until such time as the closed session may proceed with a
functioning recording device.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-5)
§ 33.06 PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF CLOSED SESSION MINUTES AND RECORDINGS.
   At one meeting at least every six months, the agenda shall include the item:
“Review of the minutes and recordings of all closed sessions that have not yet
been released for public review, and determination of which minutes, if any,
may be released.” Minutes shall be reviewed in closed session and shall not be
released unless the corporate authorities of the village find that it is no
longer necessary to protect the public interest or the privacy of an individual
by keeping them confidential. As to any minutes not released, the corporate
authorities shall find that the “need for confidentiality still exists” as to
those minutes. Minutes of closed sessions shall be kept indefinitely.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-6)
§ 33.07 MAINTENANCE AND PUBLIC RELEASE OF RECORDINGS AND ACCESS TO TAPES.
   (A)   The audio or video tape recordings of closed sessions shall be
maintained for 18 months after the closed session and shall not be released to
the public unless such release is required by a court order or specifically
authorized for release by a vote of the Village Board.
   (B)   Members of the corporate authorities may listen to the closed session
recordings in the presence of the Village Clerk or his or her designee.
   (C)   Copies of such tapes will not be made or provided to anyone unless
specifically authorized by vote of the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-7)
§ 33.08 PROCEDURE FOR DESTRUCTION OF RECORDINGS.
   The Village Clerk or his or her designee is hereby authorized to destroy the
audio and video recordings of those closed sessions for which:
   (A)   The corporate authorities of the village have approved the minutes of
the closed sessions as to accurate content, regardless of whether the minutes
have been released for public review;
   (B)   More than 18 months have elapsed since the date of the closed session;
   (C)   There is no court order requiring the preservation of such recording;
and
   (D)   The corporate authorities of the village have not passed a motion
requiring the preservation of the verbatim recording of that meeting.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-8)
REMOTE MEETING PARTICIPATION
§ 33.20 STATUTORY AUTHORITY FOR PARTICIPATION.
   Pursuant to Public Act 94-1058 which amends the Open Meetings Act in 5 ILCS
120/7, this municipality does hereby establish a policy that permits members of
the corporate body to attend meetings by means other than physical presence.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-11)
§ 33.21 DEFINITION OF MEETING.
   The term MEETING shall mean any gathering, whether in person or by video or
audio conference, telephone calls, electronic means (such as, without
limitation, electronic mail, electronic chat and instant messaging), or other
means of contemporary interactive communication, of a majority of a quorum of
the members of a public body held for the purpose of discussing public business
or such other definition as shall be contained within the state statutes.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-12)
§ 33.22 AMENDMENT OF PREVIOUS TERMS.
   The definition of MEETING set forth in §
33.21 shall supersede and replace any other definition used in any previous or
existing ordinance.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-13)
§ 33.23 REMOTE PARTICIPATION POLICY.
   The village hereby adopts the remote participation policy, as outlined in
Appendix A, that permits a member of the public body to attend and participate
in any meeting of a public body as defined in the Open Meetings Act from a
remote location via telephone, video or internet connection provided that such
attendance and participation is in compliance with the policy and any
applicable laws.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-14)
PUBLIC COMMENT
§ 33.35 PUBLIC COMMENT.
   Public comment shall be listed on each regularly scheduled Village Board
meetings and persons shall be allowed to address the Village Board as set forth
in this section.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-15)
§ 33.36 ADDRESSING VILLAGE BOARD.
   It shall be the policy of the Village Board that any person may address the
Village Board at its regular meetings under the public comment agenda item.
Public comment shall be limited to three minutes per speaker to speak on any
matter pertinent to issues or matters relating to the village. A speaker cannot
give his or her allotted minutes to another speaker to increase that person’s
allotted time. After a reasonable period of time has been devoted to public
comment, but not less than 30 minutes, the public comment section may be closed
upon a motion and second of the Village Board and a majority vote in favor
thereof.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-16)
§ 33.37 PUBLIC COMMENT SHEET.
   Anyone desiring to address the Village Board, must sign the public comment
sheet prior to the start of the meeting. The person must include his or her
name, address and any other desired contact information, although said person
shall not be required to publicly state their address information. If more than
ten individuals desire to make a public comment, the order of speakers shall be
by random draw. If an individual is not able to speak due to the time
limitation, said individual shall be given priority to speak at the next
meeting of the Village Board. Any person who is not able to speak during a
public comment period shall be allowed and encouraged to present their views to
the village in writing.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-17)
§ 33.38 ACKNOWLEDGING SPEAKERS.
   Speakers will be acknowledged by the Chair of the meeting and shall address
the public body, from the designated area in the meeting location and not
approach the public body or staff. Speakers will begin their statement by first
stating their name for the record.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-18)
§ 33.39 ANSWERS.
   Public comment is not intended to require public officials to provide any
answer to the speaker. Discussions between speakers and members of the audience
will not be allowed. In addition, after the speaker has made his or her
statement, he or she shall be seated with no further debate, dialogue or
comment.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-19)
§ 33.40 BEHAVIOR.
   All comments must be civil in nature. Any person who engages in threatening
or disorderly behavior when addressing the Village Board shall be deemed out-
of-order by the presiding officer and their time ceased to address the Village
Board at said meeting.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-20)
§ 33.41 MEETINGS.
   Public comment shall be allowed in a similar manner at all committee
meetings or meetings of subsidiary bodies of the village.
(2009 Code, § 1-7-21) (Ord. 17-22, passed 4-10-2017)
APPENDIX A: GOVERNMENTAL UNIT REMOTE ATTENDANCE POLICY
   (A)   Policy statement. It is the policy of the village that a member of any
group associated with this unit of government which is subject to the
provisions of the Open Meetings Act may attend and participate in any open or
closed meeting of that covered group from a remote location via telephone,
video or internet connection, provided that such attendance and participation
is in compliance with this policy and any other applicable laws.
   (B)   Prerequisites. A member of the covered group of the village shall be
provided the opportunity to attend an open and closed meeting or only one of
such meetings from a remote location if the member meets that following
conditions and a majority of a quorum of the covered body votes to approve the
remote attendance:
      (1)   The member must notify the recording secretary or clerk of the
covered body at least 24 hours before the meeting unless advance notice is
impractical;
      (2)   The member must meet one of three reasons described herein why he
or she is unable to physically attend the meeting, including either:
         (a)   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability;
         (b)   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the village; or
         (c)   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
      (3)   A quorum of the covered body must be physically present.
   (C)   Voting procedure. After roll call, a vote of the covered body shall be
taken, considering the prerequisites set forth in division (B) above, on
whether to allow an off-site board member to participate remotely. All of the
members physically present are permitted to vote on whether remote
participation will be allowed. A vote may be taken to permit remote
participation for a stated series of meetings if the same reason applies in
each case. Otherwise, a vote must be taken to allow each remote participation.
   (D)   Quorum and vote required. A quorum must be established by members
physically present at any meeting before it can be considered whether to allow
a member to participate in the meeting remotely. A vote of a majority of a
quorum shall be necessary to decide the issue. For the meeting to continue
there shall always need to be a quorum physically present.
   (E)   Minutes. The member participating remotely shall be considered an off-
site participant and counted as present by means of video or audio conference,
for that meeting of the members is allowed to participate. The meeting minutes
of the village shall also reflect and state specifically whether each member is
physically present, present by video or present by audio means.
(2009 Code, Ch. 1, Div. 7, Addendum A)
Cross-reference:
   Administrative functions of the Board of Trustees, see §
31.09
CHAPTER 34: VILLAGE ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Planning and Zoning Commission
   
34.001   Established
   
34.002   Membership
   
34.003   Term of office
   
34.004   Procedure
   
34.005   Powers and duties
   
34.006   Land subdivision or re-subdivision and the official map
   
34.007   Improvements
   
34.008   Further purposes
   
34.009   Expenditures
Recreation Advisory Board
   
34.020   Composition
   
34.021   Duties
Citizens Corps Council
   
34.035   Citizens Corps established
   
34.036   Council
   
34.037   Duties and responsibilities
   
34.038   Coordination with EMA
Emergency Management Agency (EMA)
   
34.050   Policy and procedures
   
34.051   Limitations
   
34.052   Definitions
   
34.053   Emergency Management Agency
   
34.054   Emergency Management powers of the President
   
34.055   Financing
   
34.056   Local disaster emergencies
   
34.057   Testing of disaster warning devices
   
34.058   Mutual aid arrangements between political subdivisions
   
34.059   Communications
   
34.060   Immunity
   
34.061   Professions, trades and occupations
   
34.062   Appropriations and levy of tax
   
34.063   Authority to accept services, gifts, grants or loans
   
34.064   Orders, rules and regulations
   
34.065   Utilization of existing agency, facilities and personnel
   
34.066   No private liability
   
34.067   Succession
   
34.068   Compensation
   
34.069   Personnel oath
   
34.070   Emergency termination or reduction of electrical service
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 34.001 ESTABLISHED.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission of the village is hereby established
according to 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4.
(2009 Code, § 4-1-1)
§ 34.002 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of nine members; said
members to be residents of the village, appointed by the President and the
Village Board, on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on the
Commission and subject to the approval of the Village Board. The President
shall, subject to approval of the Village Board, appoint one of the nine
members to be the Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The
appointment of the Chairperson shall be for the remainder of the Chairperson’s
term of office; however, the President shall, subject to approval of the
Village Board, have the authority to end the appointment and appoint a
different member as Chairperson.
(2009 Code, § 4-1-2)
§ 34.003 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The members shall serve for a period of three years. The initial officers
will be appointed as follows: three members appointed to a one-year term; three
members appointed to a two-year term; and three members appointed to a three-
year term. The following year, and each year thereafter, three members shall be
appointed to a three-year term, thus providing staggered terms for the
Commission members. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired
term only. All members of the Commission shall receive a stipend as provided by
the Village Board in the appropriation ordinance.
(2009 Code, § 4-1-3)
§ 34.004 PROCEDURE.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect such officers as it may deem
necessary and adopt rules and regulations of organization and procedure
consistent with the village code and state law. The Commission shall keep
written records of its proceedings. It shall be open at all times for and to
the inspection of the public, and the Commission shall file an annual report
with the President and Village Board, setting forth its transactions and
recommendations.
(2009 Code, § 4-1-4)
§ 34.005 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the Village Board a comprehensive plan for
the present and future development or redevelopment of the village and
contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond
the corporate limits of the village and not included in any other municipality.
Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional
parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official comprehensive plan or
part thereof of the village. Such plan shall be advisory, except as to such
part thereof as has been implemented by ordinances duly enacted by the Village
Board. All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with
the County Recorder of Deeds, and filing of the plan and ordinances with the
Village Clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law. To provide for the
health, safety, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the village and
contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall establish reasonable standards
of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of
areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements as herein
defined and shall establish reasonable requirements governing the location,
width, course and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for
public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage
collection and treatment. The requirements specified herein shall become
regulatory only when adopted by law;
   (B)   To designate land suitable for annexation to the village and the
recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation;
   (C)   To recommend to the Village Board, from time to time, such changes in
the comprehensive plan or any part thereof, as may be deemed necessary;
   (D)   To prepare and recommend to the Village Board, from time to time,
plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance to the
official comprehensive plan;
   (E)   To give aid to the officials of the village charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan or parts
thereof, to further the making of such improvements and generally, to promote
the realization of the official comprehensive plan;
   (F)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding;
   (G)   To cooperate with municipal or regional plan commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local plan program and to assure harmonious
and integrated planning for the area subject to approval of the Village Board;
   (H)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under
authority of an act of the General Assembly of the state, as may be conferred
by the Village Board; and
   (I)   Any such other and further duties as provided for in the village
zoning code including, but not limited to, administration and enforcement of
the zoning code.
(2009 Code, § 4-1-5)
§ 34.006 LAND SUBDIVISION OR RE-SUBDIVISION AND THE OFFICIAL MAP.
   At any time or times before or after the formal adoption of the official
comprehensive plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may be
designated by ordinance, which may consist of the whole area included within
the official comprehensive plan or one or more geographical or functional parts
and may include all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated area within
one and one-half miles from the corporate limits of the village. All
requirements for public hearing, filing notice of adoption with the County
Recorder of Deeds and filing of the plan and ordinances, including the official
map with the Clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law. No map or
plat of any subdivision or re-subdivision presented for record affecting land
within the corporate limits of the village or within contiguous territory which
is not more than one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits shall be
entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision shown thereon
provides for standards of design and standards governing streets, alleys,
public ways, ways for public service facilities, street lights, public grounds,
size of lots to be used for residential purposes, and distribution, sanitary
sewers, and sewage collection and treatment in conformity with the applicable
requirements of the code, including the official map.
(65 ILCS 5/11-12-12) (2009 Code, § 4-1-6)
§ 34.007 IMPROVEMENTS.
   The Village Clerk shall furnish the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
consideration, a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public
improvements of any nature. The Commission may report in relation thereto, if
it deems a report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the Village
Board.
(2009 Code, § 4-1-7)
§ 34.008 FURTHER PURPOSES.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend the boundaries of
districts for land use and shall recommend regulations to the corporate
authorities for the following:
   (A)   To regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter to be
erected;
   (B)   To establish, regulate and limit the building or setback lines on or
along the street, traffic way, drive, parkway, or storm or flood water runoff
channel or basin;
   (C)   To regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas and to
regulate and determine the area of open spaces, within and surrounding such
buildings;
   (D)   To classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and
industries and the location of buildings designed for specified industrial,
business, residential and other uses;
   (E)   To divide the entire municipality into districts of such number,
shape, area and of such different classes (according to use of land and
buildings, height, and bulk of buildings, intensity of the use of lot area,
area of open spaces or other classification), as may be deemed best suited to
carry out the purpose of this section;
   (F)   To fix standards to which buildings or structures therein shall
conform;
   (G)   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of such districts; and
   (H)   To prevent additions to and alteration or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed under this section.
(2009 Code, § 4-1-8)
§ 34.009 EXPENDITURES.
   Expenditures of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be at the
discretion of the Village Board and if the Commission shall deem it advisable
to secure technical advice or services, it shall be done upon authority of the
Village Board and appropriations by the Village Board therefor.
(65 ILCS 5/11-12) (2009 Code, § 4-1-9) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
§ 34.020 COMPOSITION.
   The Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairperson and seven
members appointed annually by the President with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.
(2009 Code, § 4-2-1)
§ 34.021 DUTIES.
   The Recreation Advisory Board shall examine and keep abreast of the
recreational facilities and activities of the village and make such
recommendations to the Board of Trustees as it deems necessary to ensure the
continued availability to the citizens of the village of recreational
facilities and activities.
(2009 Code, § 4-2-2)
CITIZENS CORPS COUNCIL
§ 34.035 CITIZENS CORPS ESTABLISHED.
   The Citizens Corps is hereby established by the village. It shall consist of
volunteers approved by the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 4-3-1) (Res. 08-04, passed 10-14-2008; Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-
2015)
§ 34.036 COUNCIL.
   The Village President shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the
Village Board, an advisory council of six members, who shall serve a term of
one year or until their successors are appointed and have qualified.
(2009 Code, § 4-3-2) (Res. 08-04, passed 10-14-2008; Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-
2015)
§ 34.037 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Citizens Corps may make recommendations concerning disaster preparedness
to the Village Board and the Rochester Citizens Corps Program (R.C.C.P.).
(2009 Code, § 4-3-3) (Res. 08-04, passed 10-14-2008; Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-
2015)
§ 34.038 COORDINATION WITH EMA.
   The Citizens Corps shall coordinate its activities with the Director of the
Emergency Management Agency regarding disasters and emergencies pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter and §§
34.050 through
34.070.
(2009 Code, § 4-3-4) (Res. 08-04, passed 10-14-2008; Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-
2015)
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (EMA)
§ 34.050 POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from the explosion in this or
in a neighboring municipality of atomic or other means from without, or by
means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood,
earthquake or other natural or human-made causes, and in order to ensure that
this village will be prepared to and will adequately deal with any such
disasters, preserve the lives and property of the people of this village and
protect the public peace, health and safety in the event of such a disaster, it
is found and declared to be necessary:
      (1)   To create a municipal emergency services and disaster agency;
      (2)   To confer upon the President the extraordinary power and authority
set forth under
Chapter 37 of this code of ordinances (65 ILCS 5/11-1-6); and
      (3)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities and
political subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of emergency services
and disaster operations.
   (B)   Whenever the President determines after an investigation that a
dangerous situation or a potentially dangerous situation exists which could
cause death to individuals or serious injury to property or the health and
welfare of public, the President may declare that a state of emergency exists.
The extraordinary powers may not be exercised until an ordinance shall have
been adopted which shall establish standards for the determination by the
President of when the state of emergency exists and shall provide that the
President may not exercise such extraordinary power and authority except after
signing under oath a statement finding that such standards have been met,
setting forth facts to substantiate such findings, describing the nature of the
emergency and declaring that a state of emergency exists. This statement shall
be filed with the Clerk of the village as soon as practical. A state of
emergency shall expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular
meeting of the corporate authorities after the state of emergency is declared.
A subsequent state of emergency may be declared if necessary.
   (C)   It is further declared to be the purpose of this code and the policy
of the village that all emergency management programs of this village be
coordinated to the maximum extent with the comparable functions of the federal
and state governments, including their various departments and agencies, of
other municipalities and localities and private agencies of every type, to the
end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the nation’s
manpower, resources and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may
occur.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-1)
§ 34.051 LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to:
   (A)   Interfere with the course or conduct of a private labor dispute,
except that actions otherwise authorized by this subchapter or other laws may
be taken when necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to
public health or safety;
   (B)   Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but
any communications facility or organization (including, but not limited to,
radio and television stations, wire services and newspapers) may be requested
to transmit or print public service messages furnishing information or
instructions in connection with a disaster;
   (C)   Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces,
firefighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States or of any
personnel thereof, when on active duty; but state and local emergency
operations plans shall place reliance upon the forces available for performance
of functions related to disaster emergencies; and
   (D)   Limit, modify or abridge the authority of the President and the
Village Board to exercise any other powers vested in them under the
constitution, statutes or common law of this state, independent of or in
conjunction with any provisions of this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-2)
§ 34.052 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COORDINATOR. The staff assistant to the President with the duty of carrying
out the requirements of this subchapter.
   DISASTER. An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or
loss of life or property resulting from any natural or human-made cause,
including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous
materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to
avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods
of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, explosion, critical
shortages of essential fuels and energy, riot, or hostile military or
paramilitary action.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The efforts of this village to develop, plan, analyze,
conduct, implement and maintain programs for disaster mitigation.
   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN. The village describing the organization, mission
and functions of the government and supporting services for responding to and
recovery from disasters.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. The preparation for and the carrying out of such
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, as may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair and
alleviate injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood,
earthquake, or other human-made or natural causes. These functions including,
without limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency aviation
services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense,
evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency assigned functions of
plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental to protecting life or property.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Any county, city, village or incorporated town.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-3)
§ 34.053 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.
   (A)   There is hereby created an emergency management agency and a
coordinator of the emergency management agency, herein called the
“coordinator”, who shall be the head thereof. The coordinator shall be
appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board. He or she
shall serve at the pleasure of the President.
   (B)   The Emergency Management Agency shall obtain, with Board approval,
such technical, clerical, stenographic and other administrative personnel, and
may make such expenditures within their appropriation therefor as may be
necessary to carry out the purpose of this subchapter.
   (C)   (1)   The coordinator, subject to the direction and control of the
President, shall be the executive head of the Village Emergency Management
Agency, and shall be responsible under the direction of the President for
carrying out the program for emergency services and disaster operations of this
village. He or she shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for
emergency management operations within this village and shall maintain liaison,
and cooperate with, the civil defense and emergency management agencies and
organization of the county, other counties and municipalities, and of the
federal and state government.
      (2)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to
serve by the coordinator, the President or any persons designated by him or
her, shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as
provided in this subchapter.
   (D)   The Municipal Emergency Management Agency shall take an integral part
in the development and revision of the local emergency operations plan.
   (E)   In the development of the emergency operations plan, the municipal
emergency management agency shall interrelate with business, labor, industry,
agriculture, civic and volunteer organizations, and community leaders.
   (F)   The Municipal Emergency Management Agency shall:
      (1)   Determine the requirements of the village for food, clothing and
other necessities in the event of an emergency;
      (2)   Develop an emergency operations plan that meets the standards
promulgated by the State Emergency Management Agency;
      (3)   Biannually review and revise the local emergency operations plan;
      (4)   Establish a register of persons with types of training and skills
in emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery;
      (5)   Establish a register of government and private response resources
available for use in a disaster;
      (6)   Prepare, for issuance by the President, ordinances, proclamations
and regulations as necessary or appropriate in coping with disasters.
      (7)   Cooperate with the federal, state and county government and any
public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this subchapter
and in implementing programs for disaster prevention, preparation, response and
recovery;
      (8)   Initiate and coordinate planning for:
         (a)   The establishment of an emergency operating center; and
         (b)   The implementation of a 911 system through the county.
      (9)   Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the
implementation of this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-4)
§ 34.054 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT.
   (A)   The President shall have the general direction and control of the
emergency management agency, and shall be responsible for the carrying out of
the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   In performing his or her duties under this subchapter, the President
is authorized to cooperate with state and federal governments and with other
municipalities and political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to
emergency management operations defined in this subchapter.
   (C)   In performing his or her duties under this subchapter, the President
is further authorized:
      (1)   To make, amend and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules and
regulations of the local disaster plan to carry out the provisions of this
subchapter within the limits of the authority conferred upon him or her;
      (2)   To cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan and program for the
emergency management of this village which plan and program shall be integrated
into and coordinated with disaster plans of the state and federal governments
and other political subdivisions, and which plan and program may include:
         (a)   Prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by
disaster;
         (b)   Prompt and effective response to disaster;
         (c)   Emergency relief;
         (d)   Identification of areas particularly vulnerable to disasters;
         (e)   Recommendations for zoning, building and other land-use
controls, safety measures for securing permanent structures and other
preventive and preparedness measures designed to eliminate or reduce disasters
or their impact;
         (f)   Assistance to local officials in designing local emergency
action plans;
         (g)   Authorization and procedures for the erection or other
construction of temporary works designed to protect against or mitigate danger,
damage or loss from flood, conflagration or other disaster;
         (h)   Organization of municipal manpower and chains of command;
         (i)   Coordination of local emergency management activities; and
         (j)   Other necessary matters.
      (3)   In accordance with such plan and program for the emergency
management of this village, and out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to
procure and preposition supplies, medicines, materials and equipment to
institute training programs and public information programs, and to take all
other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of
emergency management organizations in advance of actual disaster to ensure the
furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces for disaster operations;
and
      (4)   Out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to make such studies
and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities in this village as may
be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the village for the emergency
management phases of preparedness, response and recovery, and to plan for the
most efficient emergency use thereof.
   (D)   The President is authorized to designate space in a municipal
building, or elsewhere for the emergency services and disaster agency as its
office.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-5)
§ 34.055 FINANCING.
   (A)   It is the intent of the Village Board and declared to be the policy of
the village that every effort shall be made to provide funds for disaster
emergencies.
   (B)   It is the Village Board’s intent that the first recourse shall be to
funds regularly appropriated to the agency. If the President finds that the
demands placed upon these funds in coping with a particular disaster are
unreasonably great, and the Governor has proclaimed the village a disaster, he
or she may make application for funds from the state disaster relief fund. If
monies available from the fund are insufficient, and if the President finds
that other sources of money to cope with the disaster are not available or are
insufficient, he or she shall issue a call for an immediate session of the
Village Board for the purpose of enacting ordinances as the Village Board may
deem necessary to transfer and expend monies appropriated for other purposes,
or borrow monies from the United States government or other public or private
sources. If less than a quorum of the members of the Village Board is capable
of convening in session to enact such ordinances for the transfer, expenditure
or loan of such monies, the President is authorized to carry out those
decisions until such time as a quorum of the Village Board can convene.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the
President’s authority to apply for, administer and expend grants, gifts or
payments in aid of disaster prevention, preparedness, response or recovery.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-6)
§ 34.056 LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the President or
Village Board. If declared by the President, it shall not be continued for a
period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the Village
Board. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local
disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity, and shall be
filed promptly with the Municipal Clerk.
   (B)   The effect of a declaration of a local disaster emergency is to
activate any and all applicable local emergency operations plans and to
authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder.
   (C)   During a local disaster emergency, the President may suspend the
provisions of any municipal ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct of
municipal business, or the orders, rules and regulations of any municipal
agency, if strict compliance with the provisions of any ordinance, rule or
regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping
with the emergency, as authorized by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency
Act, provided that, if the Village Board meets at such time, he or she shall
act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-7)
§ 34.057 TESTING OF DISASTER WARNING DEVICES.
   The testing of disaster devices including outdoor warning sirens shall be
held only on the first Tuesday of each month at 10:00 a.m. in the morning, by
the Fire Chief or his or her designated representative.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-8)
§ 34.058 MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The coordinator for emergency management operations may, in collaboration
with other public agencies within his or her immediate vicinity, develop or
cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements with other political
subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies politic within this state for
reciprocal disaster response and recovery in case a disaster is too great to be
dealt with unassisted. The mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless
and until approved by each of such political subdivisions, municipal
corporations or bodies politic as are parties thereto, in the manner provided
by law, and unless and until filed with and approved in writing by the state
director. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state and local
emergency management operations plan and program, and in the event of such
disaster as described in §
34.052, it shall be the duty of each local and department for emergency
management operations to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of
such mutual aid arrangements.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-9)
§ 34.059 COMMUNICATIONS.
   The local Emergency Management Agency shall ascertain what means exist for
rapid and efficient communications in times of disaster emergencies. The agency
shall consider the desirability of supplementing these communications resources
or of integrating them into a comprehensive system or network. In studying the
character and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the agency shall
evaluate the possibility of multipurpose use thereof for general municipal and
local governmental purposes. The agency shall make recommendations to the
President as appropriate.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-10)
§ 34.060 IMMUNITY.
   Neither the village, the agency or any member thereof or any person acting
at his or her direction, engaged in any emergency management operations or
disaster activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this
subchapter or any rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter
is liable for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as
a result of such activity. This section does not, however, affect the right of
any person to receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled
under this act under the Worker’s Compensation Act or the Worker’s Occupational
Diseases Act, or under any pension law, and this section does not affect the
right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any Act
of Congress.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-11)
§ 34.061 PROFESSIONS, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS.
   If such disaster as is described in §
34.052 occurs in this village and the services of persons who are competent to
practice any profession, trade or occupation are required in this village to
cope with the disaster situation and it appears that the number of persons
licensed or registered in this village to practice such profession, trade or
occupation may be insufficient for such purpose, then any persons who are
licensed elsewhere to practice any such profession, trade or occupation may, if
a member of another political subdivision rendering aid in this village
pursuant to the order of the head of that political subdivision and upon the
request of the village, or if otherwise requested so to do by the president or
the coordinator of this village, during the time the disaster condition
continues, practice such profession, trade or occupation in this village
without being licensed or registered in this village.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-12)
§ 34.062 APPROPRIATIONS AND LEVY OF TAX.
   The Village Board may make appropriations for emergency management
operations in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for the
ordinary expenses of such political subdivision. The Village Board may also
levy for emergency management operations a tax not to exceed 0.05% of the full,
fair cash value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue on all
taxable property in the village for the current year. However, the amount
collectible under such a levy shall in no event exceed $0.25 per capita. The
annual tax shall be in addition to and in excess of the amount authorized to be
levied for general corporate purposes.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-13)
§ 34.063 AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS.
   Whenever the federal or state governments, or any agency or officer thereof,
or whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the village
services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift or grant for
purposes of emergency management, the village, acting through the President or
through its Village Board, may accept such offer and upon such acceptance the
President or the Village Board may authorize any officer of the village to
receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the
village.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-14)
§ 34.064 ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The President shall file a copy of every rule, regulation or order and
any amendment thereof made by him or her pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter in the office of the Village Clerk. No such rule, regulation or
order, or any amendment thereof, shall be effective until ten days after such
filing; provided, however, that upon the declaration of such a disaster
emergency by the President as is described in §
34.056, the provision relating to the effective date of any rule, regulation
order or amendment issued pursuant to this subchapter and during the state of
such disaster emergency, is abrogated, and said rule, regulation, order or
amendment shall become effective immediately upon being filed with the Village
Clerk, accompanied by a certificate stating the reason for the emergency.
   (B)   The Emergency Management Agency established pursuant to this
subchapter, and the coordinator thereof, shall execute and enforce such orders,
rules and regulations as may be made by the Governor under authority of the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. The local Emergency Management Agency
shall have available for inspection at its office all orders, rules and
regulations made by the Governor, or under this authority. The Illinois
Emergency Management Agency shall furnish such orders, rules and regulations to
the agency.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-15)
§ 34.065 UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITIES AND PERSONNEL.
   In carrying out the provisions of this subchapter, the President and the
coordinator of the emergency management agency are directed to utilize the
services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices
and agencies of the village to the maximum extent practicable, and the officers
and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are directed, upon
request, to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the
coordinator and the emergency management agency.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-16)
§ 34.066 NO PRIVATE LIABILITY.
   (A)   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants a license or privilege, or
otherwise permits the designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of
such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an
actual or impending disaster, or a mock or practice disaster response activity
together with his or her successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly
liable for negligently causing the death of, or injury to, any person on or
about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other
permission, or for negligently causing loss of, or damage to, the property of
such person.
   (B)   Any private person, firm or corporation and employees and agents of
such person, firm or corporation in the performance of a contract with, and
under the direction of, the village under the provisions of this subchapter,
shall not be civilly liable for causing death of, or injury to, any person or
damage to any property except in the event of willful misconduct.
   (C)   Any private person, firm or corporation, and any employee or agency of
such person, firm or corporation, who renders assistance or advice at the
request of the village, shall not be civilly liable for causing the death of,
or injury to, any person or damage to any property except in the event of
willful misconduct. The immunities provided in this division (C) shall not
apply to any private person, firm or corporation, or to any employee or agent
of such person, firm or corporation whose act or omission caused in whole or in
part such actual or impending disaster and who would otherwise be liable
therefor.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-17)
§ 34.067 SUCCESSION.
   In the event of the death, absence from the village or other disability of
the President preventing him or her from acting under this subchapter or for
any other municipal purpose, and until the office is filled in the manner
prescribed by law, the coordinator of the emergency management agency shall
succeed to the duties and responsibilities of the President.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-18)
§ 34.068 COMPENSATION.
   The Village Board, by its annual appropriations ordinance, may provide for
the payment of the salary of the coordinator and such other office staff and
personnel as may be expressly provided for in the ordinance. Nothing herein
contained shall prohibit any member of the agency from receiving compensation
from the Illinois Emergency Management Agency under any provisions of that
agency.
(2009 Code, § 30-3-19)
§ 34.069 PERSONNEL OATH.
   Each person, whether compensated or non-compensated, who is appointed to
serve in any capacity in the municipal Emergency Management Agency, shall,
before entering upon his or her duties, take an oath, in writing, before the
coordinator of the municipal Emergency Management Agency before a person
authorized to administer oaths in this village, which oath shall be filed with
the coordinator of the Emergency Management Agency, and which oath shall be
substantially as follows:
      “I,   _____________ do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during
such time I am affiliated with the village, I will not advocate nor become a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence.”
(2009 Code, § 30-3-20)
§ 34.070 EMERGENCY TERMINATION OR REDUCTION OF ELECTRICAL SERVICE.
   Declaration of emergency condition: when in the judgment of the President or
Village Board, as provided herein in §
34.056(A), a local disaster emergency requires the termination or reduction of
electrical service, the President or Village Board shall forthwith declare in
writing the existence of the emergency condition and order the termination or
reduction.
(20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.) (2009 Code, § 30-3-21)
CHAPTER 35: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
Department Established
   
35.01   Department established
   
35.02   Office of Chief created
   
35.03   Duties of Chief
   
35.04   Appointment of patrol officers
   
35.05   Salary
   
35.06   Duties
   
35.07   Mutual aid contract
   
35.08   Special police officers
   
35.09   Legal processes
   
35.10   Assisting police officer
   
35.11   Aiding Fire Department
   
35.12   Failure to perform
   
35.13   Aiding in escape
   
35.14   Witness fees
   
35.15   Rules and regulations
   
35.16   Stolen property
   
35.17   Part-time police officers
   
35.18   Appointment of detective
   
35.19   Appointment of administrative assistant
DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED
§ 35.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   There is hereby established a department of the municipal government
of the village which shall be known as the Police Department.
   (B)   The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and of such
number of patrol officers, administrative assistants, and detectives as may be
provided from time to time by the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-1) (Ord. 20-08, passed 3-9-2020)
§ 35.02 OFFICE OF CHIEF CREATED.
   There is hereby established the office of the Chief of Police. The Chief of
Police shall be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the
Village Board for a four-year term of the President.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-2)
§ 35.03 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
   The Chief of Police shall keep records and make reports concerning the
activities of his or her Department as may be required. The Chief shall be
responsible for the performance of the Police Department, of all its functions,
and all persons who are members of the department shall serve subject to the
orders of the Chief of Police.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-3)
§ 35.04 APPOINTMENT OF PATROL OFFICERS.
   Unless otherwise provided, all patrol officers shall be appointed by the
President, by and with the advice and consent of the Village Board. A police
officer may be appointed to office by the President and Village Board if he or
she meets the necessary qualifications notwithstanding the fact that the police
officer is not a resident of the village when appointed or when he or she is to
serve as such an official.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-4)
§ 35.05 SALARY.
   The Police Department shall receive such compensation as may be provided by
ordinance or resolution of the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-5)
§ 35.06 DUTIES.
   The police officer shall devote his or her entire time to the performance of
the duties of his or her office and is hereby charged with the preservation of
the peace, order and safety of the village and with the duty of protecting the
rights of persons and property and of enforcing all laws and also all orders of
the Village Board. He or she shall take notice of all nuisances, obstructions
and defects on the highways or other public places, and shall cause the same to
be abated or removed, or immediate notice thereof given to the proper officer
whose duty it may be to take action in relation thereto. When requested by the
President he or she shall attend, either in person or by deputy, all meetings
of the Village Board, execute all its orders and close the Board Chamber upon
the adjournment of that body. He or she shall also execute all warrants or
other legal process required to be executed by him or her under any ordinance
of the village or laws of the state.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-6)
§ 35.07 MUTUAL AID CONTRACT.
   The Police Department, with the approval of the Village Board, may enter
into an agreement to provide police protection to neighboring municipalities.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-7)
§ 35.08 SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.
   In accordance with requirements as set forth by the State Law Enforcement
Training and Standards Board, the President may, on special occasions when, in
his or her judgment for public peace and order of the village shall require,
appoint and commission any number of special police officers as may be
necessary and shall fix in order of their appointment, the time during which
each shall serve all such special police officers, during such time, shall
possess the powers and exercise the duties of regular police patrol officers;
provided that their appointment, if for more than ten days shall be subject to
the consent of the Village Board in the manner that other appointments to
office by the President are subject. Auxiliary police officers shall not carry
firearms, except with the permission of the Chief of Police and then only when
in uniform and in the performance of their duties.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-8)
§ 35.09 LEGAL PROCESSES.
   All police shall have the power and authority to execute village warrants or
other similar legal processes outside the corporate limits of the village and
within such distance therefrom as authorized by law in all cases when any
ordinance of the Village Board made pursuant to law shall prescribe a penalty
for the violation of any of its provisions by persons residing, acting or doing
any business within the limits of the village.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-9)
§ 35.10 ASSISTING POLICE OFFICER.
   Every police officer of the village may, at any time, call upon any able-
bodied person(s) above the age of 18 years to aid him or her in the arresting,
retaking or holding in custody of any person guilty of having committed any
unlawful act or charged therewith, or to aid such officer in preventing the
commission of any unlawful act.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.11 AIDING FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   Every police officer shall aid the Fire Department by giving the alarm in
case of fire and in clearing the streets or grounds in the immediate vicinity
of any fire so that the firefighters shall not be hindered or obstructed in the
performance of their duties.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-11)
§ 35.12 FAILURE TO PERFORM.
   Any member of the Police Department who shall neglect or refuse to perform
any duty required of him or her by this subchapter or the rules and regulations
of the Department, or who shall be, in the discharge of his or her official
duties, guilty of any fraud, favoritism, extortion, oppressions or willful
wrong or injustice, shall be subject to removal from office.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-12)
§ 35.13 AIDING IN ESCAPE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in this village to resist or obstruct
any member of the police force in the discharge of his or her duty or to
endeavor to do so, in any manner, assist any person in the custody of any
member of the Police Department to escape or to attempt to escape from such
custody or to attempt to rescue any such person in custody.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.14 WITNESS FEES.
   Any member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever this is
necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any state or
federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness
in any action or suit to which the village is a party; and fees paid for such
services shall be turned over to the Chief of Police who shall deposit the same
with the Village Treasurer.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-14)
§ 35.15 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the
conduct and guidance of the members of the Police Department as he or she shall
deem advisable and such rules, when approved by the President, shall be binding
on such members.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-15)
§ 35.16 STOLEN PROPERTY.
   The Chief of Police or designee shall be the custodian of all lost and
abandoned or stolen property in the village.
(2009 Code, § 30-2-16)
§ 35.17 PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   There is hereby established in the village the position of part-time
police officer. Part-time police officers shall serve the village as employees
at will.
   (B)   The Chief of Police may appoint part-time police officers as
employees, in such number as the President and the Village Board shall approve
and pursuant to the personnel code. The Chief of Police shall have the
authority to discharge part-time police officers as provided in the personnel
code. Part-time police officers shall be members of the regular Police
Department, subject to the personnel code, except for pension and other
benefits as may be provided to other village employees.
   (C)   Prior to appointment, part-time police officers shall be subject to a
background check, including without limitation, fingerprint verification by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Illinois State Police. No person shall
be hired as a part-time police officer unless he or she is a person of good
character and is not a person who has been convicted of a felony or crime
involving moral turpitude.
   (D)   Part-time police officers shall be assigned to perform duties by the
Chief of Police. Primary duties shall include prevention and detection of crime
and enforcement of the criminal code, traffic and highway laws of the state,
the village’s ordinances and all other applicable laws, rules, ordinances and
regulations. Every part-time police officer shall obey the orders and
directions of the Chief of Police and any supervising officer. Part-time police
officers shall at all times during the performance of their duties be subject
to the direction, control and discipline of the Chief of Police.
   (E)   Part-time police officers may be hired by the village, as authorized
by § 3.1-3021 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-21), in
accordance with the following hiring standards:
      (1)   The applicant must be a U.S. citizen;
      (2)   The applicant must be 21 years of age or older;
      (3)   The applicant must possess a high school diploma or GED
equivalency;
      (4)   The applicant must have a valid driver’s license;
      (5)   The applicant must have eyesight of 20/20, or correctable to 20/20;
      (6)   The applicant must not be colorblind;
      (7)   The applicant must have no felony convictions, or any violations
(whether conviction or other dispositions where a finding of guilty was made)
of other crimes involving moral turpitude as determined solely by the village
(50 ILCS 705/6.1 and 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-6 for list of disqualifying misdemeanor
offenses);
      (8)   The applicant must meet all standards set forth in 430 ILCS 65/0.01
et seq., pertaining to the Firearms Owners Identification Act; and
      (9)   The hiring standards for part-time police officers, as set forth
hereinabove, shall be submitted by the Chief of Police to the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training Standards Board.
   (F)   No person shall be retained as a part-time police officer who has not
achieved certification from the Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards
Board (the “Board”) in the manner required by the village, including successful
completion of police officer training pursuant to the Intergovernmental Law
Enforcement Officer’s In-Service Training Act, 50 ILCS 720/1 et seq., in
accordance with the procedures for part-time police officers established by the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board. Every part-time police
officer, prior to entering into any duties, also shall receive not less than 40
hours of training within the Police Department, including, without limitation,
police procedures, laws of arrest, search and seizure, deadly force, traffic
law, criminal code and any other pertinent training issues covering rules and
regulations, directives, and policies and procedures. Part-time police officers
shall familiarize themselves with and be subject to and obey all ordinances and
other rules, regulations, policies and procedures governing the conduct and
operation of the Police Department of the village, including, but not limited
to, the personnel code.
   (G)   Violation of any of the rules, regulations, policies and procedures of
the Police Department or of any of the provisions of the village code of
ordinances shall subject a part-time officer to disciplinary action up to and
including termination of his or her appointment.
   (H)   Part-time police officers shall be paid an hourly wage as determined
by the Village Board for each hour of service that is performed at the
direction of the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee.
   (I)   Part-time police officers shall be considered employees of the village
and, as employees, shall be covered by the village’s worker’s compensation
insurance.
   (J)   Part-time police officers shall not be used as permanent replacements
for permanent full-time police officers.
   (K)   Number of work hours: part-time police officers shall be restricted to
working not more than 1,000 hours for the village within a calendar year.
(65 ILCS 5/11-1-2) (2009 Code, § 30-2-17) (Ord. 11-06, passed 4-11-2011; Ord.
16-11, passed 4-11-2016)
Editor’s note:
   A copy of the Police Code on file in the Police Department.
§ 35.18 APPOINTMENT OF DETECTIVE.
   Unless otherwise provided, all detectives shall be appointed by the Police
Chief. A detective may by appointed to office if the individual meets the
necessary qualifications notwithstanding the fact that the individual is not a
resident of the village when appointed or when he or she is to serve as such an
official.
(Ord. 20-08, passed 3-9-2020; Ord. 21-12, passed 5-10-2021)
§ 35.19  APPOINTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT.
   Unless otherwise provided, all administrative assistants shall be appointed
by the Police Chief. An administrative assistant may be appointed to office if
the individual meets the necessary qualifications notwithstanding the fact that
the individual is not a resident of the village when appointed or when he or
she is to serve.
(Ord. 20-08, passed 3-9-2020; Ord. 21-12, passed 5-10-2021)
CHAPTER 36: VILLAGE POLICIES
Section
Investment Policy
   
36.001   Investment policy
   
36.002   Scope
   
36.003   Prudence
   
36.004   Objective
   
36.005   Delegation of authority
   
36.006   Ethics and conflicts of interest
   
36.007   Authorized financial dealers and institutions
   
36.008   Authorized and suitable investments
   
36.009   Collateralization
   
36.010   Safekeeping and custody
   
36.011   Diversification
   
36.012   Maximum maturities
   
36.013   Internal control
   
36.014   Performance standards
   
36.015   Reporting
   
36.016   Investment policy adoption and modification
Ethics
   
36.030   State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
Equal Employment Policy
   
36.045   Adoption of Codes
   
36.046   Nondiscriminatory practices
   
36.047   Contracting with noncompliants
   
36.048   Outreach to all
   
36.049   Minority hiring
   
36.050   Accommodations for disabled
   
36.051   Compliance by employees
   
36.052   Designated enforcers
Freedom of Information
   
36.065   Definitions
   
36.066   Policy
   
36.067   Individual privacy protected
   
36.068   Public records available
   
36.069   Requests to be in writing
   
36.070   Fees
   
36.071   Time limit for compliance with request
   
36.072   Extension of time limit; notice
   
36.073   Unduly burdensome request
   
36.074   Certain information exempt from inspection and copying
   
36.075   Notice of denial of request; appeals
   
36.076   Granting of request; procedure for inspection
   
36.077   Written request not required for certain documents
   
36.078   Dissemination of information about public bodies
   
36.079   List of categories of records
Identity Theft Prevention Policy
   
36.090   Compliance with federal law
   
36.091   Risk assessment/identifying relevant red flags
   
36.092   Detected red flags
   
36.093   Preventing and mitigating identity theft
   
36.094   Duties regarding change of address
   
36.095   Updating the program
   
36.096   Program administration
   
36.097   Service provider arrangements
   
36.098   Training
   
36.099   Education of customers
   
36.100   Other applicable legal requirements
   
36.101   Assistance for victims
Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment
   
36.115   Prohibition on sexual harassment
   
36.116   Definition of sexual harassment
   
36.117   Procedure for reporting an allegation of sexual harassment
   
36.118   Prohibition on retaliation for reporting sexual harassment allegations
   
36.119   Consequences of a violation of the prohibition on sexual harassment
   
36.120   Consequences for knowingly making a false report
 
   
36.999   Penalty
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 36.001 INVESTMENT POLICY.
   It is the policy of the village to invest public funds in a manner which
will provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while
meeting the daily cash flow demands of the village and conforming to all state
and local statutes governing the investment of public funds.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-1)
§ 36.002 SCOPE.
   This policy includes all public funds governed by the Board of Trustees.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-2)
§ 36.003 PRUDENCE.
   (A)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances
then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for
investment, considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the
probable income to be derived.
   (B)   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be
the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in the context of managing
an overall portfolio.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-3)
§ 36.004 OBJECTIVE.
   (A)   The primary objective, in order of priority, shall be:
      (1)   Legality. Conformance with federal, state and other legal
requirements;
      (2)   Safety. Preservation of capital and protection of investment
principal;
      (3)   Liquidity. Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating
requirements; and
      (4)   Yield. Attainment of market rates of return.
   (B)   The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its effectiveness
in meeting the village’s needs for safety, liquidity, rate of return,
diversification and its general performance.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-4)
§ 36.005 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the Treasurer who may establish written procedures for the
operation of the investment program.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-5)
§ 36.006 ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-6)
§ 36.007 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   The Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions
authorized to provide investment services.
   (B)   In addition, a list will also be maintained of approved security
brokers/dealers selected by creditworthiness.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-7)
§ 36.008 AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.
   Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in state
statutes regarding the investment of public funds. Investments shall be made
that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund type being invested.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-8)
§ 36.009 COLLATERALIZATION.
   Collateralization may be required, at the discretion of the village, on all
funds held in banks or savings and loans above the insured limits provided by
the FDIC or FSLIC. In order to anticipate market changes and provide a level of
security for all funds, the collateralization level will be a minimum of 102%
of market value of principal and accrued interest.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-9)
§ 36.010 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements,
entered into by the village, shall be conducted on a delivery-versus-payment
(DVP) basis. Securities will be held by an independent third party custodian
designated by the Treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping receipts and a written
custodial agreement.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-10)
§ 36.011 DIVERSIFICATION.
   The village shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based
on the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in, and length of maturity.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-11)
§ 36.012 MAXIMUM MATURITIES.
   (A)   To the extent possible, the village shall attempt to match its
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a
specific cash flow, the village will not directly invest in securities maturing
more than two years from the date of purchase.
   (B)   Reserve funds may be invested in securities exceeding two years if the
maturity of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable with
the expected use of the funds.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-12)
§ 36.013 INTERNAL CONTROL.
   (A)   The Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control structure designed to insure that the assets of the village
are protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall
be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met.
   (B)   The internal controls shall address the following points:
      (1)   Control of collusion;
      (2)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting;
      (3)   Custodial safekeeping; and
      (4)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and
wire transfers.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-13)
§ 36.014 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   The investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the parameters
specified within this policy. The portfolio should obtain a comparable rate of
return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates. Portfolio
performance should be compared to benchmarks with similar maturity, liquidity
and credit quality as the portfolio maintained by the Illinois Public
Treasurer’s Investment Pool (IPTIP).
(2009 Code, § 1-5-14)
§ 36.015 REPORTING.
   The Treasurer shall prepare an investment report at least monthly. The
report should be provided to the Village Board and available upon request. The
report should be in a format suitable for review by the general public. An
annual report should also be provided to the Village Board. A statement of the
market value of the portfolio shall be issued to the Village Board quarterly.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-15)
§ 36.016 INVESTMENT POLICY ADOPTION AND MODIFICATION.
   The investment policy has been adopted by ordinance. The policy shall be
reviewed on an annual basis by the Treasurer, and any modifications made
thereto shall be made by ordinance.
(2009 Code, § 1-5-16)
ETHICS
§ 36.030 STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   The regulations of § 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article 10 (5 ILCS
430/10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5
ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the “Act” in this section)
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and
employees of the village to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is
hereby prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For the purposes of this section, the terms OFFICER and EMPLOYEE shall
be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   (I)   If the State Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the State
Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village if the Act is found unconstitutional
by the State Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the State Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not
address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by
this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(2009 Code, § 1-6-1) (Ord. 04-05, passed 5-10-2004)
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY
§ 36.045 ADOPTION OF CODES.
   The village hereby declares to uphold, defend, enforce and advocate for all
laws related to equal employment opportunity including, but not limited to, the
following:
   (A)   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 which prohibits
discrimination in the participation in or benefits of programs or activities
receiving federal financial assistance on the basis of race, color or national
origin;
   (B)   Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 which prohibits
discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin in all
employment practices including hiring, firing, promotions, compensation, and
other terms, privileges and conditions of employment;
   (C)   Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 which prohibits
discrimination in federally assisted education programs;
   (D)   The Equal Pay Act of 1963 which covers all employees who are covered
by the Fair Labor Standards Act. The Act forbids pay differentials on the basis
of sex;
   (E)   The Age Discrimination Act of 1967 which prohibits discrimination
because of age against anyone between the ages of 40 and 65;
   (F)   Federal Executive Order 11246 which requires every contract with
federal financial assistance to contain a clause against discrimination because
of race, color, religion, sex or national origin;
   (G)   Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Department of Labor
Implementing Regulations at 29 C.F.R. part 32 which prohibits any
discrimination based on disability;
   (H)   Section 167 of JTPA and the U.S. Department of Labor Regulations at 29
C.F.R. parts 31 and 32 which provides that no person in the United States shall
be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected
to discrimination on the basis of race, color or national origin, under any
program or activity receiving federal financial assistance from the Department
of Labor;
   (I)   Chapter 68, Article I, § 17-19 of the State Constitution which
prohibits discrimination based on race, color, creed, national ancestry,
disability and sex in the hiring and promotion practices of any employer; and
   (J)   The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 which prohibits any
discrimination against qualified individuals with disabilities on the basis of
their disability.
(2009 Code, § 12-1-1)
§ 36.046 NONDISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES.
   The village will assure non-discriminatory employment practices in
recruitment advertising, employment, placement, layoff or termination,
promotion, demotion or transfer, rate of pay or other forms of compensation and
use of facilities.
(2009 Code, § 12-1-2)
§ 36.047 CONTRACTING WITH NONCOMPLIANTS.
   (A)   The village will not contract with other agencies, banks, businesses,
vendors and the like who practice or establish a pattern of discrimination
based on sex, color, race, religion, age, national origin, political
affiliation or belief.
   (B)   The village will incorporate into any contract for construction work,
or modification thereof, subject to the relevant rules, regulations and orders
of the Secretary of Labor or of any prior authority that remain in effect,
which is paid for in whole or in part with the aid of such financial
assistance, the following “equal opportunity clause”:
      (1)   The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, disability or
national origin. The contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that
applicants are employed, and the employees are treated during employment,
without regard to their race, color, religion, sex, national origin or
disability. Such action shall include, but not be limited, to the following:
employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment or recruitment
advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of
compensation; and selection for training, including apprenticeship. The
contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this
nondiscrimination clause;
      (2)   The contractor will, in all solicitations or advertisement for
employees places by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all qualified
applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race,
color, religion, sex, national origin or disability;
      (3)   In the event of the contractor’s noncompliance with the equal
opportunity clause or with any of the said rules, regulations and orders, this
contract may be canceled, terminated or suspended in whole or in part and the
contractor may be declared ineligible for further government contracts or
federally assisted construction contracts; and
      (4)   The contractor will include the provisions of this equal
opportunity clause in every subcontract or purchase order, unless exempted by
the rules, regulations or orders of the Secretary of Labor so that such
provisions will be binding upon each such subcontractor or vendor.
(2009 Code, § 12-1-3)
§ 36.048 OUTREACH TO ALL.
   The village assures that it will actively provide nondiscriminatory
outreach, selection and service to all individuals.
(2009 Code, § 12-1-4)
§ 36.049 MINORITY HIRING.
   Efforts will be made to hire minority individuals for all job categories so
that minority employment in all categories of the work force will represent a
proportionate share of minority populations in the village as well as
surrounding areas.
(2009 Code, § 12-1-5)
§ 36.050 ACCOMMODATIONS FOR DISABLED.
   The village will provide accommodations to the best of its ability for
employees with disabilities, contingent on budget and structural limitations.
(2009 Code, § 12-1-6)
§ 36.051 COMPLIANCE BY EMPLOYEES.
   All village employees are expected to adhere to the above policy and to work
actively for its implementation both internally and in carrying out village
program activities.
(2009 Code, § 12-1-7)
§ 36.052 DESIGNATED ENFORCERS.
   The village designates the President and the Village Board to carry out the
EEO/AA plan.
(2009 Code, § 12-1-8)
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
§ 36.065 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COPYING. The reproduction of any public record by means of any photographic,
electronic, mechanical or other process, device or means.
   FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT. The Illinois Freedom of Information Act, 5 ILCS
140/1.1 et seq.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, organization or
association, acting individually or as a group.
   PUBLIC RECORD. All records, reports, forms, writings, letters, memorandums,
books, papers, maps, photographs, microfilms, cards, tapes, recordings,
electronic data processing records, recorded information and all other
documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, having
been or being prepared, used, received, possessed or under control of the
village.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-1)
§ 36.066 POLICY.
   It is declared to be the public policy of the village that all persons are
entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of the village.
The official acts and policies of the public officials and public employees of
the village shall be consistent with the terms of this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-2)
§ 36.067 INDIVIDUAL PRIVACY PROTECTED.
   This subchapter is not intended to be used to violate individual policy, nor
for the purpose of furthering a commercial enterprise, or to disrupt the duly
undertaken work of the village.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-3)
§ 36.068 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records, as provided in the Freedom of Information Act.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-4)
§ 36.069 REQUESTS TO BE IN WRITING.
   (A)   All requests for inspection or copying of public records shall be in
writing and shall be addressed to the Clerk.
   (B)   The requestor shall include the following information in any request
for public records:
      (1)   The requestor’s full name, mailing address and telephone number at
which the requestor can be reached during normal business hours;
      (2)   A description of the records sought, being as specific as possible;
and
      (3)   A statement as to whether the request is for inspection, copying or
both.
   (C)   The Clerk shall make available a form for use by requestors; however,
no request shall be denied for failure to use the form.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-5)
§ 36.070 FEES.
   (A)   The village hereby establishes and shall charge fees reasonably
calculated to reimburse its actual cost for reproducing and certifying public
records and for the use, by any person, of the equipment of the village to copy
records. Such fees exclude the costs of any search for and review of the
record, and shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction and certification,
unless otherwise provided by state statute. The charge for copying shall be
$0.20 per page for photocopies, $0.10 per page for computer printouts and $5
per digital file. In the event materials must be reproduced by copy services or
by the Village Engineer (e.g., large plan sheets), the requestor shall be
responsible for the actual charges. A copy of the village code shall be $125.
   (B)   Documents shall be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge
where the village determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the
public interest because furnishing information can be considered as primarily
benefitting the general public. Waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public
interest if the principal purpose of the request is to access and disseminate
information regarding the health, safety and welfare or the legal rights of the
general public and is not for the principal purpose of personal or commercial
benefit. In setting the amount of the waiver or reduction, the village may take
into consideration the amount of materials requested and the cost of copying
them.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-6)
§ 36.071 TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLIANCE WITH REQUEST.
   The village shall either comply with or deny a request for public records
within seven working days after its receipt. Denials shall be in writing and in
accordance with §
36.075.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-7)
§ 36.072 EXTENSION OF TIME LIMIT; NOTICE.
   (A)   The time limit prescribed in §
36.071 may be extended in each case for not more than seven additional working
days for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The requested records are stored in whole or in part at other
locations other than the office having charge of the requested records;
      (2)   The request requires the collection of a substantial number of
specified records;
      (3)   The request is couched in categorical terms and requires an
extensive search for the records responsive to it;
      (4)   The requested records require examination and evaluation by
personnel having the necessary competence and discretion to determine if they
are exempt from disclosure under the terms of the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act or should be revealed only with appropriate deletions;
      (5)   The request for records cannot be complied with by the village
within the time limits prescribed by this division (A) without unduly burdening
or interfering with the village;
      (6)   The requested records have not been located in the course of
routine search and additional efforts are being made to locate them; and
      (7)   There is a need for consultation, which shall be conducted with all
practicable speed, with another public body or among two or more components of
a public body having a substantial interest in the determination or in the
subject matter of the request.
   (B)   When additional time is required for any of the above reasons, the
Clerk shall notify the person making the request, by letter, within the time
limits specified in this section, of the reasons for the delay and the date by
which the records will be made available or denial will be forthcoming. In no
instance may the delay in processing last longer than seven working days. A
failure to render a decision within seven working days shall be considered a
denial of the request.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-8)
§ 36.073 UNDULY BURDENSOME REQUEST.
   (A)   (1)   Requests calling for all records falling within a category shall
be complied with unless compliance with the request would be unduly burdensome
for the village, there is no method of narrowing the request, and the burden on
the village strongly outweighs the public interest in the information.
      (2)   If the village responds to a categorical request by stating that
compliance would unduly burden its operation, it shall do so in a writing
signed by the Clerk specifying the reasons why it would be unduly burdensome
and the extent to which compliance will so burden the operation of the village.
   (B)   (1)   After receipt of this response in writing, the person making the
request shall have an opportunity to reduce the request to manageable
proportions.
      (2)   If the person making the request fails to reduce the request to
manageable proportions, the response of the village shall be treated as a
denial of the request information.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-9)
§ 36.074 CERTAIN INFORMATION EXEMPT FROM INSPECTION AND COPYING.
   Information exempted by 5 ILCS 140/7 of the Freedom of Information Act shall
be exempt from inspection and copying. If a record contains both exempt and
nonexempt information, the exempt information shall be deleted and the
remainder of the record made available for inspection and copying.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-10)
§ 36.075 NOTICE OF DENIAL OF REQUEST; APPEALS.
   (A)   The Clerk, when denying a request for public record, shall notify the
requestor, by letter, of the decision to deny the information, and the reason
for the denial. Each notice of denial by the Clerk shall inform the person of
his or her right to appeal to the Village President in accordance with 5 ILCS
140/10 of the Freedom of Information Act. When a request is denied on the
grounds that the records are exempt under the provisions of this subchapter,
the notice of denial shall specify the exemption claimed to authorize the
denial and briefly explain how the exemption applies to the specified records
withheld.
   (B)   A requestor may appeal a denial of a request for public records to the
Village President. All appeals shall be in writing, shall be addressed to the
Village President in an envelope clearly marked “FOIA APPEAL”, and shall
include a copy of the original request, a copy of the denial or a statement
that the village failed to respond within seven working days; and a written
statement setting forth the reasons the requestor believes the appeal should be
granted.
   (C)   The Village President shall respond in writing to an appeal within
seven working days of receipt thereof. Failure to respond shall be considered a
denial of the appeal. If the Village President denies an appeal in whole or in
part, the requestor shall be informed of his or her rights to judicial review
under 5 ILCS 140/11 of the Freedom of Information Act.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-11)
§ 36.076 GRANTING OF REQUEST; PROCEDURE FOR INSPECTION.
   When a freedom of information request is granted, the documents will be made
available for inspection at the Village Hall during regular business hours.
Copies shall be made upon request as set forth in §
36.070.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-12)
§ 36.077 WRITTEN REQUEST NOT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   The following documents shall be made available for inspection and
copying without a written request; however, the requestor shall contact the
Clerk or Deputy Clerk in advance to set a mutually convenient time.
   (B)   These documents, if copied, shall be subject to the copying fee set
forth in §
36.070:
      (1)   Ordinances and written resolutions;
      (2)   The journal of the Village Board, not including executive session
minutes; and
      (3)   Any personnel code, building code, other technical code, or any
other regulation of the village adopted by the village, whether by ordinance,
resolution or otherwise.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-13)
§ 36.078 DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ABOUT PUBLIC BODIES.
   The village shall prominently display at the Village Hall, make available
for inspection and copying without charge, and shall send through the mail if
requested, each of the following:
   (A)   A brief description of itself, which will include, but not be limited
to, a short summary of its purpose, a block diagram giving its functional
subdivisions, the total amount of its operating budget, the number and location
of all of its separate offices, the approximate number of full and part-time
employees, and the identification and membership of any board, commission,
committee or council which operates in an advisory capacity relative to the
operation of the public body is required to report and be answerable for its
operations; and
   (B)   A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request
information and public records, a directory designating by titles and business
addresses those employees to whom requests for public records should be
directed, and any fees allowable under §
36.070.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-14)
§ 36.079 LIST OF CATEGORIES OF RECORDS.
   (A)   As to public records prepared or received after the effective date of
this subchapter, the Village Clerk shall maintain and make available for
inspection and copying a reasonably current list of all types or categories of
records under its control.
   (B)   The list shall be reasonably detailed in order to aid persons in
obtaining access to public records pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall furnish upon request a description of the
manner in which public records stored by means of electronic data processing
may be obtained in a form comprehensible to persons lacking knowledge of
computer language or printout format.
(2009 Code, § 15-1-15)
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION POLICY
§ 36.090 COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL LAW.
   (A)   General. The village is committed to comply with the Federal Fair and
Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, as well as provide customers,
particularly customers with utility accounts, the maximum identity theft
protection possible. Situations that lead to identity theft would hurt and
inconvenience the village’s customers, while at the same time damage the
village’s reputation and place the village at risk for losses. The village
developed this identity theft prevention policy with the oversight and approval
of the village board after considering the size and complexity of the village’s
operations and account systems and the nature and scope of the village’s
activities.
   (B)   Examples of identity theft.
      (1)   An identity thief uses another person’s Social Security number to
open a utility account.
      (2)   An identity thief uses a victim’s information to obtain
unauthorized services from the village.
      (3)   An identity thief opens a utility account using a victim’s name and
good credit.
      (4)   An identity thief files for bankruptcy using a victim’s name.
      (5)   An identity thief gives a victim’s name as his or her own when
arrested by police.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-1)
§ 36.091 RISK ASSESSMENT/IDENTIFYING RELEVANT RED FLAGS.
   (A)   While the overall risk of identity theft involving the village appears
low, the village will focus on detection and prevention from identity theft on
the following covered accounts: accounts to individual customers; all of the
village’s accounts that are individual utility service accounts held by
customers of the utility whether residential, commercial or industrial; any
account the village offers or maintains primarily for personal, family or
household purposes that involves multiple payments or transactions; and any
other account for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or
to the safety and soundness of the village from identity theft, as well as
automatic deposits to the accounts of the village employees. There will be a
periodic review to determine if the covered accounts are still accurate due to
any changes such as changes of address or other changes which may occur
relating to an account.
   (B)   Each type of covered account will be examined and reviewed for
relevant red flags in part by considering:
      (1)   The methods provided to open covered accounts;
      (2)   The methods provided to access covered accounts; and
      (3)   Previous experiences with identity theft.
   (C)   As part of the process, the village will consider the relevant red
flags provided by the regulatory guidance, as well as incidents of identity
theft that the village and/or the village customers have experienced and
applicable supervisory guidance.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-2)
§ 36.092 DETECTED RED FLAGS.
   (A)   The village is committed to detecting situations in which identity
theft might have or may have occurred.
   (B)   A RED FLAG is a pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates
the possible existence of identity theft. In order to identify relevant red
flags, the village considered risk factors such as the types of accounts that
it offers and maintains, the methods it provides to open its accounts, the
methods it provides to access its accounts and its previous experiences with
identity theft.
   (C)   Identity theft will be combated by detecting red flags in connection
with the opening of covered accounts and existing covered accounts, such as by:
      (1)   Obtaining identifying information about, and verifying the identity
of, a person opening a covered account;
      (2)   Authenticating customers’ transactions, including photo ID if
necessary, plus possible additional verification methods such as a user ID and
password;
      (3)   Monitoring transactions with emphasis on a change of address
closely followed by a new service request or a material change in a customer’s
credit use; and
      (4)   Verifying the validity of change of address requests, in the case
of existing covered accounts in order to monitor the diversion of statements as
a prelude to possible account manipulation.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-3)
§ 36.093 PREVENTING AND MITIGATING IDENTITY THEFT.
   In order to prevent and mitigate identity theft, the village will provide
appropriate responses to the following red flags.
   (A)   Alerts, notifications or warnings from a consumer reporting agency.
      (1)   A fraud or active duty alert is included with a credit report.
      (2)   A credit reporting agency provides a notice of credit freeze in
response to a request for a credit report.
      (3)   A credit reporting agency provides a notice of address discrepancy.
      (4)   Receiving a report of fraud with a credit report.
      (5)   Receiving indication from a credit report of activity that is
inconsistent with a customer’s usual pattern or activity.
   (B)   Suspicious documents.
      (1)   Documents provided for identification appear to have been altered,
forged or unauthentic.
      (2)   The photograph or physical description on the identification is not
consistent with the appearance of the applicant or person presenting the
identification.
      (3)   Receiving other documentation with information that is not
consistent with existing customer information (such as if a person’s signature
on a check appears forged).
      (4)   Receiving an application for service that appears to have been
altered or forged.
   (C)   Suspicious personal identifying information.
      (1)   The person opening the covered account or the customer fails to
provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in
response to notification that the application is incomplete.
      (2)   Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with
personal identifying information that is on file with the village.
      (3)   A person’s identifying information is the same as shown on other
applications found to be fraudulent.
      (4)   A person’s identifying information is consistent with fraudulent
activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing address).
      (5)   A person’s Social Security number is the same as another customer’s
Social Security number.
      (6)   A person’s address or phone number is the same as that of another
person.
      (7)   A person’s identifying information is not consistent with other
information the customer provides.
   (D)   Unusual use of, or suspicious activity related to, the covered
account.
      (1)   A change of address for a covered account followed by the village
receiving a request for the addition of authorized users on the account or
adding other parties.
      (2)   A covered account that has been inactive and then becomes active.
      (3)   Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account.
      (4)   Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable
although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the
customer’s covered account.
      (5)   The village is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in
connection with a customer’s covered account.
      (6)   A new account is used in a manner consistent with fraud (such as
the customer failing to make the first payment, or making the initial payment
and no other payments).
      (5)   An account being used in a way that is not consistent with prior
use (such as late or no payments when the account has been timely in the past).
      (7)   The village receives notice that a customer is not receiving his or
her paper statements.
   (E)   Notice from customers, victims of identity theft, law enforcement
authorities or other persons regarding possible identity theft in connection
with covered accounts held by the village.
      (1)   The village is notified by a customer, a victim of identity theft,
a law enforcement authority or any other person that it has opened a fraudulent
account for a person engaged in identity theft.
      (2)   (a)   Should any of the above instances of suspicious activity that
could be identity theft occur, the village will take immediate actions to
either prevent or mitigate the situation.
         (b)   In order to detect any of the red flags identified above with
the opening of a new account, village personnel will take the following steps
to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the account. Steps can
include:
            1.   Requiring certain identifying information such as name, date
of birth, residential or business address, principal place of business for an
entity, Social Security number, driver’s license or other identification;
            2.   Verifying the customer’s identity, such as by copying and
reviewing a driver’s license or other identification card;
            3.   Reviewing documentation showing the existence of a business
entity; and
            4.   Independently contacting the customer.
         (c)   In order to detect any of the red flags identified above for an
existing account, village personnel will take the following steps to monitor
transactions with an account. Steps can include:
            1.   Verifying the identification of customers if they request
information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via e-mail);
            2.   Verifying the validity of requests to change billing
addresses; and
            3.   Verifying changes in banking information given for billing and
payment purposes. Responses to these red flags are commensurate with the degree
of risk posed based on the village’s risk assessment. Appropriate responses may
include the following:
               a.   Complete verification of identification for fraud, active
duty, credit freeze or address discrepancy alert for any of these types of
alerts found on a consumer credit report when applying for services;
               b.   Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity theft
or suspicious activity by placing on the village’s watch list;
               c.   Contacting the customer;
               d.   Changing any passwords, security codes or other security
devices that permit access to a covered account;
               e.   Reopening a covered account with a new account number;
               f.   Not opening a new covered account;
               g.   Closing an existing covered account;
               h.   Not attempting to collect on a covered account or not
sending a covered account to a debt collector;
               i.   Notifying law enforcement; or
               j.   Determining that no response is warranted under the
particular circumstances.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-4)
§ 36.094 DUTIES REGARDING CHANGE OF ADDRESS.
   If a notice of change of address for an existing account is received and
then within 30 days a request for a change to the account is made, the village
will assess the validity of the change of address or requested change to the
account.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-5)
§ 36.095 UPDATING THE PROGRAM.
   (A)   The village will periodically review and update this policy (including
the red flags determined to be relevant) to reflect changes in risks to
customers or to the safety and soundness of the village from identity theft,
based on factors such as:
      (1)   Experiences with identity theft;
      (2)   Changes in methods of identity theft;
      (3)   Changes in methods to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft;
      (4)   Changes in the types of accounts or services that the village
offers or maintains; and
      (5)   Changes in our business arrangements, including services provided
and service provider arrangements.
   (B)   After considering these factors, the Program Administrator will
determine whether changes to the program, including the listing of red flags,
are warranted. If warranted, the Program Administrator will update the program
or present the Village Board with his or her recommended changes, and the
Village Board will make a determination of whether to accept, modify or reject
those changes to the program.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-6)
§ 36.096 PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The ultimate oversight of the program is the Village Board. The
Village Board has assigned specific responsibility for the program’s
implementation to the Program Administrator.
   (B)   The Program Administrator will report to the Village Board, at least
annually, on compliance by the village with all identity theft issues.
   (C)   The report will address material matters related to the program and
evaluate issues such as:
      (1)   The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the village in
addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered
accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts;
      (2)   Service provider arrangements;
      (3)   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management’s
response; and
      (4)   Recommendations for material changes to the program.
   (D)   The Village Board will take any additional steps necessary to support
this program.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-7)
§ 36.097 SERVICE PROVIDER ARRANGEMENTS.
   The village will oversee any service provider who performs an activity in
connection with one or more covered accounts. The village will take steps to
ensure that the activity of the service provider is conducted in accordance
with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent and
mitigate the risk of identity theft and require the service provider to report
any red flag to the Program Administrator.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-8)
§ 36.098 TRAINING.
   The village staff responsible for implementing the program will be trained
to recognize and detect red flags and properly react to unauthorized or
fraudulent attempts to obtain customer information. The village directs the
Program Administrator to conduct annual training for all employees regarding
identity theft and to supplement that training throughout the year as more
schemes are uncovered.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-9)
§ 36.099 EDUCATION OF CUSTOMERS.
   Educating consumers about preventing identity theft and identifying
potential pretext calls may help reduce their vulnerability to these fraudulent
practices. The village will have brochures available to consumers and an
identity theft prevention section on the village’s website that describes
preventative measures consumers can take to avoid becoming victims of these
types of fraud.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-10)
§ 36.100 OTHER APPLICABLE LEGAL REQUIREMENTS.
   As part of the overall program, the village will include other legal
requirements when needed, such as:
   (A)   Filing a suspicious activity report; and
   (B)   Implementing any requirements under which accounts may be created,
changed or altered when the village detects a fraud or active duty alert.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-11)
§ 36.101 ASSISTANCE FOR VICTIMS.
   In the event one of the village’s customers becomes a victim of identity
theft, the following steps will be taken, as appropriate, to assist them:
   (A)   Have trained personnel respond to customer calls regarding identity
theft or pretext calling;
   (B)   Determine if it is necessary to close an account immediately after a
customer reports unauthorized use of that account and create a new customer
account when appropriate. Where a customer has multiple accounts, an assessment
will be made as to whether any other account has been the subject of potential
fraud; and
   (C)   Help educate the customer about appropriate steps to take if they have
been victimized.
(2009 Code, § 22-1-12)
POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT
§ 36.115 PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person’s sex. The courts
have determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title
VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have
a right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual
harassment is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders
and sexual orientations. It is a policy of this village to prohibit harassment
of any person by any municipal official, municipal agent, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All municipal
officials, municipal agents, municipal employees and municipal agencies or
offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person, regardless of any
employment relationship or lack thereof.
(2009 Code, § 22-2-1) (Ord. 17-45, passed 12-11-2017)
§ 36.116 DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
State Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
   (A)   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
      (1)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly
a term or condition of an individual’s employment;
      (2)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
      (3)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   (B)   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
      (1)   Verbal. Sexual innuendoes, suggestive comments, insults, humor and
jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates or statements about other employees, even
outside their presence, of a sexual nature;
      (2)   Non-verbal. Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, “catcalls”, “
      (3)   Visual. Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites;
      (4)   Physical. Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault; and
      (5)   Textual/electronic. “Sexting” (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyberstalking or threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/ video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
   (C)   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a “reasonable person”.
(2009 Code, § 22-2-2) (Ord. 17-45, passed 12-11-2017)
§ 36.117 PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes himself
or herself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident
(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating his or her
position to the offending employee, and his or her immediate supervisor. It is
not necessary for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the
report.
   (B)   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following.
      (1)   Electronic/direct communication. If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express his or her objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      (2)   Contact with supervisory personnel.
         (a)   At the same time direct communication is undertaken, or in the
event the employee feels threatened or intimidated by the situation, the
problem must be promptly reported to the immediate supervisor of the person
making the report, a department head, a director of human resources, an ethics
officer, the village manager or administrator, or the chief executive officer
of the municipality.
         (b)   The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual
harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there
are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other
responsible officer, the municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of
the harassment.
      (3)   Resolution outside municipality. The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within 300 days of the alleged
incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must
be filed within 300 days.
   (C)   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited
to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
   (D)   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant’s willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
(2009 Code, § 22-2-3) (Ord. 17-45, passed 12-11-2017; Ord. 18-28, passed 11-13-
2018)
§ 36.118 PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT
ALLEGATIONS.
   (A)   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee’s:
      (1)   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
policy;
      (2)   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy; or
      (3)   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
   (B)   For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee’s involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this policy.
   (C)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   (D)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/15-10) provides
whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge,
suspension, demotion or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in
retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
      (1)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy or practice of any officer, member, state agency or
other state employee that the state employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule or regulation;
      (2)   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, state agency or other state
employee; or
      (3)   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions
of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
   (E)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer
may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a state or federal law, rule or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a state or federal law, rule or regulation.
(740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
   (F)   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is a
civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire, to
retaliate against a person because he or she has opposed that which he or she
reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment,
because he or she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under the State Human
Rights Act.
   (G)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may
file a retaliation charge due within 300 days of the alleged retaliation.
(2009 Code, § 22-2-4) (Ord. 17-45, passed 12-11-2017; Ord. 18-28, passed 11-13-
2018)
§ 36.119 CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant
to municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks
and/or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or
the prohibition on sexual harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65, may be
subject to a fine.
(2009 Code, § 22-2-5) (Ord. 17-45, passed 12-11-2017) Penalty, see §
36.999
§ 36.120 CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT.
   (A)   A FALSE REPORT is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser
using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping
sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false
report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the
seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is
a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
   (B)   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report
alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act to an ethics commission, an inspector general, the state police, a
State’s Attorney, the Attorney General or any other law enforcement official is
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(2009 Code, § 22-2-6) (Ord. 17-45, passed 12-11-2017) Penalty, see §
36.999
§ 36.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating §
36.119, or the prohibition on sexual harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65,
may be subject to a fine of up to $5,000 per offense, applicable discipline or
discharge by the municipality and any applicable fines and penalties
established pursuant to local ordinance, state law or federal law. Each
violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the
municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by an
ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a
state or federal agency.
(2009 Code, § 22-2-5)
   (C)   An ethics commission may levy an administrative fine of up to $5,000
against any person who intentionally makes a false, frivolous or bad faith
allegation in violation of §
36.120.
(2009 Code, § 22-2-6)
(Ord. 17-45, passed 12-11-2017)
CHAPTER 37: CIVIL EMERGENCY
Section
   
37.01   Definitions
   
37.02   Declaration of emergency
   
37.03   Curfew
   
37.04   Authority of President to issue orders
   
37.05   Effectiveness
   
37.06   Notification
§ 37.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY.
      (1)   A “riot or unlawful assembly” characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any power to execute by three or more persons acting
together without authority of law; or
      (2)   Any “natural disaster” or “human-made calamity”, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the village resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the village
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated
to duty with reference to the civil emergency.
(2009 Code, § 30-1-1)
§ 37.02 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Whenever an emergency as defined in §
37.01 exists, the President shall declare the existence by means of a written
declaration, setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency.
(2009 Code, § 30-1-2)
§ 37.03 CURFEW.
   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the President, he or she may
order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village or
to the village as a whole as he or she deems advisable and applicable during
such hours of the day or night as he or she deems necessary in the interest of
the public safety and welfare.
(2009 Code, § 30-1-3)
§ 37.04 AUTHORITY OF President TO ISSUE ORDERS.
   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the President may also, in the
interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following orders:
   (A)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores including taverns and
private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted;
   (B)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer;
   (C)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline or other flammable liquid or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever; and
   (E)   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property.
(2009 Code, § 30-1-4)
§ 37.05 EFFECTIVENESS.
   The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of 48
hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the President indicating
that the civil emergency no longer exists. The President shall have the power
to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each 48- hour
period during the time the civil emergency exists.
(2009 Code, § 30-1-5)
§ 37.06 NOTIFICATION.
   Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the President shall notify
the news media situated within the village and shall cause three copies of the
proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the
following places within the village:
   (A)   The Village Hall;
   (B)   The Post Office; and
   (C)   The Police Station.
(2009 Code, § 30-1-6)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-6
CHAPTER 38: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Generally
   
38.001   Corporate rate
   
38.002   Police tax
   
38.003   Audit tax
   
38.004   F.I.C.A. tax
   
38.005   General liability
   
38.006   Garbage tax
   
38.007   Worker’s compensation
   
38.008   Public parks tax
   
38.009   Street and bridge
Taxpayer’s Rights Code
   
38.020   Title
   
38.021   Scope
   
38.022   Definitions
   
38.023   Notices
   
38.024   Late payment
   
38.025   Payment
   
38.026   Certain credits and refunds
   
38.027   Audit procedure
   
38.028   Appeal
   
38.029   Hearing
   
38.030   Interest and penalties
   
38.031   Abatement
   
38.032   Installment contracts
   
38.033   Statute of limitations
   
38.034   Voluntary disclosure
   
38.035   Publication of tax ordinances
   
38.036   Internal review procedure
   
38.037   Application
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
   
38.050   Definitions
   
38.051   Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed
   
38.052   Collection of tax by retailers
   
38.053   Returns to Department
   
38.054   Resellers
Municipal Utility Tax
   
38.065   Tax imposed
   
38.066   Exceptions
   
38.067   Additional taxes
   
38.068   Definitions
   
38.069   Reports to municipality
   
38.070   Credit for over-payment
Electric Utility Tax
   
38.085   Tax imposed
   
38.086   Type of customer; rate effective
   
38.087   Effective date of subchapter
   
38.088   Exceptions
   
38.089   Additional taxes
   
38.090   Collection
   
38.091   Reports to village
   
38.092   Credit for over-payment
Tax Increment Financing; Interested Parties Registry Registration Rules
   
38.105   Definitions
   
38.106   Establishment of registry
   
38.107   Maintenance of registry
   
38.108   Registration by residents
   
38.109   Registration by organizations
   
38.110   Determination of eligibility
   
38.111   Renewal and termination
   
38.112   Amendment to registration
   
38.113   Registries available for public inspection
   
38.114   Notices to be sent to interested parties
   
38.115   Non-interference
   
38.116   Amendment of registration rules
 
   
38.999   Penalty
GENERALLY
§ 38.001 CORPORATE RATE.
   The maximum rate for general corporate purposes of the village be and the
same is hereby established at a rate of 0.25%.
(65 ILCS 5/8-3-1) (2009 Code, § 36-1-1)
§ 38.002 POLICE TAX.
   The maximum rate for police protection purposes of the village be and the
same is hereby established at a rate of 0.075%.
(65 ILCS 5/11-1-3) (2009 Code, § 36-1-2)
§ 38.003 AUDIT TAX.
   The Village Board may levy a “municipal auditing tax” upon all taxable
property in the village which will produce an amount which will equal the cost
of all auditing for the village.
(65 ILCS 5/8-8-8) (2009 Code, § 36-1-3)
§ 38.004 F.I.C.A. TAX.
   The Village Board may levy a tax upon all taxable property in the village at
whatever rate is necessary to participate in the Federal Social Security
System.
(40 ILCS 5/21-101 et seq.) (2009 Code, § 36-1-4)
§ 38.005 GENERAL LIABILITY.
   The Village Board may levy a tax upon all taxable property in the village at
whatever rate is necessary to purchase general liability insurance for the
village.
(2009 Code, § 36-1-5)
§ 38.006 GARBAGE TAX.
   The maximum tax for garbage collection purposes, be and the same is hereby
established at a rate of 0.20%.
(65 ILCS 5/11-19-4) (2009 Code, § 36-1-6)
§ 38.007 WORKER’S COMPENSATION.
   The maximum tax for worker’s compensation and occupational diseases claims
purposes, be and the same is hereby established at a rate to pay for legal
services, purchase insurance, purchase claim services, pay for judgments and
settlements.
(745 ILCS 10/9-107) (2009 Code, § 36-1-7)
§ 38.008 PUBLIC PARKS TAX.
   The maximum tax for public park purposes, be and the same is hereby
established at a rate of 0.075%.
(65 ILCS 5/11-98-1) (2009 Code, § 36-1-8)
§ 38.009 STREET AND BRIDGE.
   The maximum tax for street and bridge purposes, be and the same is hereby
established at a rate of 0.06%.
(65 ILCS 5/11-81-1 and 65 ILCS 5/11-81-2) (2009 Code, § 36-1-9)
TAXPAYER’S RIGHTS CODE
§ 38.020 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Locally Imposed
and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Code”.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-1)
§ 38.021 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the village’s procedures in
connection with all of the village’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-2)
§ 38.022 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The President and Board of Trustees.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the village other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The village’s Treasurer, is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator’s stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
subchapter to give full effect to this subchapter. The exercise of such
authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this
subchapter and the Act.
   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-3)
§ 38.023 NOTICES.
   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days prior to
the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the
local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
   (A)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons’ last known address; or
   (B)   Personal service or delivery.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-4)
§ 38.024 LATE PAYMENT.
   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:
   (A)   Physically received by the village on or before the due date; or
   (B)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the village, with adequate postage prepaid.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-5)
§ 38.025 PAYMENT.
   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order:
   (A)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;
   (B)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and
   (C)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-6)
§ 38.026 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   (B)   (1)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall
be four or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in
error was made.
      (2)   The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed
and administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (3)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the
date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-7)
§ 38.027 AUDIT PROCEDURE.
   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The tax;
      (2)   The time period of the audit; and
      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more than
30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local
tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer
is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer’s
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer’s tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
village’s determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-8)
§ 38.028 APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the local tax administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of
tax due, a bill, a claim denial or a notice of claim reduction regarding any
tax.
      (2)   The notice shall include the following information:
         (a)   The reason for the assessment;
         (b)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
         (c)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
         (d)   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund
and collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final
bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-9)
§ 38.029 HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under §
38.028, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any
appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
   (C)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-10)
§ 38.030 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest. The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment or nonpayment of the tax to be 6% per
annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return
shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be
imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period
for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty
shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling
ordinance.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-11)
§ 38.031 ABATEMENT.
   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-12)
§ 38.032 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-13)
§ 38.033 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing.
   (B)   The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the reviewed
tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and
owing.
      (1)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
      (2)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.
      (3)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-14)
§ 38.034 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the filing
of the application but not more than four years before the date of filing the
application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not
be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period before the
date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined
and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid
tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be
paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all
appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-15)
§ 38.035 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village
Clerk’s office.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-16)
§ 38.036 INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the
lien shall remain in full force and effect.
   (B)   If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator
shall:
      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the village’s expense;
      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(2009 Code, § 36-2-17)
§ 38.037 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement
all of the village’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this subchapter shall be
controlling.
(50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.) (2009 Code, § 36-2-18)
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
§ 38.050 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in such
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
   DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Revenue.
   GROSS CHARGE.
      (1)   The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in such a municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS
CHARGES for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
point within this state, charges for the channel mileage between each channel
point within this state and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-
office channel provided within the state.
      (2)   However, GROSS CHARGE shall not include:
         (a)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
            1.   The tax imposed by this subchapter;
            2.   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
            3.   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            4.   911 surcharges; or
            5.   Charges added to customers’ bills pursuant to the provisions
of §§ 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended, or any similar
charges added to customers’ bills by retailers who are not subject to rate
regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering
any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of
the Public Utilities Act.
         (b)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside
the village;
         (c)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage
of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a timesharing agreement;
         (d)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
         (e)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under § 9-
222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community
Affairs;
         (f)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this Act has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
         (g)   Bad debts (BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is related
to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
         (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunications devices; or
         (9)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside this state.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county or other political
subdivision of this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at
retail as defined in this section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment
of the tax. Such RETAILER shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such RETAILER to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the
Department at its discretion.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE OR ANY LIKE TERM.
Includes any retailer having or maintaining within the state, directly or by a
subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales
office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer
or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or
other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether
such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems and maritime systems,
SERVICE ADDRESS means the customer’s place of primary use as defined in the
Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For air-to-ground systems
and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of a taxpayer’s primary
use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in the state where bills are sent.
   TAXPAYER. A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees
or permittees, engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by the subchapter.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, private
line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer
exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized
mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service or any other form of
mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. As used in this subchapter, PRIVATE LINE means
a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-
company facilities and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered TELECOMMUNICATIONS
subject to the tax imposed under this Act. For purposes of this definition,
PREPAID TELEPHONE CALLING ARRANGEMENTS means that term as defined in § 2-27 of
the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act.
(2009 Code, § 36-3-1) (Ord. 02-06, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 38.051 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all of the following acts or
privileges:
   (A)   The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the
village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6% of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer;
   (B)   The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the
village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6% of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To
prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to
taxation under this section, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has
paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against
any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the
amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state which was not
previously allowed as a credit against any other state; and
   (C)   The tax imposed by this subchapter is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
village.
(2009 Code, § 36-3-2) (Ord. 02-06, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 38.052 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A)   (1)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from
the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and
shall be remitted by such retailer to the Department.
      (2)   Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by
this subchapter and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be
remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the
state.
      (3)   Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax
to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by the
Department.
      (4)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall constitute a debt of
the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law
in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail.
      (5)   If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then
the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the
manner provided by the Department.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this subchapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
(2009 Code, § 36-3-3) (Ord. 02-06, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 38.053 RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT.
   Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this subchapter on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the Department pursuant to the Illinois Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (Public Act 92-526, § 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to implement this
Act.
(2009 Code, § 36-3-4) (Ord. 02-06, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 38.054 RESELLERS.
   (A)   (1)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims
to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
Department for a resale number.
      (2)   Such applicant shall state facts which will show the Department why
such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by this subchapter on any
of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the
Department may reasonably require.
   (B)   (1)   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant.
      (2)   The Department may cancel any number which is obtained through
misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunications
tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer
applies because of the person’s having discontinued the making of resales.
   (C)   Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege
of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made
tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such
person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.
(2009 Code, § 36-3-5) (Ord. 02-06, passed 9-9-2002)
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
§ 38.065 TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges: persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within village and not for
resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom.
(2009 Code, § 36-4-1)
§ 38.066 EXCEPTIONS.
   None of the taxes authorized by this subchapter may be imposed with respect
to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which
such business may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United
States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision
thereof; nor shall any person engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas, be subject to taxation under the
provisions of this section for such transactions as are or may become subject
to taxation under the provisions of this section for such transactions as are
or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, nor shall any tax
authorized by this section be imposed upon any person engaged in the business
unless such tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons
engaged in the business of the same class in the municipality, whether
privately or municipally owned or operated.
(2009 Code, § 36-4-2)
§ 38.067 ADDITIONAL TAXES.
   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products
or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for
the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and
maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayers’ business.
(2009 Code, § 36-4-3)
§ 38.068 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, except for
that consideration received from the village; and for all services rendered in
connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise,
including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and
for all services rendered therewith, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of transmitting such messages without any
deduction on account of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of
materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expenses whatsoever.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
(2009 Code, § 36-4-4)
§ 38.069 REPORTS TO MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   On or before the last day of September, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the Village Treasurer for the months of June, July and August, 2002,
stating:
      (1)   His or her name;
      (2)   His or her principal place of business;
      (3)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax; and
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   On or before the last day of every third month thereafter, each
taxpayer shall make a like return to the Village Treasurer for a corresponding
three-month period.
   (C)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the Village Treasurer, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he or
she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts.
(2009 Code, § 36-4-5)
§ 38.070 CREDIT FOR OVER-PAYMENT.
   (A)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake
of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
   (B)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
such amount.
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) (2009 Code, § 36-4-6)
ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX
§ 38.085 TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
   (A)   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase
at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at
the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
      (1)   First 2,000 KWH: $0.386 per KWH;
      (2)   Next 48,000 KWH: $0.253 per KWH;
      (3)   Next 50,000 KWH: $0.228 per KWH;
      (4)   Next 400,000 KWH: $0.221 per KWH;
      (5)   Next 500,000 KWH: $0.215 per KWH;
      (6)   Next 2,000,000 KWH: $0.202 per KWH;
      (7)   Next 2,000,000 KWH: $0.199 per KWH;
      (8)   Next 5,000,000 KWH: $0.196 per KWH;
      (9)   Next 10,000,000 KWH: $0.193 per KWH; and
      (10)   Over 20,000,000 KWH: $0.190 per KWH.
   (B)   The tax rates set forth in division (A) above will be used at least
through December 31, 2008, are proportional to the rates enumerated in 65 ILCS
5/8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act 90-561), and do not exceed the revenue that
could have been collected during 1997 using the rates enumerated in 65 ILCS 5/
8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act 90-561).
(2009 Code, § 36-5-1) (Ord. 99-7, passed 6-14-1999)
§ 38.086 TYPE OF CUSTOMER; RATE EFFECTIVE.
   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, the rates set forth in §
38.085 shall be effective:
   (A)   On August 1, 1999 for residential customers; and
   (B)   On the earlier of:
      (1)   The last bill issued prior to December 31, 2000; or
      (2)   The date of the first bill issued pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/16-104,
for nonresidential customers.
(2009 Code, § 36-5-2) (Ord. 99-7, passed 6-14-1999)
§ 38.087 EFFECTIVE DATE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be effective until August 1,
2002.
(2009 Code, § 36-5-3) (Ord. 99-7, passed 6-14-1999)
§ 38.088 EXCEPTIONS.
   None of the taxes authorized by this subchapter may be imposed with respect
to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which
the business or privileges may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the
United States, be made the subject of taxation by this state or any political
subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting gas, or
electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this subchapter for those transactions that are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailer’s
Occupation Tax Act authorized by § 8-11-1; nor shall any tax authorized by this
subchapter be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any privilege
unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons
engaged in business of the same class in the municipality, whether privately or
municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege within the
municipality.
(2009 Code, § 36-5-4) (Ord. 99-7, passed 6-14-1999)
§ 38.089 ADDITIONAL TAXES.
   Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its
business.
(2009 Code, § 36-5-5) (Ord. 99-7, passed 6-14-1999)
§ 38.090 COLLECTION.
   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from the purchaser
by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser
to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this subchapter and
any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a
debt owed to the municipality by such person delivering the electricity.
Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by
adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity
for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and
filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the municipality upon
request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
municipality in the manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering
electricity who file returns pursuant to this section shall, at the time of
filing such return, pay the municipality the amount of the tax collected
pursuant to this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 36-5-6) (Ord. 99-7, passed 6-14-1999)
§ 38.091 REPORTS TO VILLAGE.
   (A)   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the village for the preceding month stating:
      (1)   His or her name;
      (2)   His or her principal place of business;
      (3)   His or her gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during the
month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax; and
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the village, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he or she so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings, and the taxable
gross receipts.
(2009 Code, § 36-5-7) (Ord. 99-7, passed 6-14-1999)
§ 38.092 CREDIT FOR OVER-PAYMENT.
   (A)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake
of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
   (B)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
such amount.
(2009 Code, § 36-5-8) (Ord. 99-7, passed 6-14-1999)
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING; INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY REGISTRATION RULES
§ 38.105 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act, 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
   CLERK. The Village Clerk.
   INTERESTED PARTY(IES).
      (1)   Any organization(s) active within the village;
      (2)   Any resident(s) of the village; and
      (3)   Any other entity or person otherwise entitled under the Act to
register in the interested parties registry who has registered in such registry
and whose registration has not been terminated in accordance with these
registration rules.
   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA. A redevelopment project area that
      (1)   Is intended to quality or that has previously or subsequently
qualified as a REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA under the Act; and
      (2)   Is subject to the “interested parties registry” requirements of the
Act.
   REGISTRATION FORM. The form appended to these registration rules, or such
revised form as may be approved by the Department consistent with the
requirements of the Act.
   REGISTRY or REGISTRIES. Each interested parties registry, and all such
registries, collectively, established by the village pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-
74.4-4.2 of the Act for a redevelopment project area.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Rochester, an Illinois municipal corporation.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-1) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.106 ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY.
   The village shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each
redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the adoption of
these rules or hereafter established.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-2) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.107 MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY.
   (A)   The registries shall be maintained by the Clerk, which has a principal
business office located at the Village Hall.
   (B)   The village may transfer the responsibility for maintaining the
registries to such other Department provided that the village:
      (1)   Gives prior written notice to all interested parties not less than
30 days prior to such transfer; and
      (2)   Publishes notice of such transfer in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-3) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.108 REGISTRATION BY RESIDENTS.
   (A)   An individual seeking to register as an interested party with respect
to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to
the Clerk.
   (B)   Such individual must also submit a copy of a current driver’s license,
lease, utility bill or such other evidence as may be acceptable to the Clerk to
establish the individual’s current residency.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-4) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.109 REGISTRATION BY ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   An organization seeking to register as an interested party with
respect to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration
form to the Clerk.
   (B)   Such organization must also submit a copy of a one-page statement
describing the organization’s current operations in the village.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-5) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.110 DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY.
   All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting
documentation complies with these registration rules shall be registered in the
applicable registry within ten business days of the Clerk’s receipt of all such
documents. The Clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant confirming
such registration. Upon registration, interested parties shall be entitled to
receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under these rules or
as otherwise required under the Act with respect to the applicable
redevelopment project area. If the Clerk determines that a registrant’s
registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not
comply with these rules, the Clerk shall give written notice to the registrant
specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to correct any
defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting documentation.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-6) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.111 RENEWAL AND TERMINATION.
   An interested party’s registration shall remain effective for a period of
three years. At any time after such three-year period, the Clerk may provide
written notice by regular mail to the interested party stating that such
registration shall terminate unless the interested party renews such
registration within 30 days of the Clerk’s mailing of written notice. To renew
such registration, the interested party shall, within such 30-day period,
complete and submit the same registration form and supporting documentation
then required of initial registrants in order to permit the Clerk to confirm
such person’s residency or such organization’s operations in the village. The
registration of all individuals and organizations whose registration form and
supporting documentation is submitted in a timely manner and complies with
these regulation rules shall be renewed for an additional, consecutive three-
year period. If the Clerk determines that a registrant’s renewal registration
form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not comply with
these registration rules, the Clerk shall give written notice to the registrant
at the address specified in the renewal registration form submitted by such
registrant, specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to
correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting
documentation within 30 days of receipt of the Clerk’s notice. If all defects
are not corrected within 30 days of the interested party’s receipt of the
Clerk’s notice, the interested party’s registration shall be terminated. Any
interested party whose registration is terminated shall be entitled to register
again as if a first-time registrant.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-7) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.112 AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION.
   (A)   An interested party may amend its registration by giving written
notice to the Clerk by certified mail for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   A change in address for notice purposes;
      (2)   In the case of organizations, a change in the name of the contact
person; and
      (3)   A termination of registration.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such notice, the Clerk shall revise the applicable
registry accordingly.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-8) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.113 REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal village
business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and telephone
number of each interested person and, for organizations, the name and phone
number of a designated contact person.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-9) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.114 NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES.
   Interested parties shall be sent the following notices as well as any other
notices required under the Act with respect to the applicable redevelopment
project area:
   (A)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of the
availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including
how to obtain this information; such notice shall be sent by mail within a
reasonable period of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing the public
hearing for the proposed redevelopment plan;
   (B)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of changes to
proposed redevelopment plans that does not:
      (1)   Add additional parcels of property to the proposed redevelopment
project area;
      (2)   Substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the
redevelopment plan;
      (3)   Substantially change the nature of or extend the life of the
redevelopment project; or
      (4)   Increase the number of low or very low income households to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area, provided that measured from the
time of creation of the redevelopment project area the total displacement of
households will exceed ten; such notice shall be sent by mail not later than
ten days following the village’s adoption by ordinance of such changes.
   (C)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(c) of the Act, notice of amendments to
a previously approved redevelopment plan that does not:
      (1)   Add additional parcels of property to the redevelopment project
area:
      (2)   Substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment
plan;
      (3)   Substantially change the nature of the redevelopment project;
      (4)   Increase the total estimated redevelopment project costs set out in
the redevelopment plan by more than 5% after adjustment for inflation from the
date the plan was adopted;
      (5)   Add additional redevelopment project costs to the itemized list of
redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan; or
      (6)   Increase the number of low or very low income households to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area, provided that measured from the
time of creation of the redevelopment project area the total displacement of
households will exceed ten; such notice shall be sent by mail not later than
ten days following the village’s adoption by ordinance of such amendment.
   (D)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9) of the Act for redevelopment
plans or projects that would result in the displacement of residents from ten
or more inhabited residential units or that contain 75 or more inhabited
residential units, notice of the availability of the annual report described by
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9), including how to obtain the certified annual report;
such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after
completion of the certified audit report.
   (E)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-6(e) of the Act, notice of the
preliminary public meeting required under the Act for a proposed redevelopment
project area that will result in the displacement of ten or more inhabited
residential units or which will contain 75 or more inhabited residential units,
such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than 15 days before the
date of such preliminary public meeting.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-10) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.115 NON-INTERFERENCE.
   These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise
interfere with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to
register for receipt of information to which they are entitled under the Act.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-11) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.116 AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION RULES.
   These registration rules may be amended by the Village Board, subject to and
consistent with the requirements of the Act.
(2009 Code, § 37-1-12) (Ord. 16-17, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 38.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §§
38.085 through
38.092 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances and in addition, shall be liable in a civil
action for the amount of tax due.
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) (2009 Code, § 36-5-9) (Ord. 99-7, passed 6-14-1999)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE
      
51.   UTILITY SYSTEMS GENERALLY
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   CROSS-CONNECTIONS
      
54.   WASTEWATER
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   License required; fee
   
50.03   Information required to obtain license
   
50.04   Application for license
   
50.05   Procedures for granting or denying license; appeals
   
50.06   Conditions of licensure
   
50.07   Rate structures
   
50.08   Truck requirement; cleanliness
   
50.09   Parked garbage trucks
   
50.10   Truck wastewaters
   
50.11   Windblown garbage unlawful
   
50.12   Garbage falling from truck
   
50.13   Accumulation of garbage unlawful
   
50.14   Location of yards for equipment
   
50.15   Industry, construction and the like
   
50.16   Procedures in the event of unmarketability of recyclables
   
50.17   Collection of over-sized solid waste
   
50.18   Customer responsibilities
   
50.19   Registration and cancellation
   
50.20   Records
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   RUBBISH. Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, wood furniture, bedding; non-combustible
trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt,
small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral
waste; street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt,
catch-basin dirt, contents of litter receptacles; provided, however, that
refuse shall not include earth and wastes from building operations, nor shall
it include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing
operations such as food processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps
and shavings.
   YARD WASTE. Material such as tree branches, yard trimmings, leaves and
grass.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-1) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)    No person, business, firm, corporation or similar entity shall engage
in the business or act of solid waste hauling or disposal within the corporate
limits of the village, including all residential and commercial collectors of
garbage and rubbish, unless licensed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and acting in accordance with the same. The village shall issue no more
than five licenses per year for the hauling or disposal of garbage within the
village. A license shall be effective from May 1 of any year through and
including April 30 of the following year. Beginning on May 1, 2017, the license
fee shall be $400 per axle of the largest garbage or waste hauler truck or
vehicle to be used by the collector during the license year. Beginning on May
1, 2018 the license fee shall be $500 per axle of the largest garbage or waste
hauler truck or vehicle to be used by the collector during the license year.
Beginning on May 1, 2023, and continuing thereafter, the license fee shall be
$700 per axle of the largest garbage or waste hauler truck or vehicle to be
used by the collector during the license year. The license fee for applications
received after May of any year or before April 30 of any year will not be
prorated. The fee shall be paid on or before May 1 of each year or immediately
upon issuance of the license if issued after May 1.
   (B)   The licensure fee shall be utilized by the village as follows:
      (1)   Two hundred and fifty dollars shall go to the village’s General
Fund to pay for the administrative of this chapter; and
      (2)   The remaining fee shall be dedicated to infrastructure improvements
and repairs related to the village’s roads.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-2) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012; Ord. 17-05, passed 2-13-
2017; Ord. 23-01, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 50.03 INFORMATION REQUIRED TO OBTAIN LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation may obtain a license to collect solid
waste within the village by submitting an application for license to the
Village Clerk and paying an annual license fee as set forth in §
50.02.
   (B)   The applications shall be on forms prescribed by the village, and
shall contain the following information about any agreements of the waste
hauler:
      (1)   The name, business address and telephone number of the person, firm
or corporation;
      (2)   If the waste hauler is a corporation, the corporation shall provide
a certificate of good standing and the name, address and telephone number of
the corporation’s president and of its registered agent;
      (3)   If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall provide the
names, addresses and telephone numbers of all partners holding greater than a
5% interest;
      (4)   If the applicant is doing business under an assumed name, the
applicant shall provide a copy of the assumed name certificate filed with the
County Clerk, if a natural person, and of the assumed name certificate filed
with the Secretary of State, if a corporation;
      (5)   The applicant shall provide proof of liability insurance in the
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence, including insurance for each vehicle, and
shall agree to keep such insurance in force during the term of the license;
      (6)   The applicant shall provide proof of worker’s compensation
insurance covering its employees in the statutory amount, and shall agree to
keep such insurance in force during the term of its license;
      (7)   The applicant shall attach a schedule of rates which it will charge
upon the license being granted, and shall agree to provide the village, as well
as any customers, with written notice of any rate changes at least 30 days in
advance of rate changes and otherwise comply with the provisions of §
50.07(E);
      (8)   The applicant shall agree to observe all provisions and conditions
of this chapter during the term of its license;
      (9)   If in accordance with §
50.16, the applicant proposes not to recycle a class of recyclable materials
due to the unavailability of markets, the applicant shall include with the
application, or may submit under separate cover, proof of the unavailability of
the market; and
      (10)   The application shall be signed by the applicant or a responsible
officer of the applicant.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-3) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon application for a license, the person applying for same shall
furnish the Village Clerk, along with the application, proof of insurance for
liability and property damage, and at that time, they shall file with the Clerk
a rate schedule for services to be performed for a residential application.
   (B)   The rate schedule shall set forth the type of service to be offered
and the price for the same, including the size and number of cans per pickup
for the charge, the charge for any extra cans, the charge for the bags, the
size of the bags, and the charge for bundles and size of the bundles; also a
rate schedule shall include an unlimited service charge; the schedule shall set
forth whether this is once- a-week or twice-a-week pickup. There shall not be
any additional charges for recycling.
   (C)   The rate schedule shall also set forth the day or days of each week
that the collector shall schedule his or her pickup within the village. The
rate schedule as filed, except the prices included therein, shall be valid for
the period of the license.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-4) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.05 PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING OR DENYING LICENSE; APPEALS.
   (A)   Applications for solid waste hauling licenses shall be submitted to
the Village Clerk, who shall process the applications within seven working days
and either grant or deny the license. If the license is denied, the village
shall state the reason for the denial in writing. Thereupon, the applicant may
appeal in accordance with division (B) below; or may within ten days resubmit a
license application curing any deficiencies, without having to pay an
additional license fee. The village shall grant the license or render a final
decision denying the license, within seven working days of resubmission.
   (B)   In the event a license is denied, the applicant may appeal the denial
of the application to the Village Board within seven working days of the final
denial, and may request a hearing. The Village Board’s determination shall be
reviewable in accordance with state statutes pertaining to administrative
review.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-5) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.06 CONDITIONS OF LICENSURE.
   A licensee under this chapter shall, as a condition of licensure, do the
following.
   (A)   The licensee shall pick up and segregate by class the following
classes of solid waste:
      (1)   Unseparated solid waste, which shall consist of solid waste of all
descriptions other than yard waste, including recyclable materials that have
not been segregated by the customer;
      (2)   (a)   Recyclable materials, which shall include:
            1.   Aluminum cans;
            2.   Steel cans;
            3.   Tin-coated cans;
            4.   No. 1 plastic;
            5.   No. 2 plastic; and
            6.   Newspapers.
         (b)   Recyclable materials shall be separated by the customer from
other classes of solid waste and placed in separate marked bins. Newspapers,
shall be placed in paper bags or baled with twine. Plastic bottles, may be tied
together with twine. The village reserves the right to expand the definition of
recyclable materials due to changing market conditions, without affecting the
validity of the license.
      (3)   Yard waste, which shall include leaves, grass clippings, wood
chips, twigs and garden waste such as weeds and stalks, when segregated and
bagged in accordance with the regulations of the facility which accepts such
yard waste from the solid waste hauler.
   (B)   The licensee shall transport and dispose of unseparated solid waste in
landfills or by any other method permitted by state and federal law.
   (C)   The licensee shall transport and dispose of recyclable materials by
selling or giving such materials to dealers in recyclable materials. Recyclable
material shall be recycled and shall not be disposed of in a solid waste
landfill or other methods without the express approval of the Village Board.
Unauthorized disposal of recyclable material may result in the cancellation of
the waste haulers license and subject to fines as provided for in §
50.99.
   (D)   The licensee shall transport yard waste to composting centers or other
facilities which accept yard waste only.
   (E)   Each licensee shall be responsible for handling the recyclable
materials and yard waste of its own customers; however, licensees may agree
among themselves to handle the recyclable materials and yard waste of another
licensee.
   (F)   The licensee shall comply with this chapter and all other ordinances
of the village and with state, county and federal laws and regulations
pertaining to solid waste management.
   (G)   On or before the fifteenth day of each month, the licensee shall
provide the village with data regarding the volume, by category, of solid waste
collected, where each type of material was disposed of or solid in the previous
month and shall provide any other data the village may reasonably require.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-6) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 RATE STRUCTURES.
   A licensee may set its own rates, subject only to the following
restrictions.
   (A)   The licensee shall set volume-based rates for commercial and
industrial customers for collection of unseparated solid waste, and shall
dispose of recyclable materials from such customers free of charge. The
licensee may agree with such customers on any frequency of pickup of solid
waste, provided that all waste is picked up at least once per week. Because the
needs of commercial and industrial customers vary from customer to customer,
the licensee need not announce a rate of general applicability, and is free,
subject to state and federal law, to discriminate among commercial and
industrial customers in the matter of rates.
   (B)   For residential customers, each licensee shall charge a basic fee,
which will entitle each residential customer to a once weekly pickup and
disposal of one 32-gallon garbage can or a 33-gallon bag of unseparated solid
waste, not to exceed 60 pounds. For unseparated solid waste in excess of the
basic service, the licensee shall charge a per 32-gallon can or 33-gallon bag
fee. The customer shall purchase stickers for such additional cans and bags
from the licensee, and shall affix a sticker to each additional can or bag to
be picked up in addition to the basic service. The rates for residential
customer shall be general applicability, and there shall be no discrimination
among residential customers as to rates; however, senior citizen discounts are
permissible.
   (C)   Recyclable materials shall be picked up from residential customers
free of charge.
   (D)   Rates for disposal of yard waste shall be volume-based. The licensee
shall charge separately for each 32-gallon can or 33-gallon bag of yard waste.
The customer shall purchase stickers from the licensees and shall affix a
sticker to each can or bag of yard waste. A yard waste sticker shall cost no
less than a sticker for unseparated solid waste.
   (E)   A licensee may change its rates from time to time in its discretion.
The licensee shall provide the village with a copy of any rate change for
residential customers at least 30 days in advance of the rate change, and shall
inform each residential customer of the rate change in writing at least 30 days
in advance of its effective date. Notice to customers may, in the discretion of
the licensee, be made by an insert in the monthly bill. However, no rate change
shall be effective unless these notice provisions are complied with.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-7) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.08 TRUCK REQUIREMENT; CLEANLINESS.
   The firm that handles the collection of trash shall be of good character and
give evidence that the equipment used by him or her is adequate for the
purposes intended. The successful firm shall have a truck or trucks which shall
be so designed that garbage and rubbish that is collected will be covered at
all times except in the loading of garbage or rubbish, so that offensive odors
are not permitted to permeate the air and cause a nuisance within the village.
The trucks and all containers in which garbage is collected and transported
shall be cleaned daily and the collector shall not collect any garbage on any
day without having a clean truck and hand containers if containers are used.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-8) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.09 PARKED GARBAGE TRUCKS.
   No truck carrying garbage or rubbish, or both, shall be parked or be
permitted to stand anywhere in the village except as provided for in §
50.14 any longer than is necessary to pick up containers; however, providing
that the standing of such vehicle was made necessary by mechanical trouble,
traffic conditions, accident or obedience to the direction of police officers
or traffic signals, shall not be considered a violation of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-9) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.10 TRUCK WASTEWATERS.
   A garbage truck or other equipment shall not be washed on village streets or
public property and will not be washed where the wastewaters will cause any
offensive odors to adjoining property owners.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-10) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.11 WINDBLOWN GARBAGE UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful to place garbage or rubbish in such a manner as to
allow the same to be blown by the wind onto the property of other residents.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-11) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.12 GARBAGE FALLING FROM TRUCK.
   It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any
garbage, refuse or ashes on any public street or alley in the village, provided
that this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse or
ashes in a container complying with the provisions of this chapter, preparatory
to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner provided
herein.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-12) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.13 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE UNLAWFUL.
   The fact that garbage or rubbish remains on an occupant’s premises in the
village in violation of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence that the
occupant of such premises is responsible for the violations of the chapter
occurring.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-13) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.14 LOCATION OF YARDS FOR EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   A licensee shall designate the location of the yards on which his or
her equipment will be parked while not in use and the equipment shall not be
parked within the village limits unless the designated location shall not, in
the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, create any nuisance for adjoining
property owners.
   (B)   The licensee shall have as additional equipment a truck for the
disposal of large or unusual items of rubbish which cannot be placed in the
designated containers and shall have available for such pickups such equipment
at least one day each week or on such additional days as may be necessary to
satisfy the needs of the public.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-14) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.15 INDUSTRY, CONSTRUCTION AND THE LIKE.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent or regulate the hauling
of rubbish or refuse from industrial processes, from construction projects or
other matter not normally collected on a regular schedule; and haulers of
rubbish not normally collected in regular collections shall be excused from the
requirements of obtaining a collector’s license as provided in this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-15) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.16 PROCEDURES IN THE EVENT OF UNMARKETABILITY OF RECYCLABLES.
   A licensee may relieve itself of the obligation to pick up and dispose of
any class of recyclable materials by submitting to the village proof of the
lack of a reasonable market for such recyclable material. Proof shall consist
of a written statement detailing the efforts the licensee has made to seek a
market for that class of recyclable material and any other written material the
licensee may have in its possession regarding market trends. Upon receipt of
such material, the village shall have 30 working days in which to verify the
validity of the licensee’s statement and to seek a market for the class of
recyclable materials. If the village finds the licensee’s statement is correct
and is unable to find a market, the licensee may upon 14 calendar days’ notice
to its customers, require the customers to place the unmarketable class of
recyclable material with the unseparated solid waste for pickup. With any
subsequent licensee application, the licensee shall submit written information
substantiating the continued unavailability of a market for that class of
recyclable materials.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-16) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.17 COLLECTION OF OVER-SIZED SOLID WASTE.
   A licensee under this chapter shall have no obligation to collect, but may
collect for a fee, set forth in the licensee’s rate structure, solid waste
materials, including, but not limited to, appliances, furniture, carpets, trees
and the like which do not fit into a 32-gallon container or 33-gallon bag or
weigh in excess of 60 pounds per item. From time to time, the village may make
arrangement for the pickup, disposal, and where appropriate, recycling, of such
materials. Residents of any commercial and industrial establishment in the
village may themselves remove and dispose of such materials or contract with
non-licensees hereunder for the removal of such materials.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-17) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.18 CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   No residential customer of a license shall, without prior agreement
with the waste hauler:
      (1)   Place unseparated and unbagged solid waste or yard waste for
collection in any can larger than 32 gallons, or place unseparated solid waste
or yard waste in any bag larger than 33 gallons;
      (2)   Place more than 60 pounds of unseparated solid waste or yard waste
in any 32- gallon can or 33-gallon bag; and
      (3)   Place a can of solid waste for collection which is not firmly
covered with a lid, or a bag which is not tied.
   (B)   No licensee is required to pick up any can or bag of solid waste which
is in violation of this section.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-18) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.19 REGISTRATION AND CANCELLATION.
   Any person or business registered with the village to provide garbage
services must provide at least 30 days’ advance written notice to its customers
and to the village prior to the cancelling or cessation of any garbage service
within the village.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-19) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.20 RECORDS.
   (A)   The village shall design and obtain license and data collection forms
for issuance to each licensee hereunder and shall maintain records of licenses
granted and denied hereunder.
   (B)   The licenses granted hereunder shall be serial numbered.
   (C)   All license application and records pertaining to grants and denials
of licenses shall be subject to disclosure to the public under the Freedom of
Information Act and village policies implementing that Act.
(2009 Code, § 16-1-20) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The Village Police Department, Public Works Department and Village
Board are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provision of this
chapter.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a monetary fine of not less than $75 nor
more than $750.
   (C)   Each and every day that a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
   (D)   The village may revoke the license of any licensee who fails to comply
with the conditions of licensure set forth in §
50.06. The village shall, before revoking a license, order a licensee to show
cause why the license should not be revoked, and shall specify the deficiencies
which the village believes exist. The licensee shall, within ten days of the
date of the notice, provide the village with written reasons and evidence why
the license should not be revoked. Within five days of receipt of such
evidence, the village shall render a decision, which may be appealed by the
licensee in the same manner as denial of licenses in accordance with §
50.05(B).
(2009 Code, § 16-1-11) (Ord. 12-06, passed 7-9-2012)
CHAPTER 51: UTILITY SYSTEMS GENERALLY
Section
Regulations and Rates; Applications, Fees and Deposits
   
51.01   Application for service
   
51.02   Premises and structure
   
51.03   Charges and deposits for new service
   
51.04   Multiple premises structures
   
51.05   Capital Improvement Fund and water and sewer connection fees
   
51.06   Private sewage disposal inspection fee
   
51.07   Water and sewer service deposit
Regulations and Rates; Billing for Service
   
51.20   Deposit
   
51.21   Water rates
   
51.22   Sewer rates
   
51.23   Minimum monthly bills
   
51.24   Payment of bills
   
51.25   Monthly billing
   
51.26   Delinquent bills, penalty
   
51.27   Recovery of delinquent bills and lien to secure payment
   
51.28   Discontinued service
   
51.29   Notice to delinquency, consequences and opportunity to contest
   
51.30   Estimated bills
   
51.31   Charge for intermittent service
   
51.32   Change in occupancy
   
51.33   Water and Sewer Clerk to render bills
   
51.34   Revenues delivered to the Village Treasurer
   
51.35   Waterworks and Sewerage Funds
   
51.36   Free service prohibited
   
51.37   Notice of liability
   
51.38   Accounts
   
51.39   Access to records
REGULATIONS AND RATES; APPLICATIONS, FEES AND DEPOSITS
§ 51.01 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Water and sewer service shall be furnished only upon filing an application
with the village upon forms to be supplied by the village. The application
shall state the name and mailing address of the applicant, the type of
structure and the number of premises to be served.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-1)
§ 51.02 PREMISES AND STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Each dwelling unit or separate business unit shall be considered a
PREMISES.
   (B)   A STRUCTURE shall be construed to cover all buildings and divisions
under one common roof and shall include one or more premises.
   (C)   For example, a duplex is one structure containing two premises.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-2)
§ 51.03 CHARGES AND DEPOSITS FOR NEW SERVICE.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued from the village for connection of any
structure to the sewer system or for construction of any private sewage
disposal system or the installation of any water meter unless or until the
applicable fees and deposits have been paid, including, if applicable, amounts
due under the fair share assessment (§ 155.131 of this code of ordinances).
   (B)   Following are the various fees and deposits required hereunder:
Description Amount
Description                            Amount
Private sewage disposal inspection fee $50 (See §
                                       51.06)
Sangamon County Water Reclamation      $300 per premises established by SCWRD
District sanitary sewer connection fee and payable to SCWRD through the SCWRD
                                       permit process
Street opening permit                  $200 (See §
                                       51.07)
                                       $50 per premises or an amount equal to
Village sewer connection fee           water connection fee for commercial
                                       users
Water and/or sewer deposit multiple    $150
resident/commercial - owner
Water and/or sewer deposit residential $100
- owner
Water and/or sewer deposit residential $200
- renter
Water connection fee                $400 per premises or the following for
                                       commercial meters:
   5/8 in. meter                    $400
   3/4 in. meter                    $470
   1 in. meter                      $565
   1-1/2 in. meter                  $1,250
   2 in. meter                      $2,500
                                       $200 (applicant provides complete proper
Water meter installation fee           meter pit; village supplies and installs
                                       meter); or
                                      $550 (village constructs meter pit as
                                       well as provides and installs meter)
 
(2009 Code, § 39-1-3) (Ord. 98-6, passed 7-13-1998)
§ 51.04 MULTIPLE PREMISES STRUCTURES.
   (A)   For structures having more than one premises, at the customer’s
option, water service may be provided by a single meter for the structure or by
individual meters for each premises.
   (B)   In the event a single structure meter is installed, the meter and
service piping shall be sized as follows:
 
No. of Premises  Meter Size Service Piping Size
3 or 4           1 in.      1-1/4 in.
5 to 12          1-1/2 in.  2 in.
Over 12 premises Meters to be sized individually
 
(2009 Code, § 39-1-4)
§ 51.05 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND AND WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees of the village does herewith create a Capital
Improvement Fund to be administered by the Treasurer of the village in the same
manner as the Treasurer administers other monies of the village, the security
of which said Fund shall be under appropriate bond of the Treasurer of the
village.
   (B)   All water and sewer connection fees and charges collected hereunder
shall be kept by the Treasurer in the Capital Improvement Fund.
   (C)   The Capital Improvement Fund shall be used only for the construction
of improvements to sewage system and components like lift stations and monitors
and the interceptor or main lines of the sewer system and water system as it is
now or will in the future be constituted; provided, however, that in the event
bonds are in the future issued by the Board of Trustees of the village for the
installation of the capital improvements above described, whether the bonds be
issued after referendum, by order of a court of competent jurisdiction or by
order of an administrative agency of the state, these said bonds and interest
accruing thereon can, from time to time, be retired by the funds available in
said Capital Improvement Fund by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the
village.
   (D)   No permit shall be issued for connection of any structure to be public
sewer system until the village sewer connection fee and the applicable SCWRD
sewer connection fee is paid for each premises. This fee shall be in addition
to any fee or deposit required for breaking the surface of streets or other
public ways.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-5)
§ 51.06 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL INSPECTION FEE.
   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Village Clerk. The
application shall be made on a form furnished by the village and shall include
a drawing showing lot lines, buildings and proposed location and dimensions of
the private sewage disposal system. A private sewage disposal inspection fee of
$50 shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-6)
§ 51.07 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE DEPOSIT.
   A deposit of $100 for individual residences and $150 for multiple residences
and commercial properties and $200 for any rental property shall be required
for each premises receiving water and/or sewer service. Upon discontinuation of
water and/or sewer service, any balance of such deposit shall be returned to
the applicant without interest. For rental property, the deposit is required to
be paid by the renter. On rental property currently being rented where the
renter has not paid the full $200, but the owner has already paid a $100
deposit, any new renter shall be required to pay $200 and at such time the
owner of the rental property shall be refunded the original $100 deposit.
Nothing herein, however, shall absolve the owner of rental property from the
ultimate responsibility for payment of any and all water and sewer services
used at the rental property.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-7) (Ord. 12-05, passed 6-11-2012)
REGULATIONS AND RATES; BILLING FOR SERVICE
§ 51.20 DEPOSIT.
   A deposit is required for each premises receiving water and/or sewer
service.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-12) (Ord. 11-1-71, passed - -)
§ 51.21 WATER RATES.
   Charges for each premises receiving water service and rates for the amount
of water consumed as measured and recorded by the water meters are hereby
established as follows:
   (A)   Water within the village limits.
      (1)   Thirty-six dollars twenty-three cents ($36.23) per month per
premises served within the village limits, consisting of a capital improvement
charge of eight dollars fifty cents ($8.50) and an OM&R charge of twenty-seven
dollars seventy-three cents ($27.73), which shall include one thousand (1,000)
gallons of water per month; plus
      (2)   Thirteen dollars thirty-two cents ($13.32) per one thousand (1,000)
gallons of water used in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallons per month.
   (B)   Water outside the village limits.
      (1)   Fifty dollars eleven cents ($50.11) per month per premises served
outside the village limits, consisting of a capital improvement charge of eight
dollars fifty cents ($8.50) and an OM&R charge of forty-one dollars sixty-one
cents ($41.61), which shall include one thousand (1,000) gallons of water per
month, plus
      (2)   Nineteen dollars ninety-eight cents ($19.98) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons of water used in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallons per
month.
   (C)   Water from irrigation meters.
      (1)   Water used from separate irrigation meters within the village
limits shall be charged at twenty-seven dollars seventy-three cents ($27.73)
consisting of an OM&R charge, which shall include one thousand (1,000) gallons
of water per month, plus thirteen dollars thirty-two cents ($13.32) per one
thousand (1,000) gallons of water used in excess of one thousand (1,000)
gallons per month.
      (2)   Water used from separate irrigation meters outside the village
limits shall be charged at forty-one dollars sixty-one cents ($41.61)
consisting of an OM&R charge, which shall include one thousand (1,000) gallons
of water per month, plus nineteen dollars ninety-eight cents ($19.98) per one
thousand (1,000) gallons of water used in excess of one thousand (1,000)
gallons per month.
   (D)   Hydrant bulk water. Hydrant bulk water used from a meter supplied by
Public Works Department shall be charged at sixty-seven dollars and thirty-two
cents ($67.32) consisting of an OM&R charge, which shall include one thousand
(1,000) gallons of water per use, plus thirty-one dollars sixty- eight cents
($31.68) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used in excess of one
thousand (1,000) gallons per use.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-13) (Ord. 18-12, passed 4-23-2018; Ord. 21-07, 4-12-2021;
Ord. 22-11, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 23-10, passed 4-10-2023; Ord. 24-10, passed
9-23-2024)
§ 51.22 SEWER RATES.
   Charges for each premises based on receiving water service and the sewer
rates based on the amount of water consumed as measured and recorded by the
water meters are hereby established as follows.
   (A)   Basic user charge. Eleven dollars seventy-nine cents ($11.79) per one
thousand (1,000) gallons of water supplied to the premises shall be applied to
all users to recover operating, maintenance, and replacement (OM&R) costs.
   (B)   Minimum charge.
      (1)   Nine dollars one cent ($9.01) per month, which consist of an OM&R
(non-flow related) charge.
      (2)   For each billed user of more than two million (2,000,000) gallons
of water per year, the minimum charge per month shall be determined by the
village at least annually for each user based upon the following formula:
 
Total number of users x $4.51
 
      (3)   The annual water usage of the user will be calculated using the
most recent 12 calendar months of information available prior to the date of
the determination, provided that if it is a new user or if there is not at
least 12 months of usage information available for any such user, the village
will estimate the annual water usage of the user. The average annual water
usage of all residential users will be calculated using the most recent 12
calendar months of information available for all residential users of the
village’s sanitary sewer system.
         (a)   All metered water users within the corporate limits of both the
village and the Sangamon County Water Reclamation District shall be subject to
and pay the minimum charge set forth above for capital improvements and non-
flow related OM&R.
         (b)   All metered water users within the corporate limits of both the
village and the Sangamon County Water Reclamation District, and served by the
Sangamon County Water Reclamation District, shall be charged the basic user
charge based on gallons of water received by that user to recover flow related
OM&R costs.
         (c)   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed,
not less often than annually, by certified public accountants for the village
in their annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised
periodically to reflect any change in local capital costs or OM&R costs.
         (d)   Computation of wastewater service charge:
            1.   The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the
following formula:
 
   CW = CU(Vu) + CC + CM
Where CW = amount of wastewater service charge $ per billing period
CU = basic user charge for operation, maintenance and replacement
Vu = wastewater volume for the billing period
CC = capital improvement charge
CM = minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement
 
            2.   The users of the wastewater treatment services will be
notified annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that
portion of the user charges which are attributable to the wastewater operation,
maintenance and replacement. The volume of flow used for computing basic user
charges and surcharges shall be metered water consumption read to the lowest
even increments of 1,000 gallons.
         (e)   1.   If any person discharging wastes into the public sewers
procures any part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than the
public waterworks system, all or part of which is discharged into the public
sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water
meters of a type approved by the Superintendent of Sewage Works for the purpose
of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
            2.   Devices for measuring the volume of water discharge may be
required by the Superintendent of Sewage Works if these volumes cannot
otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records.
            3.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the Superintendent of Public Works.
   (C)   Sewer deduct meters. The village will maintain six deduct meters that
will be available to residents. The deduct meters will allow residents to
utilize water and not be charged sewer rates for the water; instead, use of
water through the sewer deduct meters will be measured by the sewer deduct
meter and the village will reduce the resident’s bill by the sewer rate for the
amount of water used through the sewer deduct meter. Sewer deduct meters shall
be able to be utilized for the purpose of filling a residential swimming pool,
residential landscaping, and special events as defined in the village zoning
code. A sewer deduct meter shall not be allowed to be utilized by a resident
for more than three consecutive days. The resident shall sign an agreement
provided by the village that requires the resident to return the sewer deduct
meter within three days of checking it out in the same condition in which it
was given to the resident. Failure to abide by the terms of the agreement shall
result in a fine of $150 which the village may assess on the resident’s water
bill.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-14) (Ord. 97-3, passed 3-10-1997; Ord. 18-12, passed 4-23-
2018; Ord. 19-17, passed 8-12-2019; Ord. 21-07, 4-12-2021; Ord. 22-11, passed
4-11-2022; Ord. 23-10, passed 4-10-2023; Ord. 24-10, passed 9-23-2024; Ord. 24-
11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 51.23 MINIMUM MONTHLY BILLS.
   A minimum monthly bill for water and/or sewer service established by
ordinance by the Village Board shall be paid for each separate premises
receiving water and/or sewer service. The minimum monthly bill shall be charged
for each premises even though more than one premises is served by a single
sewer connection.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-15)
§ 51.24 PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the service
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such premises,
and the services are furnished to the premises by the village only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are
jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-16)
§ 51.25 MONTHLY BILLING.
   All bills for service shall be rendered monthly as of the first day of the
month succeeding the period for which the service is billed (each period of
service or “service month” shall be 30 or 31 days from the twentieth of one
calendar month to the twentieth of the next following calendar month), and
shall be payable not later than the close of business on the twentieth day of
the same month.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-17)
§ 51.26 DELINQUENT BILLS, PENALTY.
   If payment of the full amount of any bill is not made within the period of
the first to the twentieth of the month in which it is due as set forth in §
51.25, then a penalty of 10% of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-18)
§ 51.27 RECOVERY OF DELINQUENT BILLS AND LIEN TO SECURE PAYMENT.
   In the event any rates or charges for service are not paid within 30 days of
rendition of the bills, then and thereafter such delinquencies and penalty
thereon shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such service is
supplied, and the Village Water and Sewer Clerk is hereby authorized to file
sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of the county, and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice
of the payment of charges for such service. The Village Water and Sewer Clerk
is also authorized to initiate such action in the Circuit Court of the county
against all persons as may be liable for the services as set forth in §
51.24 as may be necessary to collect such delinquent amounts.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-19)
§ 51.28 DISCONTINUED SERVICE.
   If the rates or charges for such services are not paid within 45 days after
rendition of the bill for such services, with applicable penalties, such
services shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be
reinstated until all past due bills including the penalties thereon are paid in
full, together with payment made of $25 for reinstating such service.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-20) (Ord. 99-13, passed 12-13-1999)
§ 51.29 NOTICE TO DELINQUENCY, CONSEQUENCES AND OPPORTUNITY TO CONTEST.
   The Village office staff is directed to prepare and include a notice with
each bill including any amount delinquent with a duplicate of such notice to
the owner or other persons liable for the bill if not the same as the person to
whom the bill is sent, providing the following information:
   (A)   Pursuant to this chapter, there is a delinquent water bill(s) for the
premises;
   (B)   Pursuant to this chapter, a penalty has been added;
   (C)   Pursuant to this chapter each bill not paid within 30 days of
rendition constitutes a lien in the amount of such delinquency upon the real
estate, notice of which may be recorded at the County Recorder of Deeds’
office, and for which the village is authorized to file suit in the Circuit
Court against the responsible parties, which by ordinance includes the owner of
the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the services, jointly and
severally;
   (D)   If the rates or charges for said services are not paid within 45 days
after rendition of the bill for such services, with applicable penalties, such
services shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be
reinstated until all past due bills, including the penalty thereupon, are paid
in full, together with payment of $25 for reinstating such service, all
pursuant to ordinance;
   (E)   Each, any or all of the persons responsible for the delinquent water
service bill may meet with a village employee at the Village Hall during
regular business hours and present any evidence that the bill is in error, that
payment has been made for which credit was not given, or any other evidence,
information or reason negating or correcting the delinquency shown on the
village records; and
   (F)   There shall be added to any delinquent bill a charge of $10 for each
notice from the village sent by certified mail and, if such certified mail is
not retrieved by the responsible party, a charge of $50 for the hand delivery
of each notice by the Village Police Department.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-21) (Ord. 04-16-84, passed - -; Ord. 98-6, passed 7-13-1998;
Ord. 99-13, passed 12-13-1999)
§ 51.30 ESTIMATED BILLS.
   (A)   When it is not possible for meter readers to read the meter, the
amount of water used will be estimated on the basis of part use on the premises
in comparable periods, and a bill submitted for this amount of water.
   (B)   A correction of estimated bills will not be made until the next
billing is made on the basis of an actual meter reading. Refund of over-
payments will not be made but will be credited to the customer’s account. If
the customer terminates his or her water service account, any refund due will
be credited on the final bill.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-22)
§ 51.31 CHARGE FOR INTERMITTENT SERVICE.
   If a user requests temporary suspension of service, the charge for
resumption of service shall be $10, unless the request is for temporary
suspension for a period no less than 45 days for which there will be no charge
for resumption of service.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-23) (Ord. 99-13, passed 12-13-1999)
§ 51.32 CHANGE IN OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Any user of the waterworks system requesting a termination of services
shall be given written notice to the village hall office ten days prior to time
that such termination of services is desired.
   (B)   At that time, the meter shall be read by the village, and a bill
rendered to the occupant requesting the termination of the services.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-24)
§ 51.33 WATER AND SEWER CLERK TO RENDER BILLS.
   It is hereby made the duty of the village office staff to render bills for
service and for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect
all monies due thereon.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-25) (Ord. 06-05-72, passed - -)
§ 51.34 REVENUES DELIVERED TO THE VILLAGE TREASURER.
   All revenues and monies from the operation of the water and sewerage systems
shall be deposited in separate accounts for each system. All such revenues and
monies shall be held by the Village Treasurer separate and apart from all other
funds of the village and all of said sums, without any deductions whatever,
shall be delivered to the Village Treasurer not more than ten days after
receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may, from time to
time, be directed by the President and Board of Trustees.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-26)
§ 51.35 WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUNDS.
   The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage and
waterworks systems and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such systems as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in
the account of the funds designated as the Sewerage and Waterworks Funds of the
village and said Treasurer shall administer such Funds in every respect in the
manner provided by statute.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-27)
§ 51.36 FREE SERVICE PROHIBITED.
   No free service of any of the services supplied by the waterworks and
sewerage systems shall be supplied by the village or to any other person.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-28)
§ 51.37 NOTICE OF LIABILITY.
   A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the Village Clerk, shall be
filed in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds and shall be deemed notice
to all owners of real estate of their liability for service supplied to any
user of the service of the waterworks and sewerage systems of the village on
their properties.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-29) (Ord. 92-4, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 51.38 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage and
waterworks systems and at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be
made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursement of the sewerage and waterworks systems.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
water and wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that
sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet
these regulations.
      (2)   In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
         (a)   Flow data showing total gallons pumped to the SCWRD for the
current fiscal year;
         (b)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal
year;
         (c)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
         (d)   Number of users connected to the system;
         (e)   Number of non-metered users; and
         (f)   A list of users discharging non-domestic and industrial wastes.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-30)
§ 51.39 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the
village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination,
excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of any
grant and/or loan agreements.
(2009 Code, § 39-1-31) (Ord. 92-4, passed 5-11-1992)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
Regulations
   
52.01   Service line from main to meter and meter assembly
   
52.02   Interruption of service
   
52.03   Damages from water system breakdown
   
52.04   No consumer shall supply other consumers
   
52.05   Consumer service piping
   
52.06   Water meter location
   
52.07   Easements
   
52.08   Changes to water system equipment prohibited
   
52.09   Interconnection of structures prohibited
   
52.10   Reselling of water prohibited
   
52.11   Water service outside corporate limits
   
52.12   Protection from damages
   
52.13   Water well permits required
   
52.14   Abandoned connection
   
52.15   Alternative water source
   
52.16   Rules to become part of contract
Extension of Mains
   
52.30   Easements
   
52.31   Size and type
   
52.32   Title
   
52.33   Maintenance and replacement
Cross-reference:
   Cross-connections, see
Ch. 53
   Utility systems generally, see
Ch. 51
   Wastewater, see
Ch. 54
REGULATIONS
§ 52.01 SERVICE LINE FROM MAIN TO METER AND METER ASSEMBLY.
   The village shall install, own and be responsible for the maintenance of the
service line from the main to the meter and the complete meter assembly.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-1)
§ 52.02 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   The village reserves the right to shut off water at any time in the mains
for the purpose of repairing, cleaning, making connections with or extensions
to same, or for the concentrating of water in any part of the village in case
of fire, and for restricting the use of water in case of deficiency in supply,
including the suspension of the use of water for sprinkling lawns or gardens.
No claims shall be made against the village by reason of the breaking of any
service pipe, or service cock, or damage arising from shutting off the water
for repairing, laying or relaying mains, hydrants or other connections or
repairing any part of the water system, or from failure of the water supply, or
by increasing or decreasing the water pressure at any time, or because of the
concentrated or restricted use of any water as above outlined.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-2)
§ 52.03 DAMAGES FROM WATER SYSTEM BREAKDOWN.
   All water service supplied by the system shall be upon the express condition
that the village shall not be liable nor shall any claims be made against it
for damages or injury caused by reason of the breakage of any main, branches,
service pipes, apparatus, appurtenances connected with said system, or any part
or portion thereof, or for any interruption of the supply by reason of the
breakdown of machinery, or by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions or
renewals.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-3)
§ 52.04 NO CONSUMER SHALL SUPPLY OTHER CONSUMERS.
   No water supplied by the waterworks system shall be resold by any user. No
water user may supply water to other families or allow them to take it, except
for use on the premises and for the purpose specified in such user’s approved
application, nor after water is introduced into any building or upon any
premises shall any person make or employ any other person to make any tap or
connection with work upon the premises for alterations, repairs, extension or
attachments without written permit therefor. Resale or unauthorized use of
water shall be grounds for discontinuance of water service to the user, or the
premises, or both. This section shall not apply to an approved retail seller of
water.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-4)
§ 52.05 CONSUMER SERVICE PIPING.
   It is understood that the water consumers shall pay for, install and
maintain his or her service line from the location of the meter to his or her
premises.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-5)
§ 52.06 WATER METER LOCATION.
   In a normal situation the water meter will be installed adjacent to the
sidewalk, or where the sidewalk location would be, on village owned property.
In the event that his or her location is not practical, the property owner
shall give an easement for the location of the meter on his or her property.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-6)
§ 52.07 EASEMENTS.
   It is understood by the applicant that should the need arise, the applicant
shall give an easement for any part of the water system that shall be installed
on the applicant’s property.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-7)
§ 52.08 CHANGES TO WATER SYSTEM EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.
   No user of water supplied by the waterworks system shall be allowed to
tamper with or make changes to any equipment of waterworks system owned by the
village; i.e., water meters, shut-off valves and the like.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-8)
§ 52.09 INTERCONNECTION OF STRUCTURES PROHIBITED.
   No owner or plumber shall be permitted to conduct water pipes into any two
distinct structures unless separate and distinct stop cocks and meters shall be
placed at a location acceptable to the Village Trustee in charge of the water.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-9)
§ 52.10 RESELLING OF WATER PROHIBITED.
   No water supplied by the waterworks system of the village shall be resold by
any user without permission of the village, and unauthorized resale shall be
grounds for the discontinuance of water service to the user reselling such
water.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-10)
§ 52.11 WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (A)   No person owning, leasing, representing or controlling real property
lying in whole or part outside the village shall be permitted to tap or connect
into any part of the water system of the village.
   (B)   Water service charges to properties now served, or hereinafter served
for any reason, outside the village limits shall be billed uniformly at 150%
the rate provided for such service within the village limits; and the real
properties, whether occupied by the owners or renters thereof, shall be subject
to lien for unpaid water service charges in the same manner and to the same
extent as provided by law and the provisions for this code for village-located
properties.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-11)
§ 52.12 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGES.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover or deface or tamper with any structures, appurtenances or
equipment which are a part of the village sewage and waterworks. Any person
violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to immediate arrest
under a charge of disorderly conduct or malicious mischief.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-12) (Ord. 11-01-71, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.13 WATER WELL PERMITS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to drill a water well in the village without the proper
permits from the state, county, and the Village Board. All wells shall comply
with the cross-connection regulations in
Chapter 53 of this code of ordinances. No wells shall be drilled when the
property is within 200 feet of the municipal water main.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.14 ABANDONED CONNECTION.
   Whenever any connection to the waterworks system is abandoned, because the
building to which the water connection is made has been abandoned, destroyed or
removed, the Superintendent may remove the meter and any pipe or connections in
the public right-of-way or easement, and cap, plug or otherwise seal the pipe
or main. Before taking any such steps the Superintendent shall notify the owner
of the real estate if the owner’s name and address is known, and shall notify
the person shown on the real estate tax records as having paid taxes on the
property the last time taxes were paid. Such notice shall be made by mail, at
least 30 days before any action is taken under this section. If water is
leaking, the Superintendent shall take immediate action, and send the notices
within three working days of the time action was taken.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-14)
§ 52.15 ALTERNATIVE WATER SOURCE.
   (A)   Any customer with critical water requirements shall have an alternate
water source approved by the village. Failure to provide such shall be
considered a violation of customer rules and loss or damages resulting
therefrom shall be the responsibility of the customer. Those customers shall
include, but not be limited to, manufacturers, hospitals, nursing homes,
schools, greenhouses, hatcheries or any other building or business which might
suffer any type of loss due to interruption of water service.
   (B)   The village expressly stipulates with all customers and other persons
who may be affected by the discontinuance of service that it will neither
insure nor be responsible or liable in any manner for any loss or damages,
direct or indirect, by reason of fire or any other cause and all water service
furnished shall also be conditional upon acts of God, inevitable accidents,
failure of supply, fire, strikes, riots or any other causes.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-15)
§ 52.16 RULES TO BECOME PART OF CONTRACT.
   All of the rules and regulations concerning the use of the facilities of the
water system and the consumption of water shall be adopted and the same shall
become part of the contract with every water consumer and every water consumer
shall be considered to take water from the village, subject thereto and bound
thereby.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-16)
EXTENSION OF MAINS
§ 52.30 EASEMENTS.
   Applicants for main extensions shall deliver, without cost to the village,
permanent easements or rights-of-way when necessary for the installation and
maintenance of the extensions or subsequent additions thereto. The village
shall not be obligated to authorize any construction until all requirements of
this chapter have been met.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-21)
§ 52.31 SIZE AND TYPE.
   The village reserves the right to determine and specify the diameter and
type of pipe required to provide the service requested, and subject to the
requirements of municipal authorities, its location within or without the
limits of a street. The village further reserves the right to install a main
larger in diameter than the main required to render the service requested, in
which case, the village will pay the difference in cost.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-22)
§ 52.32 TITLE.
   Title to all main extensions shall be vested in the village and the village
shall have the right to further extend any main installed in and to other
streets or premises without repayment or refund to any applicant. However, the
village reserves the right to consider extensions made at the applicant’s
expense and without written agreement as to service lines. Upon such lines, the
village will set a meter at the beginning of the extension to measure all water
used and title to the line beyond the meter will be vested in the customer who
shall be responsible for maintenance and replacement, when necessary.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-23)
§ 52.33 MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT.
   The village, at its own expense, shall maintain and when necessary, replace
the village-owned mains used to supply water to its customers, and if adequate
service requires the reconstruction or replacement of such mains, the mains
shall be reconstructed or replaced by the village at its expense.
(2009 Code, § 39-2-24)
CHAPTER 53: CROSS-CONNECTIONS
Section
Cross-Connection Administration
   
53.01   Approved backflow device
   
53.02   Cross-connection prohibited; exception
   
53.03   Investigations by Operator in Responsible Charge
   
53.04   Right to enter premises
   
53.05   Notice to customer; reconnect fee
   
53.06   Contaminations cost and the consumer
Cross-Connection Control Code
   
53.20   Purpose
   
53.21   Application
   
53.22   Responsibility of owner
   
53.23   Definitions
   
53.24   Water system
   
53.25   Cross-connection prohibited
   
53.26   Survey and investigations
   
53.27   Where protection is required
   
53.28   Type of protection required
   
53.29   Backflow prevention devices
   
53.30   Inspection and maintenance
   
53.31   Booster pumps
 
   
53.99   Penalty
CROSS-CONNECTION ADMINISTRATION
§ 53.01 APPROVED BACKFLOW DEVICE.
   All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in accordance
with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If, in accordance with
the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Inspector, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
supply system, the Inspector shall give notice to the water customer to install
such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his or her
own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, State Environmental Protection
Agency and all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and
tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the
Illinois Plumbing Code, State Environmental Protection Agency and local
regulations.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-1)
§ 53.02 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit
to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply other than the regular public water supply enters the supply or
distribution system of the village, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency
water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have
been approved by the water operator in responsible charge (ORC) and the State
Environmental Protection Agency.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-2) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.03 INVESTIGATIONS BY OPERATOR IN RESPONSIBLE CHARGE.
   It shall be the duty of the ORC to cause surveys and investigations to be
made of commercial industrial and other properties served by the public water
supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of
public record and shall be repeated at least every two years or as often as the
Inspector shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and
available for review for a period of at least five years.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-3)
§ 53.04 RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES.
   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the right
to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply or distribution system for the purpose of verifying the
presence or absence of cross-connections and that the Inspector or his or her
authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross-connection control inspection. On demand, the
owner, lessee or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
Inspector any information which he or she may request regarding the piping
system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such
information when demanded shall, within the discretion of the Inspector, be
evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-4)
§ 53.05 NOTICE TO CUSTOMER; RECONNECT FEE.
   (A)   The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any
property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this chapter
is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he or she
may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored
until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and until a reconnection fee of $100 is paid to the
Village Clerk.
   (B)   Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
Inspector is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the
public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written
notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without
notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the
reasonable opinion of the Inspector or the State Environmental Protection
Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or
pollution of the public water supply.
   (C)   The public water supply, ORC, operator in responsible charge, the
Inspector or the agents or assigns shall not be liable to any customer for any
injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of the
customer’s water supply in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether
or not said termination was with or without notice.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-5)
§ 53.06 CONTAMINATIONS COST AND THE CONSUMER.
   The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, shall bear the cost of clean-up,
disinfecting, boil order notice, repairs, labor and overtime, all testing, to
remedy the system safe (to the public as dictated by the water systems operator
in responsible charge (ORC)) of the potable water supply system.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-6) (Ord. 87-2, passed 1-26-1987)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL CODE
§ 53.20 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
   (A)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system;
   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s potable water system and
non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety; and
   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer’s potable water systems.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-11)
§ 53.21 APPLICATION.
   These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public
potable water supply system of the village.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-12)
§ 53.22 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the
public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage
of contaminants through the customers water service connection. If, in the
judgment of the ORC or his or her authorized representative, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
supply system, the ORC shall give notice to the consumer to install such
approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises.
The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his
or her own expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer
to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have
been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance,
testing and repair as required in §
53.30(D) for a period of at least five years. The ORC may require the consumer
to submit a cross-connection inspection report to the village to assist in
determining whether or not service line protection will be required. All cross-
connection inspections shall be conducted by a cross-connection control device
inspector certified by the State Environmental Protection Agency.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-13)
§ 53.23 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor’s public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW. The backflow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in the state must meet the standards of the Illinois
Plumbing Code and the State Environmental Protection Agency.
   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer’s
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a CUSTOMER’S WATER
SYSTEM.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015, a DOUBLE CHECK VALVE
ASSEMBLY and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check
valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word SEVERE as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
   INSPECTOR. EPA approved cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI).
   INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604.
   OPERATOR IN RESPONSIBLE CHARGE. (ORC)
   PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or
at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. PLUMBING includes all piping, from discharge of
pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. PLUMBING
includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building
drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of
connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604
for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUID(S).
      (1)   Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, or biologically or
otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced into the public
or a consumer’s potable water system.
      (2)   This includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
         (b)   Process waters;
         (c)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system
which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
         (d)   Cooling waters;
         (e)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams or irrigation systems;
         (f)   Chemicals in solution or suspension; and
         (g)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at
least 25 persons at least 60 days per year. A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY is either a
community water supply or a non-community water supply.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check
valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply
pressure. The unit must include tightly closed shutoff valves located at each
end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
   SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer’s piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within
that customer’s piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should
not be an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer’s potable water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-14)
§ 53.24 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system; and the consumer’s water system.
   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the ORC up to the point where the
consumer’s water system begins.
   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer’s water
system.
   (E)   The consumer’s water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-15)
§ 53.25 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where village approved cross-connection
control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure
proper operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the Agency.
   (C)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-16)
§ 53.26 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer’s premises, and
testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the
consumer’s premises.
   (B)   On request of the ORC, or his or her authorized representative, the
consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or systems or
water use within the customer’s premises. The consumer’s premises shall be open
at all reasonable times to the ORC for the verification of information
submitted by the consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross-
connection inspection results.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his or her water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or her
public potable water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing
inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225 ILCS 320/3.
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
      (1)   All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage;
      (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s instructions;
      (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions; and
      (4)   Testing and records:
         (a)   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer;
         (b)   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with 415 ILCS 5/4
(e);
         (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs; and
         (d)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
            1.   Date of each test;
            2.   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
            3.   Test results;
            4.   Repairs or servicing required;
            5.   Repairs and date completed; and
            6.   Serving performed and date completed.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-17)
§ 53.27 WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890, latest edition, and the Agency’s regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In
addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises, where in the
judgment of the ORC, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply
system exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the ORC and the source is
approved by the State Environmental Protection Agency;
      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or system containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the ORC;
      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the ORC, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements make which it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist;
      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey; and
      (5)   Premises having a repeated history or cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
   (C)   (1)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency’s regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.
      (2)   In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer’s water system serving, but not
necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the Operator
in Responsible Charge or ORC determines that no actual or potential hazard to
the public water supply system exists:
         (a)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
         (b)   Laboratories;
         (c)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
         (d)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations;
         (e)   Food or beverages processing plants;
         (f)   Chemical plants;
         (g)   Metal plating industries;
         (h)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
         (i)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
         (j)   Car washes;
         (k)   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks; and
         (l)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-18)
§ 53.28 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The type of protection required under §
53.27 of these regulations shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as
follows.
      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard.
      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to
health.
   (B)   The type of protection required under §
53.27 of these regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation
or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      (1)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals;
      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source;
      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or
      (4)   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into
the fire safety system.
   (D)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-19)
§ 53.29 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of
the device shall be performed. Manufacturer’s maintenance manual shall be
available on-site.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-20)
§ 53.30 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer’s instructions.
      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five days.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five
days.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      (3)   Test results;
      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by §
53.99.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
ORC.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-21)
§ 53.31 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the ORC, at
least once a year, that the device is operable.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-22)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The ORC shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the
occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow
prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested,
maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the ORC, or if it is found
that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an
unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cut-
off required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working
order.
   (B)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the ORC, and the required
reconnection fee is paid.
   (C)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects on conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the ORC.
   (D)   Neither the village, the ORC or its agents or assigns shall be liable
to any customers of the village for any injury, damages or lost revenues which
may result from termination of said customer’s water supply in accordance with
the terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination of the water supply
was with or without notice.
   (E)   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
clean-up, disinfecting, boil order notices, repairs, labor and overtime, all
testing to remedy the system safe to the public as dictated by the water
systems operator in responsible charge (ORC) of the potable water supply
system.
   (F)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall
be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing
a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violation.
   (G)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter in addition
to the fine provided, shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss
or damage occasioned by the village by reason of such violation, whether the
same was caused before or after notice.
(2009 Code, § 39-3-23)
CHAPTER 54: WASTEWATER
Section
Definitions
   
54.001   Definitions
Use of Public Wastewaters Required
   
54.015   Deposit of wastes
   
54.016   Sewage in natural outlet
   
54.017   Private system, unlawful
   
54.018   Connection to system required
Private Sewage Disposal
   
54.030   Private sewage system
   
54.031   Health Department approval
   
54.032   Permit approval
   
54.033   Compliance with state and county requirements
   
54.034   Availability of public wastewater
   
54.035   Operation of private system
   
54.036   Additional restrictions
   
54.037   Time constraints for public wastewater
Building Wastewater and Connections
   
54.050   Disturbing system unlawful
   
54.051   Compliance with regulating authorities
   
54.052   Classes of permits
   
54.053   Cost borne by owner
   
54.054   Separate wastewater: exception
   
54.055   Old building wastewater
   
54.056   Construction methods
   
54.057   Prohibited connections
   
54.058   Connections to wastewater mains
   
54.059   Capacity of wastewater
   
54.060   Tap-In supervision and testing
   
54.061   Inspection
   
54.062   Protection of property
   
54.063   Bond required
   
54.064   Unlawful discharges
Extension of Collecting Wastewaters
   
54.080   Permit required; authorized personnel
   
54.081   Extension permits
   
54.082   Materials
   
54.083   Inspections of construction
   
54.084   Manholes required
Use of Public Wastewater Facilities
   
54.095   Discharge of storm water
   
54.096   Storm water
   
54.097   Regulations of wastes
   
54.098   Harmful effects of certain materials
   
54.099   Harmful wastes: approval
   
54.100   Grease and oil interceptors
   
54.101   Flow-equalizing facilities
   
54.102   Industrial wastes control manhole
   
54.103   Industrial waste testing
   
54.104   Measurements and tests
   
54.105   Special arrangements
Inspections
   
54.120   Damage
   
54.121   Inspection and testing
   
54.122   Liability of village
   
54.123   Private property inspections
Sewer Rates
   
54.135   Building unit defined
   
54.136   Sewer revenues
   
54.137   Sewer accounts
   
54.138   Notice of rates
   
54.139   Access to records
   
54.140   Appeals
 
   
54.999   Penalty
   
Appendices
DEFINITIONS
§ 54.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (A)   Clarification of word usage.
      MAY. Is permissible.
      SHALL. Is mandatory.
   (B)   Government, federal.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
      FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 466 et seq.) as
amended, (Pub. L. 95-217).
      FEDERAL GRANT. The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II grants for
construction of treatment works of the Act and implementing regulations.
   (C)   Government, local.
      APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Superintendent of the village or his or her
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
      INSPECTOR. The Superintendent or other person or persons duly authorized
by the village to inspect and approve the installation of building sewer and
their connection to the sanitary sewer system.
      NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by
the Administrator, or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of
the Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
§ 402 of the Federal Act.
      PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private cooperation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   (D)   Government, state.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
      STATE GRANT. The state participation in the financing of the construction
of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and
for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of
Illinois.
   (E)   Treatment.
      PRETREATMENT. The treatment of sewer from sources before introduction
into the sewer treatment works.
      SEWER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating sewer, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with
WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or SEWER TREATMENT PLANT or POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT.
   (F)   Types of charges.
      BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE. The charge levied on users to improve, extend
or reconstruct the sewage treatment works.
      DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for
payment of interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond and the like)
outstanding.
      LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE. Charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance and replacements costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs.
      REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term operation and maintenance includes
REPLACEMENT.
      RESERVE FUND CHARGE. A revolving fund for expansion and construction of
the sewer system.
      SEWER FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewer system.
      SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per quarter or month levied on all users
of the sewer facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in
Chapter 51 of this code of ordinances and shall consist of the total or the
basic user charge, the local capital cost and a surcharge, if applicable.
      SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than average concentration values as established by code.
      USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the collection system and/
or treatment works will be operated.
      USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost
operation, maintenance and replacement.
   (G)   User types.
      COMMERCIAL USER. Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering services.
      CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial
wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop.
The purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
      INDUSTRIAL USER. Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into products.
      INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Includes schools, churches, penal
institutions and users associated with federal, state and local governments.
      RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units such as houses, buildings, mobile
homes, apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings.
      USER CLASS. The type of user either residential or commercial (non-
industrial) or industrial as defined herein.
   (H)   Wastewater and its characteristics.
      BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
      EFFLUENT CRITERIA. Defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
      FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from sewer by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A sewer shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly
pretreated and the sewer does not interfere with the collection system.
      GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
      MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user the publicly owned
treatment works that:
         (a)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
         (b)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
         (c)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined
in standards issued under § 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
         (d)   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with
the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works
receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon
the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
      MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l). A unit of the concentration of water or
sewer constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in 1,000 milliliter of
water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to
which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and
sewer analysis.
      pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
      POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial
or other waste on a treatment works or stream. ONE POPULATION EQUIVALENT is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of
suspended solids.
      ppm. Parts per million by weight.
      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
      SEWAGE. Used interchangeably with SEWER.
      SEWER. The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it
may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present.
      SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by
a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories Methods.
      UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewer and sewer treatment facilities provided.
      WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. Defined in the water pollution regulations of
the state.
   (I)   Wastewater facilities.
      WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required
to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   (J)   Wastewater types and appurtenances.
      BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.
      BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
      COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive sewer,
storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
      EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
other.
      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village. It shall also include sewer within or outside the village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village
sanitary sewer or combined sewer system, even though that sewer may not have
been constructed with village funds.
      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and groundwaters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
      SEWER.
         (a)   A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste
liquids, including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
         (b)   The system of sewer and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
      STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater
drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
      STORM WATER RUNOFF. The portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewer.
   (K)   Watercourse and connections.
      NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
      WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-1) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
USE OF PUBLIC WASTEWATERS REQUIRED
§ 54.015 DEPOSIT OF WASTES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-4) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.016 SEWAGE IN NATURAL OUTLET.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village,
or in area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-5) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.017 PRIVATE SYSTEM, UNLAWFUL.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-6) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.018 CONNECTION TO SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   The owner of all the houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the village
and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located any public sanitary (or combined) sewer of the
village is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days
after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is
within 200 feet of the nearest property line and adequate to handle the
additional connection, where determined to be required.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-7) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
54.999
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 54.030 PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM.
   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of §
54.018, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-10) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.031 HEALTH DEPARTMENT APPROVAL.
   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit from the appropriate Health
Department. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished
by the village which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the Superintendent.
A permit and inspection fee of $100 shall be paid to the village at the time
the application is filed.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-11) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.032 PERMIT APPROVAL.
   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the
receipt of written notice by the Superintendent.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-12) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.033 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND COUNTY REQUIREMENTS.
   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Private Sewage
Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the State Environmental Protection
Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 40,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet. In case of conflicts between codes, the more
restrictive shall apply.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-13) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.034 AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC WASTEWATER.
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
54.018, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be properly cleaned out and subsequently punctured
with proportionally-sized, drilled holes to the bottom of the disposal
facilities before they are filled with suitable material.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-14) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992; Ord. 21-18, passed 7-12-
2021)
§ 54.035 OPERATION OF PRIVATE SYSTEM.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the village.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-15) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.036 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the local Health Officer.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-16) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.037 TIME CONSTRAINTS FOR PUBLIC WASTEWATER.
    When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within 90 days and the private sewage disposal system
shall be cleaned of sludge, punctured with proportionally-sized, drilled holes
to the bottom of the system and filled with clean bank-run gravel, dirt, or any
other suitable material.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-17) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992; Ord. 21-18, passed 7-12-
2021)
BUILDING WASTEWATER AND CONNECTIONS
§ 54.050 DISTURBING SYSTEM UNLAWFUL.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening
into; use; alter; or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-21) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.051 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATING AUTHORITIES.
   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those
discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-22) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.052 CLASSES OF PERMITS.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits as follows:
      (1)   Residential sewer service; and
      (2)   Service to commercial or institutional establishments or industrial
sewer service.
   (B)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make applications
on a special form furnished by the village. (See Appendix #5.) The fee per
connection shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed
pursuant to §
51.03 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, shall
provide information describing its sewer constituents, characteristics and type
of activity.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-23) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.053 COST BORNE BY OWNER.
   All costs and expenses including labor and material incidental to the
installation, connection and maintenance of a lateral sewer line shall be borne
by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the village from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation,
connection and maintenance of the lateral sewer lines. This section shall apply
even where the lateral sewer line runs under a public street, public right-of-
way or public easement.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-24) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.054 SEPARATE WASTEWATER: EXCEPTION.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer; except for sewer connection charges
accruing from such buildings or properties.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-25) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.055 OLD BUILDING WASTEWATER.
   Old building sewer may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-26) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.056 CONSTRUCTION METHODS.
   (A)   The size, slope, depth and alignment, of the building sewer shall be
subject to the approval of the Superintendent and the Illinois Plumbing Code,
latest edition. In no case shall the inside diameter of the building sewer be
less than four inches. If six-inch diameter pipe is used, the slope shall not
be less than one-eighth inch per foot. If four-inch or five-inch diameter pipe
is used, the slope shall not be less one-fourth inch per foot. The depth of the
building sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. Building
sewer lines must be witnessed by Sangamon County Water Reclamation District
(SCWRD). The building sewer shall be laid at a uniform grade and in straight
alignment, insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with
properly curved pipe and fittings, unless the break in alignment is made at a
manhole facilitating servicing. Installation shall be in accordance with
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, and
Illinois Plumbing Code, latest edition.
   (B)   All building sewer shall be constructed of materials approved by the
village. Generally all building sewer shall be constructed of the following
materials:
      (1)   Ductile iron pipe; and
      (2)   PVC solid wall plastic pipe (six-inch diameter maximum) SDR-35
(minimum).
   (C)   All pipe joints must be gas-tight and water-tight and are subject to
the approval of the village. Transition joints from one pipe material to
another shall be made using fittings manufactured for such transitions.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-27) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.057 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to public sanitary sewer.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-30) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.058 CONNECTIONS TO WASTEWATER MAINS.
   (A)   Generally. Building sewer connections with any sewer main shall be
made only at main or other such junctions as may be provided or designated by
the village, and then only in such manner as directed by the village. The
connection of the building sewer shall be made with a wye branch. The building
service sewer shall enter the sewer main or lateral by way of a wye.
   (B)   Connection in absence of wye. In the event of absence of the wye, the
connection to the sewer main or lateral shall be made by a qualified contractor
using an insertion wye or wetting the main to install a wye fitting, following
manufacturer’s recommendations.
   (C)   Plan. If another method is desired, a detail plan shall be submitted
for review and approval by the village before the connection is made.
Indiscriminate breaking of the sewer main pipe is not allowed.
   (D)   On-site inspection. After the wye branch has been inserted and
jointed, and before any additional fittings have been placed in the service
line, the installation shall be approved by the Sangamon County Water
Reclamation District. After approval is granted, the contractor shall encase
the work area as specified herein.
   (E)   Backfill. To be placed in accordance with the Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, current edition. In
addition, any building sewer crossing any street, or traveled alley be cradled
with IDOT gradation CA-6, backfilled with IDOT gradation CFA-6 and the backfill
mechanically compacted in six-inch lifts.
   (F)   Concrete encasement. When a riser is constructed and its height is
four feet or more measured from the flowline of the sewer main to the top of
the riser pipe, the wye connection shall be encased in concrete to a height of
at least one foot six inches above the flowline of the sewer main. When the
height of the riser is less than four feet above the flowline of the sewer
main, the wye connection shall be backfilled to the top of the riser pipe with
carefully placed and compacted granular backfill.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-31) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.059 CAPACITY OF WASTEWATER.
   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall
only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewer facilities,
including sewer, pump stations and sewer treatment facilities, have sufficient
reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional
anticipated waste load.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-32) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.060 TAP-IN SUPERVISION AND TESTING.
   (A)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Sangamon
County Water Reclamation District when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the SCWRD.
   (B)   At any time after the installation of the building sewer, the SCWRD
may test the building sewer for violation of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-33) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.061 INSPECTION.
   After the building sewer has been constructed in the trench but before the
sewer is backfilled, the applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the Superintendent that the building sewer is ready for inspection. If the
sewer has been constructed properly, permission will be given to backfill the
trench. If the sewer construction is found to be unsuitable, the permit
applicant will correct the installation to meet village’s requirements.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-34) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.062 PROTECTION OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
   (B)   Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
village.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-36) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.063 BOND REQUIRED.
   If the applicant for the building sewer permit does not have a general bond
on file with the village, the applicant shall furnish a corporate surety bond
in an amount one and one-half times the cost of the contemplated work for which
the permit is to be issued.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-37) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.064 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES.
   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those
ordinances in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-38) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
54.999
EXTENSION OF COLLECTING WASTEWATERS
§ 54.080 PERMIT REQUIRED; AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL.
   No person, other than an authorized employee of the village, shall make any
connection with, uncover, alter or disturb a village sewer, or open any
manhole, intercepting chamber, or any appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit to do so from the village, and no person shall make
any connection or opening into any sewer, the flow of which is directly or
indirectly discharged into any village sewer, without first obtaining a written
permit to do so from the village. (See Appendix #2.)
(2009 Code, § 39-4-42) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.081 EXTENSION PERMITS.
   (A)   Issuance of sewer extension approvals shall be initiated by an
application for construction permit. The application shall be made on the forms
provided by the IEPA, shall be fully completed by the applicable persons or
parties, and shall be accompanied by a set of construction plans,
specifications and any other information as may be required by the village,
SCWRD and IEPA.
   (B)   Construction plans and specifications shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in the state and approval thereof must be obtained from
the village, SCWRD and IEPA.
   (C)   If the application is in proper form, and the sewer extension
indicated therein appears to be in accordance with this chapter and all state
and federal requirements, the village shall execute the application for permit.
If otherwise, the application for permit shall be denied by the village. There
shall be no fee charged for the sewer extension application for permit.
   (D)   If the application is denied by the village, it shall state the reason
or reasons therefor in writing, mailed or personally delivered to the
applicant. The applicant shall have the right to amend such application in
conformity with the reasons given for denial, and resubmit it to the village
for further consideration.
   (E)   Sanitary sewer permits issued by IEPA typically expire two years from
the date of the permit. The applicant shall have two years or the time frame as
dictated by IEPA to construct the sanitary sewer. Any sewer not constructed
prior to the date of expiration shall have a new application submitted,
approved and a permit issued by IEPA prior to construction, unless an extension
is granted by the IEPA.
   (F)   The applicant for the permit shall furnish a corporate surety bond in
an amount one and one-half times the cost of the contemplated work for which
the permit is to be issued.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-43) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.082 MATERIALS.
   All sewer extensions shall be constructed of the following materials:
   (A)   Sewer pipe with diameters eight inches and larger shall be one of the
following:
      (1)   Ductile iron; or
      (2)   PVC sewer pipe SDR-35/minimum conforming to ASTM 03033 or D3034
with joints conforming to ASTM D3212.
   (B)   Laterals and fittings from the sewer main to the property lines shall
be of comparable material to the sewer main for DIP and PVC pipe.
§ 54.083 INSPECTIONS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Construction of the sewer shall be inspected under competent
supervision supplied by a registered professional engineer and upon completion
of construction, accurate detailed plans as constructed (“record drawings”)
shall be certified and submitted by the professional engineer to the village
before any applications for building sewer permits are filed; all at the
expense of the owner. These plans shall show all elevations as installed as
well as accurate measurements showing the locations of service connections. The
engineer shall also submit a certified statement stating construction was in
compliance with the approved construction drawings.
   (B)   All sewers shall be subjected to:
      (1)   A lamp test which shall provide that from one manhole to another,
at least one-half of the pipe end area shall be visible.
      (2)   Infiltration or exfiltration test with acceptable allowance per the
“standard specifications for water and sewer construction in Illinois.”
      (3)   Air pressure testing with acceptable allowable per the “standard
specifications for water and sewer constructions in Illinois.”
   (C)   (1)   When any sewer line fails to pass the infiltration test, the
exfiltration test or an air pressure test, the sewer line shall be televised in
the presence of the village’s representatives to determine points of faulty
construction. The determination and repair shall be the responsibility of the
permit applicant.
      (2)   The owner shall repair all defects; the method of repair shall be
subject to the approval of the village. (See Appendix #4.)
(2009 Code, § 39-4-45) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.084 MANHOLES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Manholes shall be installed at all changes in grade and/or direction
and at distances not greater than 400 feet apart.
   (B)   All manhole covers shall be water-tight and self-sealing,
incorporating an O-ring gasket.
   (C)   All covers shall have concealed pick holes.
   (D)   Where manhole covers may be subjected to frequent and extreme
submergence, additional water-tightness shall be ensured by using bolt down
covers.
   (E)   All manholes shall incorporate the use of “A Cok” gaskets.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-46) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
USE OF PUBLIC WASTEWATER FACILITIES
§ 54.095 DISCHARGE OF STORM WATER.
   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-49) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.096 STORM WATER.
   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewer as are specifically designated as storm sewer, or to a natural outlet
approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged on approval of the village, to a storm sewer, or
natural outlet.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-50) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.097 REGULATIONS OF WASTES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solids or gas;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works; and
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewer, or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-51) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.098 HARMFUL EFFECTS OF CERTAIN MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewer,
sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewer,
materials of construction of the sewer, nature of the sewage treatment process,
capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the
sewage treatment plant and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies.
   (B)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F
(0°C and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the village;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the village for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other waste odor-
producing substances, in such concentration exceeding limits which may be
established by the village as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hq
at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations;
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations or inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein. (Reference Appendix #6.)
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amendable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters;
      (11)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5; and
      (12)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as
permitted by the village in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-52) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.099 HARMFUL WASTES: APPROVAL.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewer, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
54.098 and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided
in 40 C.F.R. part 403, June 26, 1978 and any amendments thereto, and which in
the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent
may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates for discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of §
54.080.
   (B)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, articles and laws.
   (C)   The owner of the pretreatment or equalization facilities shall obtain
construction and operating permits from the State Environmental Protection
Agency prior to the issuance of final approval by the Superintendent.
   (D)   Where multiple process or discharges are present or contemplated at an
industry, the village shall have the authority to require the owner or person
to furnish and install more than one control manhole with appurtenances and/or
require that all sewer be discharged through a single control manhole or
structure with appurtenances described herein.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-53) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.100 GREASE AND OIL INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Superintendent they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-54) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.101 FLOW-EQUALIZING FACILITIES.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his or her expense.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-55) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.102 INDUSTRIAL WASTES CONTROL MANHOLE.
   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safety located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-56) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.103 INDUSTRIAL WASTE TESTING.
   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (B)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once per
year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
sewer discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state and local
standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and
laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such a manner as
prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the village. At such times as
deemed necessary the village reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-57) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.104 MEASUREMENTS AND TESTS.
   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of
Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required the control manhole shall be considered to be
the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.)
(2009 Code, § 39-4-58) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.105 SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with the chapter, hereof, by the industrial concern provided such
payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge
system and industrial cost recovery system. (See §§ 54.050 through 54.067.)
(2009 Code, § 39-4-59) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
INSPECTIONS
§ 54.120 DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be subject
to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-65) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.121 INSPECTION AND TESTING.
   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village,
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the United States
Environmental Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Superintendent or his or her representative shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil
refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewer or waterway or
facilities for waste treatment. (See Appendix #4.)
(2009 Code, § 39-4-66) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.122 LIABILITY OF VILLAGE.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in §
54.121, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the village, the
State Environmental Protection Agency and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the village employees and the village shall indemnify the company
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain conditions as required in §
54.103.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-67) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.123 PRIVATE PROPERTY INSPECTIONS.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the village
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-68) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
SEWER RATES
§ 54.135 BUILDING UNIT DEFINED.
   All persons or families residing in a building under one roof, be it an
apartment or homes converted into more than one dwelling place, each family or
individual resident residing therein shall be deemed an individual customer or
such homes or apartments or dwellings shall be billed for at least one minimum
water and/or sewer account according to the number of families or individual
residents residing therein.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-71) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.136 SEWER REVENUES.
   (A)   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewer system
shall be deposited in the Sewer Fund. All such revenues and monies shall be
held by the Treasurer separate and apart from his or her private funds and
separate and apart from all other funds of the village and all of said sum,
without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the Treasurer not more
than ten days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as
may, from time to time, be directed by the Village Board.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water and sewer
systems and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the account
of the fund designated as the Water and Sewage Fund of the village.
   (C)   The Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the
manner provided by 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40 et seq.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-72) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.137 SEWER ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   (1)   The Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water and sewer
systems and at regular annual intervals, he or she shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the water and sewer systems.
      (2)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the sewer
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be
recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do, in fact, meet these
regulations.
   (B)   In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the sewer plant for the
current fiscal year;
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
      (4)   Number of users connected to the system;
      (5)   Number of non-metered users; and
      (6)   A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-73) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.138 NOTICE OF RATES.
   A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the Village Clerk, shall be
filed in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds and shall be deemed notice
to all owners of real estate of the charges of the sewer system of the village
on their properties. Each user shall be notified at least annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to sewer treatment services.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-74) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.139 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The State Environmental Protection Agency, United States Environmental
Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the
village’s system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of
making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state
grant.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-75) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.140 APPEALS.
   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges shall be made available to a user within 15 days of receipt of a
written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used, or in the
computation thereof, shall be remedied by a third party selected by both
parties within 90 days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining
the discrepancies.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-76) (Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 54.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter
except §
54.120 shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
      (2)   The village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result
of any violation of any provision of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-77)
   (B)   Continued violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in §
54.096 shall be, upon conviction, be fined in the amount not exceeding $750 for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-78)
   (C)   Liability to village. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation.
(2009 Code, § 39-4-79)
(Ord. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992)
APPENDICES
Appendix
   
1.   Application for water system service connection
   
2.   Utility main extension contract
   
3.   Sewer connection application
   
4.   Certificate of inspection, approval and permit
   
5.   Utility shutoff heating notice
   
6.   Objectionable material effluent limits
APPENDIX #1. APPLICATION FOR WATER SYSTEM SERVICE CONNECTION.
   The undersigned representing himself as the owner of property located at
______________, hereby makes application for connection to the water system of
the village for said property, and in consideration of the furnishing of said
service covenants and agrees as follows:
   1.   I agree to abide by all rules and regulations as specified in and by
the ordinances of the village now in effect or enacted and passed from time to
time providing for the regulation of service furnished by the village, it is
further acknowledged and agreed that the undersigned, his heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns shall pay all charges for connection
fees and water usage which shall become due as the result of the connecting of
water mains and furnishing of water service to the above property, and that all
such charges and fees for water service rendered to the property, together with
penalties, if any, and the costs of collection are to be considered and become
a charge against the property, the lien so created to be enforced in accordance
with the ordinances of the village.
   2.   All bills for the aforesaid charges are payable on or before the due
date following the receipt of said bill and if not paid, are subject to a ten
percent (10%) penalty.
   3.   Each and all of the agreements and covenants herein contained shall run
with the real estate above described whose present owner is signatory to this
application.
   4.   I understand that making this application, I am to await installation
permit and instructions therewith.
   5.   SERVICE CONNECTION FEE: $____________ is enclosed herewith, payable to
the village.
   6.   Permission is hereby granted to the village and its authorized
representatives at any reasonable time to enter the premises of the applicant
and any portion thereof for the purposes of inspecting all connections
appurtenant to the water system.
   CONNECTION MUST BE INSPECTED BEFORE BACKFILLING
SIGNATURE ____________________________   _____________________________________
                                                                                        
                        (STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET)
                        _____________________________________
                        (VILLAGE, STATE AND ZIP CODE)
                        _____________________________________
                        (TELEPHONE NUMBER)      (DATE)
                           
Do not fill in the         MAIL BILLS TO:      
(_____________________________________
spaces to the right                                 (NAME)
if the information is the same as the            
(_____________________________________
applicant above.                     (STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET)
                           
(                                                                         
                            (VILLAGE, STATE AND ZIP CODE)
APPENDIX #2. UTILITY MAIN EXTENSION CONTRACT.
   AGREEMENT made and entered into this __________ day of ___________________,
by and between the utility system of the Village of Rochester, Illinois,
hereinafter called the “Utility Department” and __________________________,
hereinafter called the “Depositor”.
   FIRST:      That the Utility Department contracts and agrees to have
installed by contract in accordance with its rules, utility mains as shown on
the plat thereof, and the specification are attached hereto and made a part
hereof.
   SECOND:   Bids having been taken and the lowest responsible bid having been
in the amount of $________, the depositor agrees to deposit and does deposit
herewith the cost thereof.
            (A)   The lowest responsible bid $__________.
            (B)   Engineering and inspection charge $__________.
            (C)   TOTAL: $__________.
   THIRD:   Final costs to be adjusted up or down according to the completed
job cost.
   FOURTH:   The ownership of the utility mains laid herein shall be at all
times in the Utility Department, its successors and assigns.
   FIFTH:      This Agreement shall be valid and binding on the Utility
Department only when signed by the President and Clerk.
   SIXTH:      This Agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, executors,
administrators, successors or assigns of the respective parties.
   EXECUTED in duplicate by the parties hereto on the date first above written.
      UTILITY DEPARTMENT
      VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER
      BY: _____________________________________
ATTEST:                              SUPERINTENDENT
_____________________________________      _____________________________________
VILLAGE CLERK                        DEPOSITOR
WITNESSES:
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
APPENDIX #3. SEWER CONNECTION APPLICATION.
   RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL BUILDING SEWER APPLICATION
   The undersigned, being the  (owners, owner’s agent)  of the property located
at  (number) (street)  does hereby request a permit to install and connect a
building sewer to serve the  (residence, commercial building and the like)  at
said location.
   1.   The following indicated fixtures will be connected to the proposed
building sewer:
 
Number Fixture       Number Fixture
      Kitchen Sinks       Water Closets
      Lavatories          Bathtubs
      Laundry Tubs        Showers
      Urinals             Garbage Grinders
 
      Specify other fixtures:
________________________________________________________
   2.   The maximum number of persons who will use the above fixtures is
__________________.
   3.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the
proposed work is _________________________________________________.
   4.   Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewers are attached
hereunto as Exhibit “A”.
IN CONSIDERATION OF THE GRANTING OF THIS PERMIT, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
   1.   To accept and abide by all the provisions of the Revised Code and all
other pertinent ordinances and codes that may be adopted in the future.
   2.   To maintain the building sewer at no expense to the village.
   3.   To notify the village and SCWRD when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer, but before any portion of the
work is covered.
DATE: ______________________, 20_______   SIGNED:
__________________________________
                        (APPLICANT)
                        __________________________________
                        (ADDRESS OF APPLICANT)
   (CERTIFICATION BY CLERK)
$____________   (Inspection fee paid)         DATE: _______________________,
20_______
$____________   (Connection fee paid)      SIGNED:
_______________________________
                                          (CLERK)
   (APPLICATION APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED)
DATE: __________, 20_____   SIGNED:
_____________________________________________
                  (PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR OR SUPERINTENDENT)
   INDUSTRIAL SEWER CONNECTION APPLICATION
   The undersigned, being the  (owners, owner’s agent)  of the property located
at  (number) (street)  does hereby request a permit to  (install, use)  an
industrial sewer connection serving the                           , which
company is engaged in __________________ at said location.
   1.   A plan of the property showing accurately all sewer and drains now
existing is attached hereunto as Exhibit “A”.
   2.   Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be performed
under this permit is attached hereunto as Exhibit “B”.
   3.   A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes
produced or expected to be produced at said property, including a description
of the character of each waste, the daily volume and maximum rates of discharge
and representative analyses is attached hereunto as Exhibit “C”.
   4.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work
covered by this permit is
_______________________________________________________________________.
IN CONSIDERATION OF THE GRANTING OF THIS PERMIT, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
   1.   To furnish any additional information relating to the installation or
use of the industrial sewer for which this permit is sought as may be requested
by the village.
   2.   To accept and abide by all the provisions of the Revised Code and all
other pertinent ordinances and codes that may be adopted in the future.
   3.   To operate and maintain a control manhole and any waste pretreatment
facilities, as may be required as a condition of the acceptance into the public
sewer of the industrial wastes involved in an efficient manner at all times,
and at no expense to the village.
   4.   To cooperate at all times with the village and its representative(s) in
their inspecting, sampling, and study of the industrial wastes, and any
facilities provided for pretreatment.
   5.   To notify the village immediately in the event of any accident,
negligence, or other occurrence that occasions discharge to the public sewers
of any wastes or process waters not covered by this permit.
   6.   Notify village and SCWRD for service inspection.
DATE: ______________________, 20_______   SIGNED:
__________________________________
                        (APPLICANT)
                        __________________________________
                        (ADDRESS OF APPLICANT)
   (CERTIFICATION BY CLERK)
$____________   (Inspection fee paid)         DATE: _______________________,
20_______
$____________   (Connection fee paid)      SIGNED:
_______________________________
                                          (CLERK)
   (APPLICATION APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED)
DATE: __________, 20_____   SIGNED:
_____________________________________________
                  (PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR OR SUPERINTENDENT)
   APPLICATION FOR SANITARY SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION
   The undersigned, representing himself as owner of the property located at
___________________, hereby makes application for the sanitary sewerage service
for said property, and in consideration of the furnishing of said service
covenants and agrees as follows:
   1.   I agree to abide by all rules and regulations as specified in and by
the ordinances of the village now in effect or ordinances enacted and passed
from time to time providing for the regulation of the sanitary sewer system or
specifying fees and rates to be charged for connection and sanitary sewer
service furnished by the village. It is further acknowledged and agreed that
the undersigned, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns
shall pay all charges for connection fees and sewer usage which shall become
due as the result of the connecting of the sewerage mains and the furnishing of
sanitary sewer service to the above property, and that all such charges and
fees for sanitary sewerage service rendered to the property, together with
penalties, if any, and the costs of collection are to be considered and become
a charge against the property, the lien so created to be enforced in accordance
with the ordinances of the village.
   2.   All bills for the aforesaid charges are payable on or before the due
date following the receipt of said bill and if not paid, are subject to a ten
percent (10%) penalty.
   3.   Each and all of the agreements and covenants herein contained shall run
with the real estate above described whose present owner is signatory to this
application.
   4.   I understand that after making this application, I am to await
installation permit and instructions therewith.
   5.   SERVICE CONNECTION FEE: $____________ is enclosed herewith, payable to
the village.
   6.   Permission is hereby granted to the village and its authorized
representatives at any reasonable time to enter the premises of the applicant
and any portion thereof for the purposes of inspecting all connections
appurtenant to the sewage outlets, pipes and mains.
____________________________    __________________________________
(APPLICANTS’ SIGNATURE)      (STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET)
__________________________       _____________________________________
(OWNER’S SIGNATURE,         (VILLAGE, STATE AND ZIP CODE)
IF NOT APPLICANT)
                  _____________________________________
                  (TELEPHONE NUMBER)      (DATE)
                                    
Do not fill in the         MAIL BILLS TO:   
(_____________________________________
spaces to the right                              (NAME)
if the information
is the same as the                   (_____________________________________
applicant above.                  (STREET NUMBER AND NAME OF STREET)
                        (_____________________________________
                        (VILLAGE, STATE AND ZIP CODE)
   RECEIPT
   Receipt is hereby acknowledged of the executed application for the sanitary
sewer service connection from the person and for the property indicated below.
   This receipt does not authorize a service connection to be made. Inspection
and approval of the customer service line by an authorized representative of
the village and SCWRD is required, and approval of such connection and issuance
of a certificate of inspection and approval and permit is conditioned upon
compliance with all the ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the
village.
NOTE:
   1.   In the event the location of the sewer service connection is unknown,
the Superintendent is to be contacted.
   2.   This office is to be notified the day before the work is to be done so
that inspection may be arranged in accordance with specifications furnished.
For example, if you desire inspection on Tuesday, contact us on Monday. If you
desire inspection on Monday, contact us on Friday, etc.
   3.   Wastes from the basement as well as the other floor(s) of the property
must go into the sanitary sewers. Downspout and surface drainage are prohibited
inasmuch as this is not a storm sewer system.
WARNING!   In order to coordinate our inspections, we must be advised a day in
advance before the work is done. The inspection must be made before the trench
is backfilled. If trench is backfilled before the inspection is made, it will
have to be reopened to permit inspection. Coordination with SCWRD inspectors is
your responsibility.
NO. _________________________________________   VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER
                           COUNTY OF SANGAMON
DATE: _______________________________________
ADDRESS: ___________________________________
OWNER(S): __________________________________
_____________________________________________
APPENDIX #4. CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION, APPROVAL AND PERMIT.
   It is hereby certified that inspection has been made of the individually-
owned sewer mains and sanitary service connection for the property described
below by both the village and SCWRD, and said installation is hereby approved
as in compliance with the specifications, rules and regulations established by
the revised code of this municipality.
   Permission is hereby granted to complete the construction of said
individually-owned sewer main to the village sanitary sewerage system and to
utilize the same for waste disposal in compliance at all times, with the
revised code of this village.
NO. _________________________________________
ADDRESS: ___________________________________
TYPE OF CONNECTION:
         _________________ Single-family residence
         _________________ Multiple dwelling or trailer court
         _________________ Commercial
         _________________ Industrial
         _________________ Institutional
         _________________ Governmental
INSTALLATION BY: _____________________________________________________________
   THE SERVICE IS IN OPERATION AS OF THIS _______ DAY OF ________, 20_______.
                        VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER
                        COUNTY OF SANGAMON
                  SIGNED: _________________________________
APPENDIX #5. UTILITY SHUTOFF HEATING NOTICE.
   This notice is being sent to you pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 54 of the code of ordinances as adopted by the corporate authorities.
CUSTOMER’S NAME: _____________________________________________________________
ADDRESS: ______________________________________________________________________
TOTAL AMOUNT OF BILL:   $________________ WATER
               $________________ SEWER
               $________________ OTHER
                           SUB-TOTAL:   $________________
                           PENALTY:   $________________
                           TOTAL DUE:   $________________
DATE OF HEARING ___________________________________
TIME OF HEARING ___________________________________
LOCATION OF HEARING _________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
PHONE _____________________________________________
   If the consumer/customer fails to appear at the hearing, the applicable
utility services shall be terminated (shut off) without further proceedings.
   If payment for the charges and fees is received prior to the date of the
hearing, you may disregard this hearing notice.
   The President and Village Clerk, or their designated representative(s),
shall preside at the hearing.
                                 _________________________________________
   VILLAGE CLERK
   DATED THIS _______ DAY OF ________, 20_______.
NOTE:   After services have been shut off, there will be a reconnection fee of
$______________.
APPENDIX #6. OBJECTIONABLE MATERIAL EFFLUENT LIMITS.
Waste or Chemical Concentration mg/l
Waste or Chemical                                     Concentration mg/l
Boron                                                 1.0
Chromium (hexavalent)                                 5.0
Chromium (trivalent)                                  10.0
Copper                                                3.0
Cyanide                                               0.005
Iron                                                  15.0
Lead                                                  0.1
Mercury or its compounds                              0.005
Nickel                                                3.0
Oil and grease and the like (carbon tetrachloride     100.0
extraction)
Temperature not over 150°F (65°C)
Acid iron picking waste or concentrated plating waste zero
Free acid and alkalis pH                              Between 5.5 and 9.5
Zinc                                                  2.0
Cadmium                                               2.0
Chlorine demand                                       30.0
Phenols                                               0.5
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 39 Appendices)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLES
      
74.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
76.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Definitions
   
70.01   Illinois Vehicle Code; definitions adopted
General Regulations
   
70.15   Obedience to police
   
70.16   Scene of fire
   
70.17   Signs and signals
   
70.18   Unauthorized signs
   
70.19   Interference with signs or signals
   
70.20   Advertising signs
   
70.21   Animals or bicycles
   
70.22   Bicycle lamps, reflectors and equipment
DEFINITIONS
§ 70.01 ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE; DEFINITIONS ADOPTED.
   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS Chapter 1, entitled “Title and
Definitions”, as passed, approved and amended by the Illinois General Assembly
is hereby adopted by the village, the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the corporate limits of the village.
(2009 Code, § 23-1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2 and 65 ILCS 5/11-11
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 70.15 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   Members of the Police Department assigned to traffic duty are hereby
authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order, signal or direction of a police officer. Except in cases of emergency,
it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt
to direct traffic.
(2009 Code, § 23-2-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-203
§ 70.16 SCENE OF FIRE.
   The Fire Department officer in command or any firefighter designated by him
or her may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in directing
traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has responded to
an emergency call for so long as the Fire Department equipment is on the scene
in the absence of or in assisting the Police Department.
(2009 Code, § 23-2-2)
§ 70.17 SIGNS AND SIGNALS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the
instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the
corporate authorities or in accordance with the laws of the state except upon
direction of a police officer. All signs and signals established by direction
of the governing body shall conform to the Illinois State Manual of Uniform
Traffic-Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(2009 Code, § 23-2-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-301
§ 70.18 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS.
   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street,
any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, light, reflector or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, nor shall any person or place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any street, any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the
movement of traffic or effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. No tree, bush or foliage of any kind shall
be so placed, maintained, allowed to remain or be displayed upon either public
or private property in such a manner as to hide from view or interfere with the
movement of traffic or the effectiveness of any traffic-control device, sign or
signal.
(2009 Code, § 23-2-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.19 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS OR SIGNALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere
with any official traffic sign or signal.
(2009 Code, § 23-2-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.20 ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the village any sign, signal,
marking or device other than a traffic sign or signal authorized by the Village
Board or the State Department of Transportation, which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal in view of any street or highway, and it shall be unlawful to place
or maintain any sign which hides from view any lawful traffic-control device.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any flashing or rotating beacon of
light in view of any street or highway.
(2009 Code, § 23-2-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   General offenses, see Title XIII
   Street regulations, see
Chapter 95
   Zoning, see
Chapter 156
§ 70.21 ANIMALS OR BICYCLES.
   Any person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a
vehicle upon any street shall be subject to the provisions of this title
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which can have
no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal.
(2009 Code, § 23-2-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-206
§ 70.22 BICYCLE LAMPS, REFLECTORS AND EQUIPMENT.
   When used at nighttime, every bicycle shall be equipped with the following:
   (A)   A lamp upon the front which emits a white light visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet to the front;
   (B)   A red reflector on the rear which shall be visible to a distance of
600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights
on a motor vehicle;
   (C)   A reflex reflector on each pedal visible from the front and rear of
the bicycle from a distance up to 200 feet when viewed within the lawful lower
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle; and
   (D)   Side reflectors upon each side of the bicycle which shall be visible
up to a distance of 500 feet when viewed directly in front of a lawful lower
beam of motor vehicle headlights. The requirements of this division (D) may be
met by reflective materials which shall be at least three-sixteenths of an inch
wide on each side of each tire or rim which may indicate as clearly as possible
the continuous circular shape and size of the tires or rims of such bicycle and
which reflective materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear
tire or rim.
(2009 Code, § 23-2-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Stop and Through Streets
   
71.01   Through streets
   
71.02   One-way streets or alleys
   
71.03   Stop streets
   
71.04   Yield right-of-way streets
   
71.05   Posting signs
Driving Rules
   
71.20   Illinois Vehicle Code; Rules of the Road adopted
   
71.21   Driving rules
   
71.22   Duty to report accident
   
71.23   Transporting liquor in vehicles
   
71.24   Excessive noise; stopped vehicle
   
71.25   Excessive noise; squealing tires
   
71.26   Reckless, negligent or careless driving
   
71.27   Excessive noise while driving
Equipment of Vehicles
   
71.40   Illinois Vehicle Code; Equipment of Vehicles adopted
   
71.41   Muffler
   
71.42   Sound amplification system
   
71.43   Engine brakes prohibited
STOP AND THROUGH STREETS
§ 71.01 THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   The streets and parts of streets of the village designated by
ordinance as through streets are hereby declared to be through streets.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street
and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to
constitute an immediate hazard unless directed otherwise by the traffic
officer.
   (C)   See
Chapter 75, Schedule I of this code of ordinances for applicable through and
stop streets.
(2009 Code, § 23-3-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.02 ONE-WAY STREETS OR ALLEYS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any streets or alleys
designated as one-way streets or alleys by ordinance in any direction other
than that so designated.
   (B)   See
Chapter 75, Schedule II of this code of ordinances for the designated one-way
streets and alleys.
(2009 Code, § 23-3-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-208
§ 71.03 STOP STREETS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an
intersection where a stop sign is erected pursuant to ordinance at one or more
entrances thereto and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the vehicles not so
obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is
controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event, the directions of the
police officer shall be complied with.
   (B)   See
Chapter 75, Schedule I of this code of ordinances for designated stop
intersections.
(2009 Code, § 23-3-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-302
§ 71.04 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, in obedience to such
sign, shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and if
required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or
stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the
intersection.
   (B)   See
Chapter 75, Schedule III of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 23-3-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.05 POSTING SIGNS.
   Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through, stop and yield right-
of-way streets, all one-way streets and alleys and all stop intersections.
(2009 Code, § 23-3-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-304
DRIVING RULES
§ 71.20 ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE; RULES OF THE ROAD ADOPTED.
   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11, entitled “Rules of the Road”, as
passed, approved and amended by the Illinois General Assembly is hereby adopted
by the village and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the village except for the following changes, deletions and
omissions:
   (A)   Omissions. Omit §§ 11-207, 11-208.1, 11-208.2, 11-209.1, 11302, 11-
303, 11-310(f), 11-313, 11-401 to and including 11-416, 11-500 to and including
11-502, 11-602, 11-603, 11-604, 11-606(b), 11-608, 11-1419 and 11-1422.
   (B)   Changes and additions.
      (1)   Change 11-904(a) to read: “Preferential right-of-way at an
intersection may be indicated by stop or yield signs as authorized by this
title.”
      (2)   Change 11-1416(a) to read: “Any person who shall willfully and
unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other person in lawfully
driving and traveling upon or along any highway within this state or who shall
offer for barter or sale, merchandise on said highway so as to interfere with
the effective movement of traffic shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
violation of this title.”
(2009 Code, § 23-4-1)
§ 71.21 DRIVING RULES.
   (A)   Careless driving. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in the
village in a careless manner so as to interfere with the safe or lawful
operation of any other vehicle or so as to interfere with or to injure, damage
or endanger persons or property engaged in the lawful use of the street.
   (B)   Drag racing. No person shall participate within the village in drag
racing as such activity is defined by 625 ILCS 5/11-506.
   (C)   Fleeing or attempting to elude police officer. Any driver or operator
of a motor vehicle who, having been given a visual or audible signal by a
police officer directing such driver or operator to bring his or her vehicle to
a stop, willfully fails to or refuses to obey such direction, increases his or
her speed, extinguishes his or her lights or otherwise flees or attempts to
elude the officer is guilty of a violation of this chapter. The signal given by
the police officer may be by hand, voice, siren, red or blue light; provided,
however, the officer giving such signal shall be in police uniform and if
driving a vehicle, such vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official
police vehicle.
   (D)   Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker. Traffic-control
signals, signs or markers owned by the village shall be possessed only by the
village’s employees, police officers, contractors or their employees engaged in
highway construction, contract or work upon the roadways or public ways
approved by the village. No person shall possess a traffic-control signal, sign
or marker owned by the village except as provided in this division (D) without
the prior written authority of the village. It shall be a violation of this
division (D) for a person to possess such a traffic-control signal, sign or
marker without lawful authority.
(625 ILCS 5/11-313)
   (E)   Special speed limitations on elevated structures.
      (1)   No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure
when such structure is sign-posted.
      (2)   Upon the trial of any person charged with the violation of this
division (E), proof of the determination of the maximum speed by the village
and the existence of such signs is conclusive evidence of the maximum speed
which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
(625 ILCS 5/11-608)
   (F)   General speed restrictions.
      (1)   The speed limits on the various streets shall be approved by the
Village Board, but shall not exceed 20 mph in a school zone and not to exceed
30 mph on a residential street unless otherwise posted.
      (2)   See
Chapter 75, Schedule IV of this code of ordinances.
(625 ILCS 5/11-604 and 65 ILCS 5/11-40-1)
   (G)   Special speed limit while passing schools.
      (1)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20
mph while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public thoroughfare
on or across which children pass going to and from school during school days
when school children are present.
      (2)   This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are
posted upon streets and maintained by the village or state wherein the school
zone is located.
(625 ILCS 5/11-605)
   (H)   Failure to reduce speed. A vehicle shall be driven upon the streets
and alleys of this village at a speed which is reasonable and proper with
regard to traffic conditions and the use of the street or alley. The fact that
the vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve
the driver of the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an
intersection or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrian or other
traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. Speed must be decreased
as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or
entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all
persons to use due care.
   (I)   Traffic lane usage. Whenever any roadway within the village has been
divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, a vehicle shall be
driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be
moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement
can be made with safety.
   (J)   U-turns prohibited. No driver of a vehicle shall make a U-turn on any
street or at any intersection of any streets in the village.
(2009 Code, § 23-4-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.22 DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
within the village shall, without unnecessary delay, notify the Police
Department and shall make a report of such action. Failure to report an
accident within the village within 24 hours shall result in arrests of the
person or persons involved.
(2009 Code, § 23-4-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-415
§ 71.23 TRANSPORTING LIQUOR IN VEHICLES.
   No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor
within the passenger area of any motor vehicle in this village except in the
original container and with the seal unbroken.
(2009 Code, § 23-4-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-502
§ 71.24 EXCESSIVE NOISE; STOPPED VEHICLE.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when the motor vehicle is stopped,
unreasonably accelerate the engine thereof with the gears of the vehicle in
neutral, thereby causing an unreasonably loud or excessive noise.
(2009 Code, § 23-4-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.25 EXCESSIVE NOISE; SQUEALING TIRES.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall cause the wheels of such vehicle to
spin violently, thereby causing an unreasonably loud or excessive noise.
(2009 Code, § 23-4-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-505
§ 71.26 RECKLESS, NEGLIGENT OR CARELESS DRIVING.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the village in a careless,
reckless, negligent or wanton manner, or carelessly so as to endanger life or
property.
(2009 Code, § 23-4-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.27 EXCESSIVE NOISE WHILE DRIVING.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when operating the vehicle, accelerate
the vehicle or rapidly stop the vehicle causing an unreasonably loud noise.
(2009 Code, § 23-4-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES
§ 71.40 ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE; EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES ADOPTED.
   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12, entitled “Equipment of Vehicles”,
as passed, approved and amended by the Illinois General Assembly is hereby
adopted by the village and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within
the corporate limits of the village.
(2009 Code, § 23-5-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/12-605, 625 ILCS 5/12-605.1 and 625 ILCS
5/12-605.2
§ 71.41 MUFFLER.
   No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such vehicle is
provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition; and the use of a
cut-out is prohibited. No muffler shall cause an unreasonably loud or excessive
noise.
(2009 Code, § 23-5-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/12-602
§ 71.42 SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM.
   No driver of any motor vehicle within this state shall operate or permit
operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside the
vehicle from 75 feet or more when the vehicle is being operated upon a highway,
unless such system is being operated to request assistance or warn of a
hazardous situation.
(2009 Code, § 23-5-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/12-611
§ 71.43 ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor truck vehicle to use or
operate engine brakes on all public highways or streets within the corporate
limits, unless it is an emergency.
(2009 Code, § 23-5-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Time limit parking
   
72.02   Parking for sale or repair
   
72.03   Private property
   
72.04   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places
   
72.05   Parking for the handicapped
   
72.06   Load limits
   
72.07   Towing cars away
   
72.08   Parking violations
   
72.09   Prima facie proof
   
72.10   Snow routes
   
72.11   Parking tickets; state statute
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 TIME LIMIT PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time in excess of
the amount of time designated by law and so posted.
(2009 Code, § 23-6-1) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 PARKING FOR SALE OR REPAIR.
   (A)   Vehicles for sale. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle which has been marked for sale upon the paved portion or any part of
any public street or alley in the village; except that a maximum of one vehicle
licensed to a resident of the village, which has been marked for sale, may be
parked on the village street on which such resident resides so long as the
vehicle is parked immediately in front of the resident’s domicile or, in the
event that parking is not permitted on the street and there is an alley
available, in the alley, provided that the flow of traffic in the alley is not
blocked or impeded.
   (B)   Repairs and maintenance. No person shall park a vehicle upon any
street for the purpose of washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except
when emergency repairs are necessary.
(2009 Code, § 23-6-2) (Ord. 03-01, passed 5-12-2003) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner of the property.
(2009 Code, § 23-6-3) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   Generally. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic,
or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official
traffic-control devices, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         (i)   On any controlled-access highway;
         (j)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers;
         (k)   In any alley that is open and maintained; and
         (l)   Alongside a U.S. mailbox.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle (whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers):
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of such entrance (when properly signposted); and
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing or parking.
      (3)   Parking a vehicle (whether occupied or not, except temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers):
         (a)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking; and
         (b)   In yellow zones.
   (B)   Moving vehicle. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his
or her control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance
as is unlawful.
   (C)   Parking schedules. 
Chapter 75, Schedules I,
II and
III of this code of ordinances shall list all applicable no parking zones.
   (D)   Truck parking prohibitions. No person shall park any vehicle, vehicles
or trailer the length of which exceeds 24 feet or any Second Division vehicle
licensed for an “F” classification or higher:
      (1)   Upon any street, alley or any public way within the village except
for the purpose and time period reasonably necessary to load and unload the
same;
      (2)   Upon public or private property within the village with the motor
running for a continuous period in excess of 30 minutes; and
(625 ILCS 5/3-815)
      (3)   Exemptions: recreational vehicles, campers, motor homes, boats and
trailers may remain for the purposes of loading and unloading for a total
amount of 72 hours.
   (E)   Trailers and recreational vehicles. A vehicle designed for living or
recreation and not used as a commercial including, but not limited to, mobile
homes, motor homes, travel trailers, recreational trailers, campers, boats,
personal watercraft, all terrain vehicles, and trailers used to transport a
recreational vehicle shall not be parked permanently or temporarily on any
public street including in front of a residential lot by the owner or guest of
the owner. In the event the owner of a residential lot does not have a
driveway, such owner may temporarily park the recreational vehicle upon the
street or roadway immediately in front of his or her house for a period not to
exceed 48 consecutive hours provided that the parking is otherwise permitted
upon such street or roadway.
(2009 Code, § 23-6-4) (Ord. 14-06, passed 5-12-2014 ; Ord. 20-04, passed 2-10-
2020 ) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 PARKING FOR THE HANDICAPPED.
   (A)   Designated parking. Certain parking spaces within the confines of the
village shall be designated for use by handicapped persons’ vehicles only and
will be posted with appropriate signs to that effect.
   (B)   Use of designated handicapped parking. The use of designated
handicapped parking locations, duly posted and signed shall to that effect, be
open to any vehicle which bears the appropriate handicapped state registration
plate issued by the Secretary of State for the State of Illinois, or a valid
handicapped parking permit issued by another governmental agency or which bears
a handicapped card furnished in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.1 et seq.
furnished by the village.
   (C)   Application for state handicapped registration plate. The issuance of
a state handicapped motor vehicle registration plate shall be made with the
Secretary of State of the State of Illinois at any facility provided and
approved for that purpose by the Secretary of State.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2)
   (D)   Handicapped parking areas. Those places designated as handicapped
parking spaces are listed in
Chapter 76, Schedule IV of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 23-6-5) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   Established. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on the public
streets and alleys of the village when the gross weight of said vehicle exceeds
10,000 pounds, from January 15 to April 15 in each and every year when the
weight limitations for such streets and alleys are indicated by posted signs in
the village, which signs are erected and maintained as provided in 625 ILCS 5/
15-316(b), as may be hereafter amended; provided, however, that the President
or his or her designated agent may by prior consent authorize the use and
operation of vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds on the public streets and
alleys in the village.
   (B)   Restrictions. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle upon any
street where the operation is prohibited by this section and where such signs
of prohibition are posted, except that a vehicle may be driven on such street
for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose of making
deliveries or picking up loads.
   (C)   Exceptions. This section shall not include pickup trucks, trucks
operated by the village maintenance and repairs on the street or the operation
of a vehicle owned by the U.S. government or state while on lawful business of
these agencies.
(2009 Code, § 23-6-6) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 TOWING CARS AWAY.
   (A)   The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty
are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any car, boat, trailer or other vehicle illegally
parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic
hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the
movement of any emergency vehicle; or any vehicle which has been parked in any
public street or other public place for a period of 24 hours.
   (B)   Vehicles towed away shall be stored on any village property or in a
public garage or parking lot and shall be restored to the owner or operator
thereof after payment of the expense incurred by the village in removing and
storing such vehicle(s).
(2009 Code, § 23-6-7)
§ 72.08 PARKING VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting
parking a vehicle in a designated area or restricting the length of time a
vehicle may be there parked, may settle and compromise the claim against him or
her for such illegal parking by paying to the village $10 for each such offense
and $15 for the second offense within six months.
      (2)   Such payment may be made at the Village Hall and a receipt shall be
issued for all money so received and such money shall be promptly turned over
to the Treasurer to be credited to the General Fund. The members of the Police
Department are hereby authorized to refrain from instituting a prosecution for
the alleged offense involved for at least five days; provided, this section
shall not apply to persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the entrance or
exit of any place where Police and Fire Department apparatus or other emergency
equipment is kept or housed or so as to block an emergency entrance in a
hospital. Nor shall this section apply to any person charged with parking a
vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley or parking in
such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic only;
nor to any person who refuses to remove a vehicle illegally parked at the
request of any member of the Police Department.
   (B)   Removal; time limit. Any vehicle illegally parked for a period in
excess of 24 hours may be removed by a towing service authorized by the Police
Department of the municipality. In any emergency, any vehicle may be removed by
any means when authorized by the Police Department of the municipality.
   (C)   Village parking lots. No person shall park a motor vehicle on a
village parking lot unattended for more than five consecutive days.
   (D)   Parking violation ticket. The parking violation ticket shall be as
follows:
CITATION FORM
CITATION FORM
NO ________________________________________________
DATE __________________________________      TIME
________________________________
LICENSE NO. ___________________________      STATE
_______________________________
LICENSE EXPIRES _______________________      MAKE OF VEHICLE ___________________
METER NUMBER ________________________      OFFICER _____________________________
YOU ARE CHARGED WITH THE VIOLATION MARKED BELOW:
1.   Overparked, Two-Hour Zone       $10 [ ]
2.   Double Parked            $10 [ ]
3.   Parked at Fire Plug             $10 [ ]
4.   Blocking Driveway or Alley         $10 [ ]
5.   Parked Where Official Signs Erected   $10 [ ]
6.   Improper Parking            $10 [ ]
7.   Yellow Line               $10 [ ]
8.   Each Additional Hour Violation      $10 [ ]
9.   Parking on Sidewalk         $10 [ ]
NAME ________________________________________________
ADDRESS ________________________________________________
VILLAGE _____________________________   STATE ______________   ZIP CODE
_______________
   You may settle and compromise a claim for illegal parking by paying the sum
set forth above for the first particular violation and the same sum shall apply
for the same particular offense for the second and each subsequent violation
within 5 days after the time set out above. If not paid within this time limit,
an enforcement warrant will be issued and an assessment of not less than $15 will
be collected.
   FOR YOUR CONVENIENCE
After detaching your Ticket Stub, place the fine in the envelope and deposit at
Village Hall.
 
(2009 Code, § 23-6-8)
§ 72.09 PRIMA FACIE PROOF.
   The fact that a vehicle which is illegally parked or operated is registered
in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person
was in control of the vehicle at the time of such violation.
(2009 Code, § 23-6-9)
§ 72.10 SNOW ROUTES.
   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on the streets designated in
Chapter 75, Schedule V of this code of ordinances at any time within 18 hours
after a snowfall of three inches or more, unless the street has been cleared of
snow.
(2009 Code, § 23-6-10) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 PARKING TICKETS; STATE STATUTE.
   (A)   The Village Board intends to utilize 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 and the
procedure set forth therein.
   (B)   The appropriate authorities are hereby authorized to utilize the
statute and the procedure set forth therein.
(2009 Code, § 23-6-11)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any vehicle parked in violation of §
72.05 in a posted designated handicapped space which does not bear a state
handicapped registration plate, or a valid handicapped parking permit issued by
another governmental agency of a village handicapped registration card will be
ticketed and the vehicle will be removed in accordance with departmental
policies and in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-1302. The registered owner of the
vehicle as ascertained by the registration plates of the vehicle will be
presumed to be in control of the vehicle and will be fined $200. The same
registered owner will be held liable for the cost of removal of the vehicle and
must pay that cost, plus storage charges, if any, prior to the release of the
vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3(c)) (2009 Code, § 23-6-5)
CHAPTER 73: ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLES
Section
   
73.01   Abandonment of vehicles prohibited
   
73.02   Abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle notification to law
enforcement agencies
   
73.03   Removal of motor vehicles or other vehicles; towing or hauling away
   
73.04   Police tows; reports, release of vehicles, payment
   
73.05   Record searches for unknown owner
   
73.06   Identifying and tracing of vehicle
   
73.07   Reclaimed vehicles; expenses
   
73.08   Disposal of unclaimed vehicle
   
73.09   Disposal of unclaimed vehicles without notice
   
73.10   Disposal of hazardous dilapidated motor vehicles
   
73.11   Collection of unpaid charges
   
73.12   Police record for disposed vehicle
   
73.13   Public sale proceeds; disposition of
   
73.14   Liability of law enforcement officers
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in
this village is unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth under §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private or public
property, other than a highway, in view of the general public, anywhere in this
village is unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned
vehicle. A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property shall
be authorized for removal, by the village, after a waiting period of seven days
or more, or may be removed immediately if determined to be a hazardous
dilapidated motor vehicle under 625 ILCS 5/4-201. A violation of division (A)
above or this division (B) is subject to penalties as set forth under §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   A towing service may begin to process an unclaimed vehicle as
abandoned by requesting a record search by the Secretary of State up to ten
days after the date of the tow, or any later date acceptable to the Secretary
of State. This division (C) shall not apply to vehicles towed by order or
authorization of the village or a law enforcement agency.
(625 ILCS 5/4-201)
(2009 Code, § 23-7-1) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.02 ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLE NOTIFICATION TO LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle comes into the
temporary possession or custody of a person in this village, not the owner of
the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the municipal police when the
vehicle is within the corporate limits of any village having a duly authorized
police department, or the state police or the county sheriff when the vehicle
is outside the corporate limits of the village. Upon receipt of such
notification, the municipal police will authorize a towing service to remove
and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle. The
towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a
record of the tow as set forth in 625 ILCS 5/4-204 for law enforcement
agencies, until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally
entitled to possession thereof or until it is disposed of as provided in this
chapter.
(625 ILCS 5/4-202) (2009 Code, § 23-7-2)
§ 73.03 REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES OR OTHER VEHICLES; TOWING OR HAULING AWAY.
   (A)   When a vehicle is abandoned on a highway in an urban district ten
hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by a law
enforcement agency having jurisdiction.
   (B)   When a vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on a highway other than
a toll highway, interstate highway or expressway, outside of an urban district
for 24 hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by a
law enforcement agency having jurisdiction.
   (C)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled
vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the
highway or its physical appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its
immediate removal from the highway or private property adjacent to the highway
by a towing service may be authorized by a law enforcement agency having
jurisdiction.
(2009 Code, § 23-7-3)
§ 73.04 POLICE TOWS; REPORTS, RELEASE OF VEHICLES, PAYMENT.
   When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away as provided in §§
73.02 or
73.03:
   (A)   The authorization, any hold order and any release shall be in writing,
or confirmed in writing, with a copy given to the towing service;
   (B)   The police headquarters or office of the law officer authorizing the
towing shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the
color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade name, manufacturer’s series
name, body style, vehicle identification number, license plate year and number
and registration sticker year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record
shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location
towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow;
   (C)   The owner, operator or other legally entitled person shall be
responsible to the towing service for payment of applicable removal, towing,
storage and processing charges and collection costs associated with a vehicle
towed or held under order or authorization of the law enforcement agency. If a
vehicle towed or held under order or authorization of a law enforcement agency
is seized by the ordering or authorizing agency or any other law enforcement or
governmental agency and sold, any unpaid removal, towing, storage and
processing charges and collection costs shall be paid to the towing service
from the proceeds of the sale. If applicable law provides that the proceeds are
to be paid into the treasury of the appropriate civil jurisdiction, then any
unpaid removal, towing, storage and processing charges and collection costs
shall be paid to the towing service from the treasury of the civil
jurisdiction. That payment shall not, however, exceed the amount of proceeds
from the sale, with the balance to be paid by the owner, operator or other
legally entitled person; and
   (D)   Upon delivery of a written release order to the towing service, a
vehicle subject to a hold order shall be released to the owner, operator or
other legally entitled person upon proof of ownership or other entitlement and
upon payment of applicable removal, towing, storage and processing charges and
collection costs.
(625 ILCS 5/4-204) (2009 Code, § 23-7-4)
§ 73.05 RECORD SEARCHES FOR UNKNOWN OWNER.
   (A)   When a law enforcement agency authorizing the impounding of a vehicle
does not know the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other legally
entitled person, that law enforcement agency will cause the vehicle
registration records of the state to be searched by the Secretary of State for
the purpose of obtaining the required ownership information.
   (B)   The law enforcement agency authorizing the impounding of a vehicle
will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the state police to be searched by
a directed communication to the state police for stolen or wanted information
on the vehicle. When the state police files are searched with negative results,
the information contained in the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files
will be searched by the state police. The information determined from these
record searches will be returned to the requesting law enforcement agency for
that agency’s use in sending a notification by certified mail to the registered
owner, lienholder and other legally entitled persons advising where the vehicle
is held, requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale
information. Notification shall be sent no later than ten business days after
the date the law enforcement agency impounds or authorizes the impounding of a
vehicle, provided that if the law enforcement agency is unable to determine the
identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled
to ownership of the impounded vehicle within a ten business day period after
impoundment, then notification shall be sent no later than two days after the
date the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other person legally
entitled to ownership of the impounded vehicle is determined. Exceptions to a
notification by certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder and other
legally entitled persons are set forth in 625 ILCS 5/4-209.
   (C)   (1)   When ownership information is needed for a towing service to
give notification as required under this chapter, the towing service may cause
the vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by the Secretary
of State.
      (2)   The written request of a towing service, in the form and containing
the information prescribed by the Secretary of State by rule, may be
transmitted to the Secretary of State in person, by U.S. mail or other delivery
service, by facsimile transmission, or by other means the Secretary of State
deems acceptable.
      (3)   The Secretary of State shall provide the required information, or a
statement that the information was not found in the vehicle registration
records of the state, by U.S. mail or other delivery service, facsimile
transmission, as requested by the towing service, or by other means acceptable
to the Secretary of State.
   (D)   The Secretary of State may prescribe standards and procedures for
submission of requests for record searches and replies via computer link.
   (E)   Fees for services provided under this section shall be in amounts
prescribed by the Secretary of State under § 3-821.1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code. Payment may be made by the towing service using cash, any commonly
accepted credit card or any other means of payment deemed acceptable by the
Secretary of State.
(625 ILCS 5/4-205) (2009 Code, § 23-7-5)
§ 73.06 IDENTIFYING AND TRACING OF VEHICLE.
   When the registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to
the possession of a vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files of
this state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable,
the law enforcement agency having custody of the vehicle shall notify the state
police, for the purpose of identifying the vehicle owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by
the state police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency
having custody of the vehicle for notification purposes as set forth in §
73.05.
(625 ILCS 5/4-206) (2009 Code, § 23-7-6)
§ 73.07 RECLAIMED VEHICLES; EXPENSES.
   (A)   Any time before a vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as
provided in §
73.08, the owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to its possession
may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the law enforcement agency having
custody of the vehicle proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession
of the vehicle.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be released to the owner, lienholder or other person
under this section until all towing, storage and processing charges have been
paid.
(625 ILCS 5/4-207) (2009 Code, § 23-7-7)
§ 73.08 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   (A)   (1)   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle seven years
of age or newer remains unclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder or other
legally entitled person for a period of 30 days after notice has been given as
provided in §§
73.05 and
73.06, the law enforcement agency or towing service having possession of the
vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public auction to a person licensed as an
automotive parts recycler, rebuilder or scrap processor under 625 ILCS 5 or the
towing operator which towed the vehicle.
      (2)   (a)   Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a
conspicuous place for at least ten days prior to the sale on the premises where
the vehicle has been impounded.
         (b)   At least ten days prior to the sale, the law enforcement agency
where the vehicle is impounded, or the towing service where the vehicle is
impounded, shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by
certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled
persons.
      (3)   Notice as provided in §§
73.05 and
73.06 and as provided in this section shall state the time and place of sale
and shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what
steps must be taken by any legally entitled persons to reclaim the vehicle.
   (B)   If an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle displays dealer
plates, notice under this section and §
73.09 shall be sent to both the dealer and the registered owner, lienholder or
other legally entitled persons.
   (C)   In those instances where the certified notification specified in §§
73.05 and
73.06 has been returned by the postal authorities to the law enforcement agency
or towing service, the sending of a second certified notice will not be
required.
(625 ILCS 5/4-208) (2009 Code, § 23-7-8)
§ 73.09 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES WITHOUT NOTICE.
   (A)   New car. When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or
other person legally entitled persons of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed
vehicle of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means
provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided for in §
73.08 without notice to any person whose identity cannot be determined.
   (B)   Old car.
      (1)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is
impounded as specified by this chapter, or when any such vehicle is towed at
the request or with the consent of the owner or operator and is subsequently
abandoned, it will be kept in custody or storage for a minimum of ten days for
the purpose of determining the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or
other legally entitled persons and contacting the registered owner, lienholder
or other legally entitled persons by the U.S. mail, public service or in person
for a determination of disposition; and an examination of the state police
stolen vehicle files for theft and wanted information.
      (2)   At the expiration of the ten-day period, without the benefit of
disposition information being received from the registered owner, lienholder or
other legally entitled persons, the vehicle may be disposed of in either of the
following ways:
         (a)   The law enforcement agency having jurisdiction will authorize
the disposal of the vehicle as junk or salvage; or
         (b)   The towing service may sell the vehicle in the manner provided
in §
73.08, provided that the section shall not apply to vehicles towed by order or
authorization of a law enforcement agency.
   (C)   Antique vehicle. A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle, custom
vehicle or street rod may, however, be sold to a person desiring to restore it.
(625 ILCS 5/4-209) (2009 Code, § 23-7-9)
§ 73.10 DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS DILAPIDATED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Any hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle impounded pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter and 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3.1, whether impounded at a public facility
or on the property of private towing service, shall be kept in custody for a
period of ten days for the purpose of determining the identity of the
registered owner or lienholder and contacting such owner or lienholder, if
known, by regular U.S. mail. At the expiration of the ten-day period, without
benefit of disposition information being received from the registered owner or
lienholder, the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction will authorize the
disposal of the vehicle as junk.
(625 ILCS 5/4-209.1) (2009 Code, § 23-7-10)
§ 73.11 COLLECTION OF UNPAID CHARGES.
   In an action to collect towing, storage and processing charges that remain
unpaid after disposition of a vehicle towed or relocated under this chapter,
the towing service may recover reasonable collection costs.
(2009 Code, § 23-7-11)
§ 73.12 POLICE RECORD FOR DISPOSED VEHICLE.
   When a vehicle in the custody of the village or law enforcement agency is
reclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person,
or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided
in this chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by that law
enforcement agency for a period of one year from the date of the sale or
disposal.
(625 ILCS 5/4-210) (2009 Code, § 23-7-12)
§ 73.13 PUBLIC SALE PROCEEDS; DISPOSITION OF.
   (A)   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits is authorized to be
towed away by a law enforcement agency having jurisdiction and disposed of as
set forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after
the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in
the treasury of the municipality.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles disposed of
or sold at public sale under 625 ILCS 5/4-107(k) of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(625 ILCS 5/4-211) (2009 Code, § 23-7-13)
§ 73.14 LIABILITY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   (A)   A law enforcement officer or agency, a department of municipal
government designated under 625 ILCS 5/4-212.1 or its officers or employees, or
a towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be held to answer or be
liable for damages in any action brought by the registered owner, former
registered owner, or his or her legal representative, lienholder or any other
person legally entitled to the possession of a vehicle when the vehicle was
processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this chapter.
   (B)   A towing service, and any of its officers or employees, that removes
or tows a vehicle as a result of being directed to do so by a law enforcement
officer or agency or a department of municipal government or its officers or
employees shall not be held to answer or be liable for injury to, loss of, or
damages to any real or personal property that occurs in the course of the
removal or towing of a vehicle or its contents on a limited access highway in a
designated incident management program that uses fast lane clearance techniques
as defined by the Department of Transportation.
(625 ILCS 5/4-213) (2009 Code, § 23-7-14)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates §
73.01 or who aids and abets in that violation shall be:
      (1)   Subject to a mandatory fine of $200; and
      (2)   Required by the court to make a disposition on the abandoned or
unclaimed vehicle and pay all towing, storage, and processing charges and
collection costs pursuant to §
73.07.
   (B)   (1)   When a vehicle is abandoned, it shall be presumed that the last
registered owner is responsible for the abandonment and shall be liable for all
towing, storage and processing charges and collection costs, less any amounts
realized in the disposal of the vehicle. The last registered owner’s liability
for storage fees may not exceed a maximum of 30 days’ storage fees.
      (2)   The presumption established under this division (B) may be rebutted
by a showing that, prior to the time of the tow:
         (a)   A report of vehicle theft was filed with respect to the vehicle;
or
         (b)   The vehicle was sold or transferred and the last registered
owner provides the towing service with the correct identity and address of the
new owner at the time of the sale or transfer.
      (3)   If the presumption established under this division (B) is rebutted,
the person responsible for theft of the vehicle or to whom the vehicle was sold
or transferred is liable for all towing, storage, and processing charges and
collection costs.
(625 ILCS 5/4-214) (2009 Code, § 23-7-15)
CHAPTER 74: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Skateboards and Toy Vehicles
   
74.01   Definitions
   
74.02   Skateboarding on a street
   
74.03   Clinging to a vehicle
   
74.04   Yield right-of-way
   
74.05   Skateboarding on private property
   
74.06   Skateboarding on public property
   
74.07   Skateboarding in the business district
   
74.08   Damaging village property
   
74.09   Skateboard ramps
   
74.10   Agreement for impoundment
   
74.11   Skateboards and motorized vehicles on trails
Golf Carts and UTVs
   
74.20   Golf carts and UTVs
SKATEBOARDS AND TOY VEHICLES
§ 74.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The village business district include all areas zoned B-
1 and B-2.
   SKATEBOARD. A device with wheels for riding upon, usually standing,
including, without limitations, skateboards of all types.
   TOY VEHICLES. Coasters, scooters, roller skates or any other non-motorized
device with wheels or rollers upon which a person may ride. This definition
does not apply, so long as they are used for the purposes for which they are
intended, to wagons, wheelchairs and strollers or other devices designed and
used for the purpose of transporting children, infants, physically challenged
or incapacitated persons, or to bicycles, or to carts or other devices intended
and used for transporting merchandise or materials.
(2009 Code, § 27-10-1)
§ 74.02 SKATEBOARDING ON A STREET.
   No person shall operate a skateboard or toy vehicle on a public street if
there is a sidewalk adjacent to such street. If no sidewalk exists, skateboards
may be ridden on the street providing street riding shall be done as far to the
right side of the road as possible, and in the same direction as traffic.
(2009 Code, § 27-10-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.03 CLINGING TO A VEHICLE.
   No person operating a skateboard, toy vehicle or other non-motorized device
shall attach himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(2009 Code, § 27-10-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.04 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Any person operating a skateboard or other toy vehicle must yield right-of-
way to any pedestrian or motor vehicle.
(2009 Code, § 27-10-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.05 SKATEBOARDING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall operate a skateboard or toy vehicle on the premises of
any business, residence or other private property in violation of a sign
complying with this section.
   (B)   Areas in which skateboarding or operation of a toy vehicle is
prohibited must be indicated by one or more signs which are positioned to
provide notice and which contain the words “No Skateboarding” or any other word
or combination of words indicating that skateboarding or operation of a toy
vehicle is prohibited. Letters on the sign must be clearly legible.
(2009 Code, § 27-10-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.06 SKATEBOARDING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall operate a skateboard or toy vehicle in, upon or on the
grounds of any public property, except as authorized by the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 27-10-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.07 SKATEBOARDING IN THE BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   No person shall operate a skateboard or toy vehicle within the village’s
business district.
(2009 Code, § 27-10-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.08 DAMAGING VILLAGE PROPERTY.
   No person shall operate a skateboard or toy vehicle on or against any
municipal-owned table, bench, structure, tennis court, parking stop, retaining
wall, fountain, statue or other improvement which may suffer damage by such
use.
(2009 Code, § 27-10-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.09 SKATEBOARD RAMPS.
   No person shall use or place a ramp, jump or any other device used to force
a skateboard or toy vehicle off the pavement on the grounds of the municipal-
owned parking lot, park or sidewalk.
(2009 Code, § 27-10-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.10 AGREEMENT FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
   In place of any other penalty provided by law, any person violating this
chapter may, for a first offense, agree to have the skateboard or play vehicle
impounded by the Police Department for one week.
(2009 Code, § 27-10-10)
§ 74.11 SKATEBOARDS AND MOTORIZED VEHICLES ON TRAILS.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a motorized vehicle on any
walking trails, unless they are authorized emergency vehicles. It shall be
unlawful for anyone to skateboard on any walking trails.
(2009 Code, § 27-10-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
GOLF CARTS AND UTVS
§ 74.20 GOLF CARTS AND UTVS.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this subchapter:
         COUNTY ROADS. As defined by applicable statue.
         GOLF CART. A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the
purpose of transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance
equipment, except those non-highway vehicles licensed by the Illinois Secretary
of State.
         NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLE. As defined in applicable statute.
         STATE ROADS. As defined by applicable statue.
         UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLE. A motorized off-highway vehicle designed to
primarily travel off-highway, sixty- four (64) inches or less in width, having
a manufacturers dry weight of two thousand (2,000) pounds or less, traveling on
four (4) or more non-highway tires, designed with a non-straddle seat and a
steering wheel for steering control, except equipment such as lawnmowers. Also
referred to and defined as a recreational off-highway vehicle in 625 ILCS 5/1-
168.8, and abbreviated as "UTV".
         VILLAGE STREETS. Any of the streets within the boundaries of the
Village of Rochester, Illinois, except for state and county roads.
   (B)   Required equipment.
      (1)   Horn;
      (2)   Brakes and brake lights;
      (3)   Turn signals;
      (4)   Steering wheel apparatus;
      (5)   Rearview mirror;
      (6)   Seatbelts;
      (7)   No modifications made to the golf cart or UTV suspension, unless
approved upon inspection by the Village Police Department;
      (8)   Approved "Slow Moving Vehicle" emblem on the rear of the vehicle
(625 ILCS 5/12-709);
      (9)   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred (500) feet to the front which must be illuminated when in operation;
      (10)   Tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred
(100) feet from the rear which must be illuminated when in operation;
      (11)   Permit number attached to the middle of the "Slow Moving Vehicle"
sign that is at least three inches (3") high; and
      (12)   Any additional requirements of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
   (C)   Requirements.
      (1)   All golf carts and UTVs operated in the Village of Rochester must
be equipped with all of the required equipment listed in division (B) of this
section;
      (2)   Any person who operates a golf cart or UTV in the Village of
Rochester takes full responsibility for all liability associated with operating
the vehicles and possess proof of liability insurance, meeting Illinois statute
requirements;
      (3)   Any person who operates a golf cart or UTV in the Village of
Rochester must possess a valid unrestricted driver's license issued by the
State of Illinois or any other state. No person whose driver's license is
restricted by the Illinois Graduated Driver's License program or any other
restricted driver's permit shall be authorized to operate a golf cart on
village roads.
      (4)   Golf carts and UTVs may be operated on village streets which have a
posted speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour or less, but may never exceed
twenty (20) miles per hour. Golf carts and UTVs may cross restricted streets at
intersections.
      (5)   Golf carts and UTVs may not be operated on sidewalks or multi-use
paths unless explicitly authorized by the village;
      (6)   Golf carts and UTVs are permitted to operate in village parks and
public property only on roadways and parking areas, unless otherwise
authorized;
      (7)   Golf carts and UTVs must yield the right-of-way to overtaking
vehicles at all times;
      (8)   The maximum occupancy of golf carts and UTVs traveling on village
streets will be one person per bucket seat or two people per bench seat;
      (9)   Child passengers must be secured in accordance with the Child
Passenger Protection Act 625 ILCS 25/1;
      (10)   Golf carts and UTVs may only be operated on roadways per Illinois
law;
      (11)   Golf carts and UTVs must obey all traffic laws of the State of
Illinois and the Village of Rochester;
      (12)   Golf carts and UTVs are only allowed to park in handicapped
parking spaces if the driver or at least one passenger has a valid handicap
parking sticker;
      (13)   Golf carts and UTVs shall not be operated during inclement weather
(rain, freezing rain, sleet, snow, etc) or when visibility is impaired by
weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions; and
      (14)   A person who drives or is in actual physical control of the golf
cart or UTV on a roadway while under the influence is subject to Section 11500
through 11-502 of the Illinois Compiled Statues (625 ILCS 5/11-500 through 5/
11-502).
   (D)   Permits.
      (1)   All golf carts and UTVs operating on village streets must be
inspected by the Chief of Police or his designee and must have a valid permit
visibly displayed on the rear of the vehicle issued by the Rochester Police
Department. The Rochester Police Department will inspect golf carts and UTVs on
Saturdays in the month of April from 9:00 am to 12:00 pm. Operators will be
allowed a onetime "free pass" to drive their golf cart or UTV to the Rochester
Police Department on inspection days. In the event of inclement weather on
scheduled inspection days, alternate inspection days may be scheduled at the
discretion of the Chief of Police. Operators will be provided a copy of the
Golf Cart and UTV Ordinance and must sign a receipt to acknowledge
understanding of the ordinance prior to a permit being issued. The receipts
shall be kept on file with the Rochester Police Department;
      (2)   Permits shall be granted for a period of one year from May 1 to
April 30 and may be renewed annually;
      (3)   The cost of the permit is $75 for operators age 65 and older and
$100 for all other;
      (4)   Operators must have adequate insurance coverage for operation of
the golf cart or UTV. Insurance coverage will be verified when a permit is
issued and when renewing the permit;
      (5)   A physically handicapped applicant must submit a certificate signed
by a physician, certifying that the applicant is able to safely operate a
qualified golf cart or UTV on village streets;
      (6)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by
the village and shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Name and address of applicant;
         (b)   Driver's license number of applicant;
         (c)   Name of liability insurance carrier;
         (d)   Serial number, make, model and description of the vehicle;
         (e)   Photocopy of applicable liability insurance coverage and
specifically for the golf cart or UTV to be operated on village streets;
         (f)   Signed general release of liability, waiver, discharge and
covenant not to sue by applicant releasing the Village of Rochester, County of
Sangamon and all other governmental entities which have approved the operation
of golf carts and/or UTVs and neighborhood vehicles on their roadways of and
from all liability for direct, indirect, special, incidental or consequential
damages, whether arising in court, contract or any other legal theories, in
connection with or arising out of the operator's use of a golf cart or UTV and
in addition, the operator shall save, hold harmless and indemnify such
governmental entities against any and all liability, claims, causes of action
and costs of whatsoever kind and nature, including, without being limited to
injury, damage, loss, including death, resulting from, arising out of, or
occurring in connection with the use of a golf cart or UTV pursuant to this
subchapter, or any other ordinance of the Village of Rochester; and
         (g)   Such other information as the village may require.
      (7)   Failure to comply with any of the permitting provisions set forth
herein or failure to timely pay for a permit shall subject the individual to
loss of a permit for the period of one year.
   (E)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Any violation of this subchapter shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than $150 nor more than $750 for each violation;
      (2)   A second violation of this subchapter shall, in addition to being
subject to fine, be grounds for the revocation of the vehicle's permit for a
period up to one year;
      (3)   Upon investigation by and the recommendation of the Chief of
Police, the Village Board may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder,
upon a finding that there is evidence that permitted operator cannot safely
operate the golf cart;
      (4)   The Board of Trustees of the Village of Rochester reserves the
right to amend or repeal this subchapter at any time and if such amendment or
repeal affects the rights of permit holders, all permit holders will be
notified thereof by the village by certified mail; and
      (5)   No person receiving a permit pursuant to the terms of this
subchapter shall have any legal right to the continuation of said subchapter
regardless of the cost of rendering a golf cart or UTV in compliance with this
subchapter for the purpose of its operation in the Village of Rochester
pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 23-18, passed 7-10-2023)
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Stop intersections
      
II.   One-way streets
      
III.   Yield right-of-way street
      
IV.   Reduced speed limits
      
V.   Snow emergency routes
      
VI.   Through trucks prohibited
SCHEDULE I. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   In accordance with the provisions of §§
71.01 and
71.03 of this code of ordinances, the following streets are hereby designated
as stop intersections, to wit:
Through Street Stop Street (Direction)
Through Street                 Stop Street (Direction)
One- and Two-Way Stops          
Appalachian Trail              Osage Road (northbound)
Camelot Drive                  Arthur Drive (eastbound)
Camelot Drive                  Guinevere Drive (eastbound)
Camelot Drive                  Lancelot Drive (eastbound)
Camelot Drive                  Merlin Drive (eastbound)
Camelot Drive                  Pellinore Drive (eastbound)
Cardinal Hill                  Jack Taylor (westbound)
Cumberland Road                Allegheny Road (northbound)
Ebel Drive                     Soccer parking lot (westbound)
Ebel Drive                     Wild Rose Lane (westbound)
East Main Street               Cardinal Hill Road (northbound)
East Main Street               Cardinal Hill Road (southbound)
East Main Street               John Street (both)
East Main Street               Maple Street (southbound)
East Main Street               North Walnut Street (southbound)
East Main Street               Oak Street (southbound)   
East Main Street               Pleasant Lane (southbound)
East Main Street               State Street (northbound)
East Main Street               Water (southbound)
Guinevere Drive                Arthur Drive (southbound)
Guinevere Drive                Lancelot Drive (westbound)
Illinois Route 29              Camelot (southbound)
Illinois Route 29              Rocket Drive (southbound)
Illinois Route 29              Taft Drive (southbound)
Maplehurst Road                Virginia Lane (both)
Mill Street                    John Street (northbound)
Mill Street                    Park Street (northbound)
Mill Street                    Water Street (both)
Milldale Drive                 Burberry Lane (both)
Milldale Drive                 Heathrow Lane (both)
Mishawaka Drive                Pocomoke Lane (eastbound)
Mishawaka Drive                Swannanoa Drive (eastbound)
North Walnut Street            Circle Drive (westbound)
North Walnut Street            Katie Lane (westbound)
North Walnut Street            Mill Street (westbound)
North Walnut Street            Rochester High School Parking Lot (north lot)
North Walnut Street            Rochester High School Parking Lot (south lot)
Oak Hill Road                  Cumberland Road (eastbound)
Oak Hill Road                  Heathrow Lane (southbound)
Oak Hill Road                  Maplehurst Road (westbound)
Oak Hill Road                  Milldale Drive (westbound)
Oak Hill Road                  Penocook Drive (eastbound)
Oak Hill Road                  Roanoke Drive (eastbound)
Oak Hill Road                  Woodland Trail (northbound)
Oak Hill Road                  Wyndmoor Drive (westbound)
Oak Street                     Karen Rose (eastbound)
Oak Street                     Magnolia (westbound)
Oak Street                     Mill Street (eastbound)
Oak Street                     Old Timbers (eastbound)
Old Timbers                    Parkview Drive (northbound)
Old Timbers                    Sawmill (northbound)
Old Timbers                    Sawmill (southbound)
Old Timbers                    Waterwheel (northbound)
Old Timbers                    Waterwheel (southbound)
Roanoke Drive                  Osage Road (southbound)
Sattley Street                 First Street (eastbound)
Sattley Street                 Second Street (eastbound)
Sattley Street                 Third Street (eastbound)
Sattley Street                 Fourth Street (eastbound)
South Walnut Street            First Street (westbound)
South Walnut Street            Second Street (westbound)
South Walnut Street            Third Street (westbound)
South Walnut Street            Fourth Street (westbound)
South Walnut Street            Cherry Drive (eastbound)
South Walnut Street            Village Lane (westbound)
State                          Vernon Road (westbound)
State                          Willow Road (westbound)
Virginia                       Heathrow Lane (westbound)
Waterwheel                     Magnolia (westbound)
West Main Street               Bertrand Drive (southbound)
West Main Street               Deer Creek (northbound)
West Main Street               Melody Lane (southbound)
West Main Street               Twin Oaks (northbound)
West Main Street               Wildrose (northbound)
Woodland Trail                 Briarwood Lane (northbound)
Woodland Trail                 Riverwood Drive (southbound)
Wyndmoor Drive                 Burberry Lane (both)
Wyndmoor Drive                 Heathrow Lane (both)
Three-Way Stops                 
Appalachian Trail (northbound) Cumberland Road (both)
Four-Way Stops                  
Mill Street                    Pleasant Lane
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 27, Sch. A) (Ord. 11-02, passed 1-10-2011; Ord. 20-14, passed
7-13-2020; Ord. 23-24, passed 9-11-2023)  Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   In accordance with §
71.02 of this code of ordinances, the following streets are hereby designated
as one-way streets:
 
Street - Direction          Location
Wild Rose Lane (northbound) From West Main Street through Community Park to
                            Ebel Drive
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 27, Sch. B) (Ord. 11-01, passed 1-10-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE III. YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY STREET.
   In accordance with §
71.04, the following intersections are hereby established as yield right-of-
way intersections:
 
Through Street      At Yield Street (Direction)
Mishawaka Drive       Penacook Drive (eastbound)
Pocomoke Lane         Natick Circle (northbound)
South Walnut Street   East Main Street (southbound)
Water Street          Lexington Drive (westbound)
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 27, Sch. C) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE IV. REDUCED SPEED LIMITS.
Street Speed Limit Location
Street              Speed Limit Location
Allegheny Road      20 mph      From Cumberland Road to Roanoke Drive
Appalachian Trail   20 mph      From Cumberland Road to north end of street
Arthur Drive        20 mph      From Camelot Drive to Guinevere Drive
Birch Lane          20 mph      From Magnolia Drive to north end of street
Bramble Lane        20 mph      From Taft Street to east end of street
Briarwood Lane      20 mph      From Oak Grove to Woodland Trails
Camelot Drive       20 mph      From State Route 29 to east end of street
Chase Haven         20 mph      From Appalachian Trail to south end of street
Circle Drive        20 mph      From North Walnut Street to North Walnut Street
Cumberland Road     20 mph      From Oak Hill Road to Oak Hill Road
Deercreek Road      20 mph      From West Main Street to Hillcrest Road
Ebel Drive          20 mph      From West Main Street to north end of street
Edgewood Place      20 mph      From Woodland Trails to north end of street
Elaine Drive        20 mph      From Merlin Drive to north end of street
First Street        20 mph      From South Walnut Street to Sattley Street
Fourth Street       20 mph      From South Walnut Street to Sattley Street
Fox Point           20 mph      From Woodland Trails to north end of street
Galahad Drive       20 mph      From Elaine Drive to north end of street
Guinevere Drive     20 mph      From Camelot Drive to Merlin Drive
Hillcrest Road      20 mph      From Twin Oaks Drive to Deercreek Road
Lancelot Drive      20 mph      From Camelot Drive to Guinevere Drive
Lexington Drive     20 mph      From Water Street to Pleasant Lane
Magnolia Drive      20 mph      From Oak Street to Maple Street
West Main Street    20 mph*     From Melody Lane to west edge of school campus
Maple Street        20 mph      From East Main Street to north end of street
Maxheimer Road      20 mph      From Buckhart Road (County Highway 4) to 800
                                feet south of Buckhart Road
Merlin Drive        20 mph      From Camelot Drive to Guinevere Drive
East Mill Street    20 mph      From Walnut Street to Oak Street
Mishawaka Drive     20 mph      From Oak Hill Road to Oak Hill Road
Natick Circle       20 mph      From Pocomoke Lane to south end of street
Oak Grove Drive     20 mph      From Woodland Trails to east end of street
Osage Road          20 mph      From Appalachian Trail to Roanoke Drive
Parkview Drive      20 mph      From Lexington Drive to Water Street
Pellinore Drive     20 mph      From Camelot Drive to Galahad Drive
Penacook Drive      20 mph      From Mishawaka Drive to Willimantic Drive
Pleasant Lane       20 mph      From Mill Street to north end of street
Pocomoke Lane       20 mph      From Mishawaka Drive to Willimantic Drive
Potomac Road        20 mph      From Cumberland Road to Roanoke Drive
Quail Crossing      20 mph      From west end of street to east end of street
Riverwood Drive     20 mph      From Woodland Trails to north end of street
Roanoke Drive       20 mph      From Oak Hill Road to west end of street
Sattley Street      20 mph      From First Street to Fourth Street
Second Street       20 mph      From South Walnut Street to Sattley Street
Swannanoa Drive     20 mph      From Mishawaka Drive to west end of street
Taft Street         20 mph      From State Route 29 to State Route 29
Third Street        20 mph      From South Walnut Street to Sattley Street
Timber Ridge        20 mph      From Woodland Trails to north end of street
Twin Oaks Drive     20 mph      From West Main Street to Hillcrest Road
Vernon Drive        20 mph      From State Street to Willow Road
Walberta Drive      20 mph      From State Route 29 to State Route 29
Walker Ridge        20 mph      From Appalachian Trail to south end of street
North Walnut Street 20 mph      From East Main Street to village limits
North Walnut Street 20 mph*     From Mill Street to Katie Lane
Water Street        20 mph      From Mill Street to Parkview Drive
Wild Rose Lane      20 mph      From Ebel Drive to Hillcrest Road
Willimantic Drive   20 mph      From Penacook Drive to Pocomoke Lane
Willow Road         20 mph      From State Street to Vernon Drive
Woodland Trails     20 mph      From Oak Hill Road to south end of street
* Indicates school speed zones
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 27, Sch. D) (Ord. 10-03, passed 5-10-2010; Ord. 12-14, passed
11-14-2012; Ord. 17- 30, passed 6-12-2017; Ord. 19-04, passed 3-11-2019)
Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE V. SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
72.10, the following are hereby designated as snow emergency route signs, to
wit:
Street - Direction Location
Street - Direction  Location
First Street        From South Walnut Street to Stattley Street (full length of
                    street)
East Main Street    From North Walnut Street to corporate limits (full length
                    of street)
West Main Street    From State Route 29 to corporate limits (full length of
                    street)
North Oak Street    From East Main Street to corporate limits (full length of
                    street)
Oak Hill Road       From West Main Street to corporate limits (full length of
                    street)
State Street        From State Route 29 to East Main Street (full length of
                    street)
North Walnut Street From East Main Street to corporate limits (full length of
                    street)
South Walnut Street From State Route 29 to corporate limits (full length of
                    street)
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 27, Sch. K) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE VI. THROUGH TRUCKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of §
72.04(D), the following are hereby designated as streets where trucks are
prohibited, to wit:
 
Street - Direction Location
East Main Street   Between Cardinal Hill Road and State Route 29 - no through
                   commercial trucks
Vernon Drive       From State Street to Willow Road
Willow Road        From State Street to Vernon Drive
 
   (B)   Large trucks and tractors prohibited on Maple Lane and Magnolia Drive.
Large trucks and tractors are hereby prohibited from traversing Maple Street
and Magnolia Lane, with the exception of garbage and recycling haulers
authorized to do business in the village and common carriers making deliveries
on the aforementioned streets.
(2009 Code, Ch. 27, Sch. L) (Ord. 12-08, passed 7-9-2012 ; Ord. 20-21, passed
11-9-2020 ) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 76: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   No parking signs
      
II.   No parking zones
      
III.   Parallel parking zones
      
IV.   Handicapped parking
      
V.   Perpendicular parking zones
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING SIGNS.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
72.04, the following are hereby designated as no parking zones, to wit:
Street - Direction Location - Number
Street - Direction             Location - Number
Camelot Drive (southbound)     From Guinevere Drive to State Route 29
Ebel Drive (southbound)        From north end of street to West Main Street
North John Street (northbound) From East Main Street to 40 feet to north of
                               East Main Street
East Main Street (eastbound)   From 40 feet west of John Street to 40 feet east
                               of John Street
East Main Street (eastbound)   From 75 feet east of John Street to State Street
East Main Street (westbound)   From 25 feet east of John Street to 40 feet west
                               of John Street
Melody Drive (northbound)      North end of street
North Walnut (east side)       From Mill Street to the northernmost boundary of
                               the village limits
Wild Rose Lane (northbound)    From West Main Street to the south edge of the
                               parking lots
Wild Rose Lane (westbound)     From west end of parking lots to Ebel Drive
Willow Road (eastbound)        From 155 feet east of State Street to 270 feet
                               east of State Street
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 27, Sch. E) (Ord. 09-11, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 11-01, passed
1-10-2011; Ord. 13-02, passed 3-13-2013) Penalty, see §
72.99
SCHEDULE II. NO PARKING ZONES.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
72.04, the following are hereby designated as limited parking zones, to wit:
 
Street - Side                    Location - Number
                                 From 460 feet south of State Route 29 to 880
South Walnut Street (southbound) feet south of State Route 29 (Christian Church
                                 at 413 South Walnut Street)
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 27, Sch. F) Penalty, see §
72.99
SCHEDULE III. PARALLEL PARKING ZONES.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
72.04, the following are hereby established as parallel parking signs, to wit:
 
Street - Direction             Location
North John Street (northbound) From East Main Street to Mill Street
East Main Street (westbound)   From John Street to North Walnut Street
East Main Street (eastbound)   From North Walnut Street to John Street
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 27, Sch. G) Penalty, see §
72.99
SCHEDULE IV. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   In accordance with the provisions of §
72.05, the following are hereby designated as handicapped parking spaces, to
wit:
 
Street                         Location - Number
1 Community Drive              Village Hall parking lot
Ebel Drive                     East side of Ebel Drive, north side of sidewalk
                               entrance - 2
Ebel Drive                     Soccer fields parking lot
Ebel Drive                     Pavilion parking lot
North John Street (southbound) North side of East Main Street - 1
Wild Rose Lane                 Concession stand parking lot
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 27, Sch. H) (Ord. 11-03, passed 1-10-2011; Ord. 12-13, passed
9-10-2012) Penalty, see §
72.99
SCHEDULE V. PERPENDICULAR PARKING ZONES.
   In accordance with the provisions of this Traffic Code, the following are
hereby designated as perpendicular parking zones, to wit:
 
Street                         Location - Number
North John Street (southbound) East Main Street
Wild Rose Lane (southbound)    From West Main Street to Ebel Drive
Wild Rose Lane (northbound)    From Ebel Drive to West Main Street
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 27, Sch. I) Penalty, see §
72.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   PARKS
      
93.   FAIR HOUSING
      
94.   FIRE PROTECTION
      
95.   STREET REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Regulations
   
90.01   Short title
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Injury to property
   
90.04   Manner of keeping
   
90.05   Keeping barking dogs and crying cats
   
90.06   Cruelty to animals prohibited
   
90.07   Exhibiting wild or vicious animals
   
90.08   Health hazard
   
90.09   Limitation on number of dogs and cats kept
   
90.10   Animals and the like in village
Dogs
   
90.25   Definitions
   
90.26   Dogs or cats to be inoculated and to have name tags affixed to collars
   
90.27   Inoculation to be performed by licensed veterinarian; issuance of
certificate
   
90.28   Duration of inoculation
   
90.29   Specifications for tag
   
90.30   Exhibition of certificate upon request
   
90.31   Restraint of dogs
   
90.32   Impoundment of dogs running at large or unlicensed dogs; citation of
owner or keeper
   
90.33   Notice and citation to owner or keeper of impoundment
   
90.34   Obstructing poundmaster
   
90.35   Impoundment of dogs which have bitten persons or other domesticated
animals
   
90.36   Impoundment
   
90.37   Redemption of impounded animals
   
90.38   Village pound designated
   
90.39   Disposition of dogs deemed nuisances
   
90.40   Dangerous dog; female dog at large
   
90.41   Female dog with other dogs
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1, 65 ILCS 5/11-5-6 and 65 ILCS 5/11-
20-9
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 90.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Animal Control Code”.
(2009 Code, § 3-1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 510 ILCS 5/1
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any animal, other than a human, which may be affected by rabies.
(510 ILCS 5/2.02)
   ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN. Any person appointed by the President and approved by
the Village Board to perform duties enforcing this chapter or any animal
control official appointed and acting under authority of the Village Board.
(510 ILCS 5/2.03)
   AT LARGE. Any dog shall be deemed to be at large when it is off the property
of its owner and not under the control of a responsible person.
   CAT. Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
   CONFINED. Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his or her
agent, to an escape-proof building or other enclosure away from other animals
and the public.
(510 ILCS 5/2.05)
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed or
unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner’s family, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places.
(510 ILCS 5/15.2)
   DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. The Department of Agriculture of the State of
Illinois.
(510 ILCS 5/2.06)
   DOG. All members of the family Canidae.
(510 ILCS 5/2.11)
   DOMESTICATED ANIMAL. An animal of a species of vertebrates that has been
domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition and depend
on humankind for survival.
   HAS BEEN BITTEN. Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person
or animal seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced, and further
includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
(510 ILCS 5/2.12)
   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES. The injection of an anti-rabies vaccine approved
by the Department.
(510 ILCS 5/2.13)
   KENNEL. Any structure or premises or portion thereof on which more than
three dogs, cats or other household domestic animals, over four months of age,
are kept or on which more than two such animals are maintained, boarded, bred
or cared for in return for remuneration or are kept for the purpose of sale.
   LEASH. A cord, rope, strap or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength
to keep such dog or other animal under control.
(510 ILCS 5/2.14)
   LICENSED VETERINARIAN. A veterinarian licensed by the state in which he or
she engages in the practice of veterinary medicine.
(510 ILCS 5/2.15)
   OWNER. A person having a right of property in a dog or other animal or who
keeps or harbors a dog, or who has a dog in his or her care, or who acts as its
custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog or other domestic animal to remain on
or about any premises occupied by him or her.
(510 ILCS 5/2.16)
   POUND. Any facility approved by the Administrator and licensed as such by
the Department of Agriculture for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and
used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted dogs or
other animals.
(510 ILCS 5/2.18)
   POUNDMASTER. Sangamon County, including its division known as the Animal
Control Center and/or any other agency designated by Sangamon County or the
village to handle animal control issues for the village and/or their agents.
   REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. A printed form prescribed by the Department of
Agriculture for the purpose of recording pertinent information as required by
the Department under the Animal Control Act.
(510 ILCS 5/2.19)
   RESTRAINT. A dog is under RESTRAINT within the meaning of this code if it is
controlled by a leash; within an enclosed vehicle being driven or parked on the
streets; or within the property limits of his or her owner or keeper.
   SHADE. Protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of June
through September.
   SHELTER. As it applies to dogs, shall mean a moisture-proof structure of
suitable size to accommodate the dog and allow retention of body heat, made of
durable material with a solid floor raised at least two inches from the ground
and with the entrance covered by a flexible, windproof material. Such structure
shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to provide
insulation and protection against cold and dampness.
   UNOWNED STRAY DOG. Any dog not on the premises of the owner or keeper or
under control by leash or other recognized control methods, and which does not,
at that time and place, bear a current rabies inoculation tag issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, by means of which, by reference to records
of current registration certificates, the Administrator or his or her deputies
or assistants may determine the name and address of the owner or keeper
thereof, or some other means of identification from which the Administrator or
his or her deputies or assistants may directly determine the name and address
of the owner or keeper thereof.
(510 ILCS 5/2)
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal which has previously attacked or bitten any
person or which has behaved in such a manner that the person who harbors said
animal knows or should reasonably know that the animal is possessed of
tendencies to attack or bite persons.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any live monkey or ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, snake or other
reptile, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other animal or any bird of
prey which can normally be found in the wild state.
(510 ILCS 5/24) (2009 Code, § 3-1-2) (Ord. 12-18, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 90.03 INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   (A)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing a
dog or cat to permit such dog or cat to go upon any sidewalk, parkway or
private lands or premises without the permission of the owner of such premises
and break, bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub,
tree or garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon.
   (B)   Waste products accumulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause or permit a dog or cat to be on property, public or private, not owned or
possessed by such person unless such person has in his or her immediate
possession an appropriate device for scooping excrement and an appropriate
depository for the transmission of excrement to a receptacle located upon
property owned or possessed by such person. This section shall not apply to a
person who is visually or physically handicapped.
(2009 Code, § 3-1-3) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 MANNER OF KEEPING.
   (A)   Pens, yards or runs. All pens, yards, runs or other structures wherein
any animal is kept shall be of such construction so as to be easily cleaned and
kept in good repair.
   (B)   Fences. Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall
be securely constructed, shall be adequate for the purpose, kept in good repair
and shall not be allowed to become unsightly. Fences shall be constructed in
accordance with §
156.038 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 3-1-4) (Ord. 17-24, passed 6-12-2017) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 KEEPING BARKING DOGS AND CRYING CATS.
   (A)   Harboring. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly keep or
harbor any dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which
habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood, or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in
the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   (B)   Petitions of complaint. Whenever any person shall complain to the
Police Department that a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps or a cat
which habitually cries or howls is being kept by any person in the village, the
Police Department shall notify the owner of said dog or cat that a complaint
has been received and that the person should take whatever steps are necessary
to alleviate the howling, yelping or crying.
(2009 Code, § 3-1-5) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Cruelty to animals prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully or maliciously inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture,
abuse or cruelly beat, strike or abuse any animal, or by an act, omission or
neglect, cause or inflict any unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering,
injury or death to any animal, whether such animal belongs to such person or to
another, except that reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or
trespassing animals. Any unwanted animals should be delivered to the county
animal control facility for proper disposal.
   (B)   Food and shelter. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any
animal to fail, refuse or neglect to provide such animal with food, potable
water, shade or shelter, or to cruelly or unnecessarily expose any such animal
in hot, stormy, cold or inclement weather, or to carry any such animal in or
upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner. The terms used in this section
shall comply with §
90.02.
(2009 Code, § 3-1-6) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-6
§ 90.07 EXHIBITING WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on
his or her premises any wild or vicious animal as described in this chapter for
display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This
section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal
exhibitions or circuses.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept any
wild animal as a pet, unless a permit is granted by the Department of Natural
Resources of the state.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious
animal within the village.
      (2)   Any animal which is found off the premises of its owner may be
seized by any police officer or humane officer and upon establishment to the
satisfaction of any court of competent jurisdiction of the vicious character of
said animal, it may be killed by a police officer or humane officer; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to animals under the control of a
law enforcement or military agency nor to animals which are kept for the
protection of property, provided that such animals are restrained by a leash or
chain, cage, fence or other adequate means from contact with the general public
or with persons who enter the premises with the actual or implied permission of
the owner or occupant.
   (D)   The Department of Agriculture shall issue a temporary permit for the
keeping, care and protection of any infant animal native to this area which has
been deemed to be homeless, then said animal may be kept on a temporary basis.
(2009 Code, § 3-1-7) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 HEALTH HAZARD.
   The President shall have the power to issue an order prohibiting the keeping
of any animal, fowl or bird which is deemed to be a nuisance or pose a health
hazard to the general public.
(2009 Code, § 3-1-8)
§ 90.09 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS KEPT.
   (A)   Nuisance.
      (1)   The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats in the village
for a considerable period of time detracts from and, in many instances, is
detrimental to the healthful and comfortable life for which such areas were
created.
      (2)   The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats is, therefore,
declared to be a public nuisance. The terms “dog” and “cat” shall be construed
as provided in §
90.02.
   (B)   Limitation; exception.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than
five dogs or cats within the village, with the exception that a litter of pups,
a litter of kittens or a portion of a litter may be kept for a period of time
not exceeding five months from birth.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment
wherein dogs or cats are kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes or
boarding.
   (C)   Kennels. In the areas where kennels are permitted, no kennel shall be
located closer than 200 feet to the boundary of the nearest adjacent
residential lot. (See
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.)
(2009 Code, § 3-1-9) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 ANIMALS AND THE LIKE IN VILLAGE.
   (A)   Certain prohibitions. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter no
person shall keep within the village any cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine,
goats, chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese, rabbits or other livestock.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply in areas of the village that
are included and permitted by a zoning variance and/or by a pre-annexation
agreement. This section shall not apply to livestock nor shall this section
apply to livestock brought in to the village for the purpose of being shipped
out of the village.
   (C)   Powers of Police Chief. The Police Chief shall have the power to issue
an order prohibiting the keeping of any animal, fowl or bird which is deemed to
pose a health hazard to the general public.
(2009 Code, § 3-1-10) Penalty, see §
90.99
DOGS
§ 90.25 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used in this subchapter shall comply with §
90.02 unless otherwise provided in this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-1)
§ 90.26 DOGS OR CATS TO BE INOCULATED AND TO HAVE NAME TAGS AFFIXED TO COLLARS.
   (A)   Each calendar year, or at such intervals as may hereafter be
promulgated by the Department of Agriculture, every owner or keeper of a dog
four months or more of age shall cause such dog to be inoculated against
rabies. Such owner or keeper of such dog shall cause a serially numbered tag
evidencing such inoculation to be attached to a collar or harness worn by the
dog.
   (B)   Every owner or keeper of a dog, regardless of age, shall cause the dog
to wear a collar or harness and shall affix thereto a metallic or other
suitable tag inscribed with the name, address and phone number, if any, of the
owner or keeper of the dog.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-2) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.27 INOCULATION TO BE PERFORMED BY LICENSED VETERINARIAN; ISSUANCE OF
CERTIFICATE.
   The inoculation of dogs required by §
90.26(A) shall be performed by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice his or
her profession in this state. Upon performing such inoculation, such
veterinarian shall issue to the owner or keeper a certificate showing such fact
and shall also deliver to the owner or keeper a metallic or other suitable tag
to be attached to the collar or harness of the dog, which tag shall also
certify to the fact of the inoculation against rabies.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-3)
§ 90.28 DURATION OF INOCULATION.
   The inoculation performed under the provisions of §
90.27 shall be effective until the expiration of the calendar year in which the
vaccination was performed or the expiration of such period of time as may be
promulgated by the Department of Agriculture.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-4)
§ 90.29 SPECIFICATIONS FOR TAG.
   The tag issued under the provisions of §
90.27 shall be in such form as shall be determined by the Department of
Agriculture.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-5)
§ 90.30 EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATE UPON REQUEST.
   At any reasonable time upon request of any member of the Police Department
or village employee, the owner or keeper of any unmuzzled dog shall exhibit his
or her certificate issued under the provisions of §
90.27, showing the inoculation against rabies of any dog owned or controlled by
him or her.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-6) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.31 RESTRAINT OF DOGS.
   The owner or keeper of a dog shall keep the dog under restraint at all times
and shall not permit such dog to be at large, off the premises of the property
of the owner or keeper, unless the dog is under complete control as defined in
§
90.02.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-7) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-9
§ 90.32 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE OR UNLICENSED DOGS; CITATION OF
OWNER OR KEEPER.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of such employees and officers of the Police
Department as shall be designated for that purpose by the President to take up
and impound in such place as may be designated and set apart for that purpose,
any dog found running at large or unlicensed in the village, contrary to any of
the provisions of this chapter or other regulations of the village or state.
   (B)   When dogs are found running at large or unlicensed and their ownership
is known to the designated employee(s), such dogs may be impounded at the
discretion of such employee(s), but the employee(s) may cite the owner of such
dog to answer charges of violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Any dog permitted to run at large within the village is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
   (D)   Any impounded dog which shall not be redeemed within seven days shall
be handled in accordance with the rules and policies of the poundmaster and/or
as the law may otherwise allow.
   (E)   The Village Board may establish a reasonable fee by motion for each
day that a dog is housed in the county pound.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-8) (Ord. 12-18, passed 12-10-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 510 ILCS 5/10
§ 90.33 NOTICE AND CITATION TO OWNER OR KEEPER OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   In case of impounding and where the owner or keeper of such dog is disclosed
by any tax or license tag worn by it or is otherwise known to the officers
impounding the same, the designated official shall make reasonable attempts to
contact the owner, informing him or her of the impounding of his or her dog and
shall cite the owner or keeper of such dog to answer charges of violation of
this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-9)
§ 90.34 OBSTRUCTING POUNDMASTER.
   Any person(s) who shall bring any dog into the village for the purpose of
causing the same to be impounded or any person who shall resist, hinder or
molest the poundmaster or dogcatcher or police officer while engaged upon the
duties imposed upon them by this chapter or any person who shall break into the
dog pound and release or deliver any dog therefrom without having first paid
the fees herein specified, or any owner or keeper of any dog who shall permit
any dog to run at large within the corporate limits of the village, upon
conviction of any part of this chapter shall be fined according to §
90.99.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.35 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PERSONS OR OTHER DOMESTICATED
ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog to keep it in a manner so
that it does not bite or harm any other domesticated animals or person. In
addition to the penalties set forth in §
90.99, any dog which shall have bitten or otherwise injured any person or other
domesticated animal so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall be immediately
taken, impounded and kept separated from other dogs for ten days. Impounding of
all animals will be done in accordance with the policies and regulations of the
poundmaster. Any owner, keeper, possessor or other authorized person upon
claiming the animal is liable for all fees and fines as levied by the village,
poundmaster and/or any other humane society shelter or other impoundment
facility. The dog must be examined by a licensed veterinarian at the
commencement and termination of this ten-day period. If such dog during this
period shall die or show definite signs of illness, it shall be the duty of
such owner or person having custody of the dog to turn the dog over to the
county animal control officer so that it can be determined whether or not the
dog has rabies. If, during this ten-day period, a veterinarian shall diagnose
the dog with rabies, the dog shall be handled in accordance with policies and
regulations of the poundmaster and may be euthanized by same in a manner
provided for by law. In case such dog cannot be safely taken up and impounded,
the poundmaster and/or the village may take any and all measures to secure the
dog, including lethal force.
If, at the expiration of the ten days no symptoms of rabies have developed in
such dog so impounded, the same may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of
the redemption fees and charges specified by this chapter; provided, however,
that in case any dog so impounded for biting a person shall have previously
bitten any person, such dog may be subject to further impoundment and/or an
order may be sought declaring the dog to be declared “vicious” under the Animal
Control Act. If the dog is declared “vicious” it shall be subject to the
provisions of the Act. After having been notified that his or her dog has
bitten or otherwise injured any person or other domesticated animal, the owner
or keeper thereof shall not, under any circumstances, permit such animal to be
at large unless securely muzzled.
(510 ILCS 5/13)
   (B)   Any and all fees charged by the poundmaster shall be charged to the
owner plus the transportation costs to the pound.
   (C)   Any and all actions taken within and pursuant to this section shall be
done in accordance with the law and/or regulations relating to same, including
specifically the Animal Control Act, 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-11) (Ord. 12-18, passed 12-10-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.36 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Those persons charged with the duty of enforcing this subchapter may employ
any method found practical and humane in capturing and impounding any dog found
running at large.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-12)
§ 90.37 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   The owner of any animal impounded under this chapter may redeem the same by
paying all the costs and charges assessed, if any, that have accrued up to the
time of making redemption and on paying the same; it shall be the duty of the
authorities to release the animal from the pound and deliver it to its owner,
or certify the release thereof to any county authority having possession of the
animal.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-13)
§ 90.38 VILLAGE POUND DESIGNATED.
   The Village Board does hereby designate the Sangamon County pound as the
village pound.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-14)
§ 90.39 DISPOSITION OF DOGS DEEMED NUISANCES.
   Any dog which may, in any manner, continually disturb the quiet of any
person or neighborhood or shall destroy or in any manner injure any animal,
plant, shrub or other property not on the premises of its owner or keeper is
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and such dog shall be taken up and impounded
and may be redeemed or disposed of in the manner provided for under this
chapter.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-15)
§ 90.40 DANGEROUS DOG; FEMALE DOG AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any vicious or dangerous dog
as defined in §
90.02 or of any female dog, while in heat, to run at large within the limits of
this village.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-16) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.41 FEMALE DOG WITH OTHER DOGS.
   No person in control or possession of a female dog or permitting the same to
remain upon his or her premises, shall permit any such female dog, while in
heat, to consort with any other dog or dogs in an indecent manner in any place
of public view, whether upon his or her own or any other premises.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-17) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
(2009 Code, § 3-1-11)
   (B)   The penalties for violating any of the provisions within §§
90.01 through
90.10 or 90.25 through 90.41 shall be as set forth in this section. Each
violation shall be considered a violation of the owner and the penalties for
subsequent offense shall be applicable regardless if such subsequent offense is
with the same or a separate animal of the owner. Each penalty shall apply to
the owner of the animal and shall be due from same.
   (C)   Any violation of §§
90.03, 90.04 or 90.09 shall result in a penalty of $75 for the first offense,
$100 for the second offense if such offense occurs within 18 months of the
first offense, and $150 for the third and each subsequent offense that occurs
within 18 months of the second (or subsequent) offense.
   (D)   Any violation of §
90.05 shall result in a penalty of $200 for the first offense, $400 for the
second offense if such offense occurs within 18 months of the first offense,
and $750 for the third and each subsequent offense that occurs within 18 months
of the second (or subsequent) offense.
   (E)   Any violation of §
90.06 shall result in a penalty of $750 for each offense that occurs within an
18-month period.
   (F)   Any violation of §
90.07 shall result in a penalty of $150 for the first offense, $300 for the
second offense if such offense occurs within 18 months of the first offense,
and $600 for the third and each subsequent offense that occurs within 18 months
of the second (or subsequent) offense.
   (G)   Any violation of §
90.10 shall result in a penalty of $100 for the first offense, $200 for the
second offense if such offense occurs within 18 months of the first offense,
and $400 for the third and each subsequent offense that occurs within 18 months
of the second (or subsequent) offense.
   (H)   Any violation of §
90.26(A) shall result in a penalty of $150 for the first offense, $500 for the
second offense if such offense occurs within 18 months of the first offense,
and $750 for the third and each subsequent offense that occurs within 18 months
of the second (or subsequent) offense. Any violation of §
90.26(B) shall result in a penalty of $100 for the first offense, $200 for the
second offense if such offense occurs within 18 months of the first offense,
and $300 for the third and each subsequent offense that occurs within 18 months
of the second (or subsequent) offense.
   (I)   Any violation of §§
90.30 or
90.34 shall result in a penalty of $200 for the first offense, $400 for the
second offense if such offense occurs within 18 months of the first offense,
and $750 for the third and each subsequent offense that occurs within 18 months
of the second (or subsequent) offense.
   (J)   Any violation of §
90.31 shall result in a penalty of $75 for the first offense, $150 for the
second offense if such offense occurs within 18 months of the first offense,
and $300 for the third and each subsequent offense that occurs within 18 months
of the second (or subsequent) offense.
   (K)   Any violation of §
90.35 shall result in a penalty of $175 for the first offense and $750 for the
second offense and each such subsequent offense that occurs within 18 months of
the first or a subsequent offense.
   (L)   Any violation of §
90.40 shall result in a penalty of $150 for the first offense, $300 for the
second offense if such offense occurs within 18 months of the first offense,
and $600 for the third and each subsequent offense that occurs within 18 months
of the second (or subsequent) offense.
   (M)   Any violation of §
90.41 shall result in a penalty of $100 for the first offense, $200 for the
second offense if such offense occurs within 18 months of the first offense,
and $300 for the third and each subsequent offense that occurs within 18 months
of the second (or subsequent) offense.
(2009 Code, § 3-2-18) (Ord. 12-18, passed 12-10-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1 and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-9
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Specific nuisances enumerated
   
91.002   Nuisances detrimental to health generally
   
91.003   Notice to abate
   
91.004   Hearing
   
91.005   Appeal
   
91.006   Abatement by village
   
91.007   Failure to comply with notice
Weeds
   
91.020   Definition
   
91.021   Height
   
91.022   Notice
   
91.023   Service of notice
   
91.024   Abatement; cost
   
91.025   Lien
Garbage and Debris
   
91.040   Accumulation prohibited
   
91.041   Notice to person
   
91.042   Service of notice
   
91.043   Abatement
   
91.044   Lien
   
91.045   Disposal of refuse, rubbish and garbage
Waste Material Disposal
   
91.060   Diffusion of waste material
   
91.061   Deposit of offensive matter prohibited
   
91.062   Disposal of tree limbs and shrub clippings
   
91.063   Costs
Natural Vegetation Disposal
   
91.075   Disposal
   
91.076   Restrictions
   
91.077   Costs
Noise As a Nuisance
   
91.090   Prohibited noise
   
91.091   Enforcement; powers of arrest or citation
Dangerous and Unsafe Properties
   
91.105   Adoption by reference
Penalties and Special Assessment
   
91.120   Special assessment
Vacant Buildings
   
91.135   Definition of “vacant building”
   
91.136   Nuisance declared
   
91.137   Nuisance abatement
   
91.138   Charges for nuisance abatement
 
   
91.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 SPECIFIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be against the health, peace
and comfort of the village, for any person, firm or corporation within the
limits of the village to permit the following; but the enumeration of the
following nuisances shall not be deemed to be exclusive. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent the corporate authorities of this village
from declaring what shall be nuisances, and abating them within the village
limits:
   (A)   Filth. To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal,
filth or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any
place, to the prejudice of others;
   (B)   Deposit of offensive materials. To throw or deposit any offal or other
offensive matter, or the carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake,
pond, spring, well or common sewer, street or public highway;
   (C)   Corruption of water. To corrupt or render unwholesome, or impure, the
water of any spring, river, stream, pond or lake, well, public or private, to
the injury or prejudice of others;
   (D)   Highway encroachment. To obstruct or encroach upon public highways,
private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places and ways to burying
places;
   (E)   Manufacturing gunpowder. To carry on the business of manufacturing
gunpowder, nitroglycerine, or other highly explosive substances, or mixing or
grinding the materials therefor, in any building within 300 feet of any
valuable building erected at the time such business may be commenced;
   (F)   Powder magazines. To establish powder magazines near incorporated
towns, at a point different from that appointed according to law by the
corporate authorities of the town, or within 800 feet of any occupied dwelling
house;
   (G)   Noxious odors. To erect, continue or use any building or other place
for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous
to the health of individuals, or of the public;
   (H)   Unlawful advertising. To advertise wares or occupations by painting
notices of the same on, or affixing them to fences or other private property,
or on rocks or other natural objects without the consent of the owner, or if in
the highway or other public place, without permission of the proper
authorities;
   (I)   Wells unplugged. To permit any well drilled for oil, gas, salt water
disposal or any other purpose in connection with the production of oil and gas,
to remain unplugged after such well is no longer used for the purpose for which
it was drilled;
   (J)   Burn-out pits. To construct or operate any salt water pit or oil field
refuse pit, commonly called a BURN-OUT PIT so that salt water, brine or oil
field refuse or other waste liquids may escape therefrom in any manner except
by the evaporation of such salt water or brine or by the burning of such oil
field waste or refuse;
   (K)   Discarded materials. To permit concrete bases, discarded machinery and
materials to remain around any oil or gas well or to fail to fill any holes,
cellars, slush pits and other excavations made in connection with any such well
or to restore the surface of the lands surrounding any such well to its
condition before the drilling of any such well, upon abandonment of any such
oil or gas well;
   (L)   Underground wells. To permit any salt water, oil, gas or other wastes
from any well drilled for oil, gas or exploratory purposes to escape to the
surface, or into a mine or coal seam, or into any underground fresh water
supply or from one underground stratum to another;
   (M)   Harassment. To harass, intimidate or threaten any person who is about
to sell or lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real property, or
is about to buy or lease, or has bought or leased a residence or other real
property, when the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a person’s
attempt to sell, buy or lease a residence, or other real property, or refers to
a person’s sale, purchase or lease of a residence or other real property;
   (N)   Business. To establish, maintain and carry on any offensive or
unwholesome business or establishment within the limits of the village or
within one and one-half miles of the village limits;
   (O)   Filthy premises conditions. To keep or suffer to be kept any chicken
coop, cow barn, stable, cellar, vault, drain, privy, sewer or sink upon any
premises belonging to or occupied by any person, or any railroad car, building,
yard, grounds and premises belonging to or occupied by any person;
   (P)   Expectorate. To expectorate on any public sidewalk or street, or other
public building or floor or walk of any public vehicle or hall;
   (Q)   Litter on streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or
allow trash, paper, cardboard, wire, dirt, rock, stone, glass, brick, lumber,
wood or litter of material objects of any size or description to fall upon the
streets of the village from any moving vehicle, or to be thrown from a moving
vehicle, or to throw from a moving vehicle and to remain thereon;
   (R)   Accumulation of junk and trash. To deposit or pile up any rags, old
rope, paper, iron, brass, copper, tin, aluminum, used lumber, appliances,
construction materials, demolition debris, ashes, garbage, refuse, plastic,
brush, litter, weeds, slush, lead, glass bottles or broken glass upon any lot,
piece or parcel of land or upon any public or private alley, street or public
way within the village;
   (S)   Rodents. To cause or permit any condition or situation to exist that
shall attract, harbor or encourage the infestation of rodents;
   (T)   Bringing nuisances into the village. To bring into the village or keep
therein for sale or otherwise, either for food or for any other purpose, any
dead or live animal or any matter, substance, or thing which shall be a
nuisance or which shall occasion a nuisance in the village, or which may or
shall be dangerous or detrimental to health;
   (U)   Offensive liquids. To keep nauseous, foul or putrid liquid or
substance or any liquid or substance likely to become nauseous, foul, offensive
or putrid, nor permit any such liquid to be discharged, placed, thrown or to
flow from or out of any premises into or upon any adjacent premises or any
public street or alley, nor permit the same to be done by any person connected
with the premises;
   (V)   Dense or offensive smoke. To cause or permit the emission of dense
smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency in the
village so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof;
   (W)   Scrap tires, both mounted and dismounted. To keep any scrap tires,
either mounted or dismounted, in open view, or so as to allow such tires to
accumulate stagnant water so as to provide a breeding ground for mosquitoes and
other pests;
   (X)   Motor transport engines. To operate motor vehicle transport engines in
the nighttime between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., in any place in
which a majority of the buildings, within a radius of 400 feet are used
exclusively for residence purposes, excluding state and federal highways;
   (Y)   Accumulation of debris. To store, dump or permit the accumulation of
debris, refuse, garbage, trash, tires, buckets, cans, wheelbarrows, garbage
cans or other containers in a manner that may harbor mosquitoes, flies,
insects, rodents, nuisance birds or other animal pests that are offensive,
injurious or dangerous to the health of individuals or the public; and
   (Z)   Generally. To commit any act which is a nuisance according to the
common law of the land or made such by statute of the state.
(2009 Code, § 25-1-1) Penalty, see §
91.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 740 ILCS 55/221 through 55/222
§ 91.002 NUISANCES DETRIMENTAL TO HEALTH GENERALLY.
   No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premises or part
thereof shall be made, used, kept, maintained or operated in the village if
such use, keeping or maintaining shall be dangerous or detrimental to health.
(2009 Code, § 25-1-2) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.003 NOTICE TO ABATE.
    (A)   Whenever the Code Officer, upon his or her own inspection, or the
Village Manager or the President, finds that a nuisance exists, the Code
Officer shall send a written notice via certified mail to the party responsible
for the nuisance and to the party on whose property the nuisance exists
ordering that the nuisance be abated within a reasonable time.
   (B)   The notice to abate shall contain:
      (1)   A description of what constitutes the nuisance;
      (2)   The location of the nuisance;
      (3)   A statement of what condition or state of affairs must be achieved
in order for the nuisance to be deemed abated;
      (4)   The date by which abatement must be completed;
      (5)   The date by which a request for a hearing must be filed and a
statement of the procedure for so filing;
      (6)   A statement that the responsible party has a right to appeal the
abatement order to the Village Board of Trustees; and
      (7)    A statement indicating that if the nuisance is not abated by the
date prescribed and/or if no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, this village will abate the nuisance and assess the costs against
the property and/or impose a fine.
(2009 Code, § 25-1-3) (Ord. 21-15, 6-14-2021)
§ 91.004 HEARING.
   Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the President
or his or her designated representative ordering the abatement. A request for a
hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Village Clerk within the
time stated in the notice; otherwise, it will be presumed that a nuisance
exists, and that such nuisance must be abated as ordered. The hearing shall not
be a formal trial-type proceeding, but appropriate procedural safeguards shall
be observed to ensure fairness. At the conclusion of the hearing, the President
or his or her designated representative shall render his or her decision and
the reasons therefor in writing. If he or she finds that a nuisance exists, he
or she shall order it abated within an additional time which must be reasonable
under the circumstances.
(2009 Code, § 25-1-4)
§ 91.005 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any party aggrieved by the decision of the President may appeal to the
Board of Trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Clerk
within five days of such decision a written statement indicating the basis for
the appeal.
   (B)   The appeal shall be heard by the Board of Trustees at the next regular
or special meeting after such filing. Their findings shall be conclusive and if
a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a time
reasonable under the circumstances.
(2009 Code, § 25-1-5)
§ 91.006 ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE.
   If the person ordered to abate a nuisance fails to do so, or if the nuisance
poses an emergency, this village may perform the required action to abate. Any
village official who is authorized to abate any nuisance as defined in this
subchapter shall have authority to engage the necessary assistance and to incur
the necessary expenses therefor. The official who abates a nuisance shall keep
an accurate account of the expenses incurred. The itemized expense shall be
filed with the Village Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of this
village.
(2009 Code, § 25-1-6)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2
§ 91.007 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.
   If the person notified to abate a nuisance shall neglect or refuse to comply
with the requirements of such notice by abating such nuisance within the time
specified, such person shall be guilty of a violation of this subchapter. The
village shall not be required to issue another notice where the condition or
violation is at first abated, but later resumed and/or repeated.
(2009 Code, § 25-1-7)
WEEDS
§ 91.020 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WEEDS. Includes, but not be limited to, the following: burdock; rag weed
(giant); rag weed (common); thistle; cocklebur; jimson; blue vervain; wild
carrot; poison ivy; wild mustard; rough pigweed; lambsquarter; wild lettuce;
curled dock; smartweeds (all varieties); poison hemlock; wild hemp; Johnson
grass; grass; and all other noxious weeds as defined by the statutes of the
state.
(2009 Code, § 25-2-1) (Ord. 19-06, passed 3-11-2019)
§ 91.021 HEIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow to a height
exceeding eight inches anywhere in the village. Any such plants, weeds or grass
exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(2009 Code, § 25-2-2) (Ord. 19-06, passed 3-11-2019) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.022 NOTICE.
   The Police Department or any other person so designated by the President may
issue a written notice for removal of weeds or grass. Such weeds or grass shall
be cut by the owner or occupant within five days after such notice has been
duly served.
(2009 Code, § 25-2-3)
§ 91.023 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Service of the notice provided for herein may be effected by handing the
same to the owner, occupant or lessee of the premises, or to any member of his
or her household of the age of 15 years or older found on the premises or by
mailing such notice to the last known residence address of the owner; provided,
that if the premises are unoccupied and the owner’s address cannot be obtained,
then the notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.
(2009 Code, § 25-2-4)
§ 91.024 ABATEMENT; COST.
   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five days, the
President or a designated representative may proceed to abate such nuisance,
keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be
charged and paid by such owner or occupant. The charge for the first instance
of abatement by mowing said overgrown grass and weeds shall be $75 per hour for
each hour spent mowing said grass and weeds plus $50 administrative fee. The
charge for each instance of abatement thereafter shall be $100 per hour for
each hour of mowing plus $50 administrative fee.
(2009 Code, § 25-2-5)
§ 91.025 LIEN.
   (A)   (1)   The charges for such weed or grass removal shall be a lien upon
the premises. A bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for
the service shall be presented to the owner. If this bill is not paid within 30
days of submission of the bill, a notice of lien of the cost and expenses
thereof incurred by the village shall be recorded and a priority lien
established. To perfect such a lien, the village must, within one year after
the removal cost is incurred, file notice of lien in the office of the Recorder
in the county in which the underlying parcel is located or, if the underlying
parcel is registered under the Torrens system, in the office of the Registrar
of Titles of that county.
      (2)   The notice must consist of a sworn statement setting out:
         (a)   A description of the underlying parcel that sufficiently
identifies the parcel;
         (b)   The amount of the removal cost; and
         (c)   The date or dates when the removal cost was incurred by the
village.
      (3)   If, for any one parcel, the village engaged in any removal activity
on more than one occasion during the course of one year, then the village may
combine any or all of the costs of each of those activities into a single
notice of lien.
   (B)   (1)   The removal cost is not a lien on the underlying parcel unless a
notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the
taxable year immediately preceding the removal activities.
      (2)   The notice must be delivered or sent after the removal activities
have been performed, and it must:
         (a)   State the substance of § 11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code
authorizing the lien and the substance of any ordinance of the village
implementing § 11-20-15;
         (b)   Identify the underlying parcel, by common description; and
         (c)   Describe the removal activity.
   (C)   Upon payment of the lien cost by the owner of the underlying parcel
after notice of lien has been filed, the village (or its agent) shall release
the lien, and the release may be filed of recorded by the owner at his or her
sole expense as in the case of filing notice of lien.
   (D)   The provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, specifically § 11-20-
15, shall be followed and shall apply to all liens filed hereunder.
   (E)   A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose
as in the case of mortgages or mechanics’ liens. An action to foreclose a lien
under this section must be commenced within two years after the date of filing
notice of lien unless a longer period is provided by law. The lien set forth
herein shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens.
(2009 Code, § 25-2-6) (Ord. 11-12, passed 9-12-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-6 and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7
GARBAGE AND DEBRIS
§ 91.040 ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall permit any garbage or trash to accumulate on their
premises or private property.
   (B)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for
the owner or occupant of real estate to refuse or neglect to remove the garbage
or debris.
(2009 Code, § 25-3-1) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.041 NOTICE TO PERSON.
   The Chief of Police or a designated representative may issue a written
notice for removal of garbage or debris. Such garbage or debris shall be
removed by the owner or occupant within five days after such notice has been
duly served.
(2009 Code, § 25-3-2)
§ 91.042 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Service of notice provided for herein may be effected by handing of the same
to the owner, occupant or lessee of the premises, or to any member of his or
her household of the age of 15 years or older found on the premises or by
mailing such notice to the last known residence address of the owner; provided
that if the premises are unoccupied and the owner’s address cannot be obtained,
then the notice may be served by posting the same upon the premises.
(2009 Code, § 25-3-3)
§ 91.043 ABATEMENT.
   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five days, the
Police Chief or a designated representative may proceed to abate such nuisance,
keeping an account of the expense of the abatement and such expense shall be
charged and paid by such owner or occupant.
(2009 Code, § 25-3-4)
§ 91.044 LIEN.
   (A)   (1)   The charges for such removal shall be a lien upon the premises.
A bill representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service
shall be presented to the owner. If this bill is not paid within 30 days of
submission of the bill, a notice of lien of the cost and expenses thereof
incurred by the village shall be recorded and a priority lien established. To
perfect such a lien, the village must, within one year after the removal cost
is incurred, file notice of lien in the office of the Recorder in the county in
which the underlying parcel is located or, if the underlying parcel is
registered under the Torrens system, in the office of the Registrar of Titles
of that county.
      (2)   The notice must consist of a sworn statement setting out:
         (a)   A description of the underlying parcel that sufficiently
identifies the parcel;
         (b)   The amount of the removal cost; and
         (c)   The date or dates when the removal cost was incurred by the
village.
      (3)   If, for any one parcel, the village engaged in any removal activity
on more than one occasion during the course of one year, then the village may
combine any or all of the costs of each of those activities into a single
notice of lien.
   (B)   The removal cost is not a lien on the underlying parcel unless a
notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the
taxable year immediately preceding the removal activities. The notice must be
delivered or sent after the removal activities have been performed, and it
must:
      (1)   State the substance of § 11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code
authorizing the lien and the substance of any ordinance of the village
implementing § 11-20-15;
      (2)   Identify the underlying parcel, by common description; and
      (3)   Describe the removal activity.
   (C)   Upon payment of the lien cost by the owner of the underlying parcel
after notice of lien has been filed, the village (or its agent) shall release
the lien, and the release may be filed of recorded by the owner at his or her
sole expense as in the case of filing notice of lien.
   (D)   The provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, specifically § 11-20-
15, shall be followed and shall apply to all liens filed hereunder.
   (E)   A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose
as in the case of mortgages or mechanics’ liens. An action to foreclose a lien
under this section must be commenced within two years after the date of filing
notice of lien unless a longer period is provided by law. The lien set forth
herein shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens.
(2009 Code, § 25-3-5) (Ord. 11-12, passed 9-12-2011)
§ 91.045 DISPOSAL OF REFUSE, RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.
   (A)   All refuse, rubbish, garbage, junk and other offensive matters shall
be disposed of at a location and in a method that conforms to requirements of
the State Environmental Protection Act.
   (B)   No person shall store, deposit or permit to remain upon the ground or
in any waterway, drainage ditch, or confined waters within the village any
refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk or other offensive matter that may attract or
harbor flies, rodents, vermin and/or mosquitoes, that may create unsightliness
or offensive odors, or that may create a health hazard or nuisance.
   (C)   No person shall burn any such refuse, rubbish, garbage, junk or other
offensive matter if such burning would be in violation of the requirements of
the State Environmental Protection Act, or would create a visibility hazard on
any street, alley, public walkway or on private property other than the
property on which the burning is performed, or would become a nuisance,
annoyance or discomfort to any other person by the reason of the emission of
smoke, fumes, fly ash, dust, soot, noxious odor or other atmospheric pollution
or discharge.
(2009 Code, § 25-3-6) Penalty, see §
91.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13 and 720 ILCS 5/47-10
WASTE MATERIAL DISPOSAL
§ 91.060 DIFFUSION OF WASTE MATERIAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, place, sweep or deposit
anywhere within the corporate limits of the village any garbage, rubbish,
refuse or waste material in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited
by the action of natural elements, such as sun, wind, rain or snow, into or
upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, ditch, drainage way, stream
or other public place, or into or upon any occupied premises.
(2009 Code, § 25-4-1) (Ord. 97-10, passed 11-10-1997) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.061 DEPOSIT OF OFFENSIVE MATTER PROHIBITED.
   No pile or deposit of garbage, rubbish, refuse or waste material of any kind
whatsoever, nor accumulation of any offensive or nauseous substance, shall be
made within the corporate limits of the village, nor shall any person unload,
discharge or put upon or along the line of any railroad, or any street,
highway, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, ditch, drainage way or other public
place within the village, any manure, garbage, rubbish, refuse or waste
material of any kind whatsoever, or other offensive or nauseous substance, nor
shall any cars or trucks loaded with or having in or upon them any such
material or substances, be allowed to remain or stand on or along any railroad,
street or highway within the corporate limits of the village.
(2009 Code, § 25-4-2) (Ord. 97-10, passed 11-10-1997) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.062 DISPOSAL OF TREE LIMBS AND SHRUB CLIPPINGS.
   No provision of this subchapter shall limit or restrict the disposal of tree
limbs and shrub clippings as such may be provided in §§
91.020 through
91.025 as amended from time to time.
(2009 Code, § 25-4-3) (Ord. 96-14, passed 12-9-1996)
§ 91.063 COSTS.
   At the direction of the Village Manager, the costs of removing any materials
not in compliance with this subchapter shall be assessed to the person who is
responsible for such materials. Any charge by the village for employees of the
village used to remove any materials in violation of this subchapter shall be a
charge of $75 per hour with a two hour minimum.
(2009 Code, § 25-4-4) (Ord. 96-14, passed 12-9-1996)
NATURAL VEGETATION DISPOSAL
§ 91.075 DISPOSAL.
   Residents within the village corporate limits shall be allowed to dispose of
only natural vegetation in the form of tree limbs and shrubbery trimmings in
the area designated by the village, and no other materials, including grass
clippings or leaves, may be disposed of in the manner provided for herein.
Disposal of materials pursuant to this section is permitted only for those
persons to dispose of materials only for residential and noncommercial
purposes, and no person shall be allowed to dispose of any materials pursuant
to this section if such materials are generated by such person by or for any
commercial purpose. No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave,
cause or permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or
leaving of grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste upon any public street
or right-of-way in the village. The term COMMERCIAL PURPOSE shall mean any time
when a person or business is compensated for the purpose of maintaining,
trimming or disposing of any materials including those eligible for disposal in
accordance with this section.
(2009 Code, § 25-5-1) (Ord. 05-01, passed 3-14-2005 ; Ord. 20-03, passed 2-10-
2020 ) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.076 RESTRICTIONS.
   The area designated by the village is located north of the West Sewer Pond,
or at such locations as may be designated by the Board of Trustees or the
Trustee of Public Health and Safety. Disposal may only be made during the hours
of 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on each Saturday during the months of April through
October. The village will allow disposal at other times only by permit obtained
by a resident from the village office. Dumping or disposal of any other
material, including leaves or grass clippings, or bagging disposable material
in any manner, shall be a violation of this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 25-5-2) (Ord. 05-01, passed 3-14-2005)
§ 91.077 COSTS.
   (A)   At the direction of the Trustee of Public Health and Safety, the costs
of removing any materials not in compliance with this subchapter shall be
assessed to the person who is responsible for such materials.
   (B)   Any charge by the village for employees of the village used to remove
any materials in violation of this subchapter shall be a charge of $75 per hour
with a two hour minimum.
(2009 Code, § 25-5-3) (Ord. 05-01, passed 3-14-2005)
NOISE AS A NUISANCE
§ 91.090 PROHIBITED NOISE.
    (A)   It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for a person to play, use,
operate or permit to be played, used or operated, any radio, tape recorder,
cassette player or other machine or device for reproducing sound, if it is
located in or on any of the following:
      (1)   Any public property, including any public street, highway,
building, sidewalk, park or thoroughfare if the sound generated is audible at a
distance of 30 feet from the device producing sound; or
      (2)   Any motor vehicle on a public street, highway or public space; and
if the sound generated is audible at a distance of 30 feet from the device
producing the sound.
   (B)   Possession by a person or persons of any of the machines or devices
enumerated in division (A)(1) above shall be prima facie evidence that such
person operates, or those persons operate, the machine or device.
(2009 Code, § 25-6-1) (Ord. 21-23, passed 10-12-2021) Penalty, see §  
91.999
§ 91.091 ENFORCEMENT; POWERS OF ARREST OR CITATION.
   (A)   Any authorized police officer shall issue a citation for any violation
under this section, except they may arrest for instances when:
      (1)   The alleged violator refuses to provide the officer with such
person’s name and address and any proof thereof as may be reasonably available
to the alleged violator; or
      (2)   When the alleged violator refuses to cease such person’s illegal
activity after being issued a citation.
   (B)   See §
10.99 for penalty.
(2009 Code, § 25-6-2) Penalty, see §
91.999
DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE PROPERTIES
§ 91.105 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The village may demolish, repair or enclose or cause the demolition,
repair or enclosure of dangerous and unsafe buildings or uncompleted and
abandoned buildings within the village and may remove or cause the removal of
garbage, debris and other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances or
materials from those building.
   (B)   Therefore, the village does hereby adopt by reference the applicable
provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1 and 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.1 governing dangerous and
unsafe buildings.
(2009 Code, § 25-7-1) Penalty, see §
91.999
PENALTIES AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
§ 91.120 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   In addition to any other method authorized by law, if:
      (1)   A property owner is cited with a code violation under this chapter,
requiring the cutting of grass and weeds, the removal of garbage and debris,
the removal of inoperable motor vehicles, or rodent and vermin abatement;
      (2)   Noncompliance is found upon reinspection of the property after the
due date for compliance with an order to correct the code violation or with an
order for abatement;
      (3)   Costs for services rendered by the municipality to correct the code
violation remain unpaid at the point in time that they would become a debt due
and owing the municipality, as provided in 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.1 et seq.; and
      (4)    A lien has been filed of record by the municipality in the office
of the recording in the county in which the property is located, then those
costs may be collected as a special assessment on the property pursuant to 65
ILCS 5/9-2-4.5.
   (B)   Upon payment of the costs by the owner of record or persons interested
in the property, the lien shall be released by the municipality and the release
shall be filed of record in the same manner as the filing of notice of the
lien.
(2009 Code, § 25-8-1) Penalty, see §
91.999
VACANT BUILDINGS
§ 91.135 DEFINITION OF “VACANT BUILDING”.
   A VACANCY BUILDING is a building or portion of a building which is:
   (A)   Unoccupied or unsecured;
   (B)   Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means;
   (C)   Unoccupied and a dangerous structure;
   (D)   Unoccupied and condemned by the village pursuant to applicable
provisions of this subchapter;
   (E)   Unoccupied and has multiple code violations;
   (F)   Unoccupied and the building or its premises has been the site of
unlawful activity within the previous six months;
   (G)   Condemned by the village and unlawfully occupied;
   (H)   Unoccupied for over 180 days and during which time the Village Manager
has issued an order to correct public nuisance conditions and same have not
been corrected in a code compliant manner;
   (I)   Unoccupied for over two years;
   (J)   Defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1 as an ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
being a residential dwelling unit that has been unoccupied by any lawful
occupant or occupants for at least 90 days, and for which after such 90-day
period the village has made good faith efforts to contact the legal owner or
owners of the property or, if known, the agent of the owner, and no contact has
been made; and
   (K)   Not including, unoccupied buildings which are undergoing construction,
renovation or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with all applicable
ordinances, codes, legislation and regulations, and for which construction,
renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to completion.
(2009 Code, § 25-9-1) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.136 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Vacancy buildings that are indefinitely vacant and in a state of disrepair
or boarded are public nuisances in that they contribute to the decrease in
value of surrounding properties, precipitate disinvestment by neighboring
owners, provide a location for criminal activity, undermine the aesthetic
character of the neighborhood and village, and have other undesirable effects.
(2009 Code, § 25-9-2) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.137 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   The village is authorized to perform or provide for property maintenance
activities to abate the nuisance caused by a vacant building, including the
following:
   (A)   Cutting and removal of neglected weeds, grass, trees and bushes as
authorized by §§
91.020 through
91.025 and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7;
   (B)   Pest control activities, as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8;
   (C)   Removal of infected trees as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12;
   (D)   Removal of garbage, debris and graffiti as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-
20-13; and
   (E)   Removal, securing and enclosing abandoned residential properties as
authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01.
(2009 Code, § 25-9-3)
§ 91.138 CHARGES FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Collection of costs. The village shall have the authority to collect
from the property owner the costs incurred in performing the property
maintenance activities to abate the nuisances described in §
91.137. The village shall send a bill for the cost to the property owner, his
or her agent, legal representative, or occupant in legal possession or control
of the premises.
   (B)   Traditional lien procedure for vacant buildings. If a bill sent
pursuant to division (A) above is not paid in full within 30 days of the date
of the bill, the village shall have the authority to file and record a lien
against the property, pursuant to § 11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65
ILCS 5/11-20-15, and by completing the following steps.
      (1)   Notice of lien.
         (a)   The village or the person performing the service by authority of
the village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of lien in the
office of the Recorder of deeds in the county in which the real estate is
located. The notice of lien shall be filed within one year after the cost and
expense is incurred. If, for any one property, the village engaged in any
nuisance abatement activity described in §
91.137 on more than one occasion during the course of one year, then the
village may combine any or all of the costs of those activities into a single
notice of lien.
         (b)   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
forth:
            1.   A description of the real estate that sufficiently describes
the parcel;
            2.   The amount of the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
activities; and
            3.   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by
the village or someone working on behalf of the village.
         (c)   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified
mail to the property owner, his or her agent or legal representative or
occupant in legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to
the person who received the tax bill for the preceding year.
      (2)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien. The release may
be filed of recorded by the owner at his or her sole expense as in the case of
filing notice of lien.
      (3)   Foreclosure of lien. Subsequent to the filing of the above-
described lien, the village may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure
of such lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the
premises or real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the nature of an
intervening petition or cross-complaint the village may proceed in its
corporate name to foreclose such lien. An action to foreclose a lien under this
section must be commenced within two years after the date of filing notice of
lien unless otherwise allowed by law. The property subject to a lien arising
under this subchapter shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the
proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the monies owing the village.
   (C)   Priority lien procedures for abandoned residential property.
      (1)   The priority lien procedure described in this division (C) shall
apply to costs incurred for activities performed on abandoned residential
properties, as defined in §
91.135(J).
      (2)   If a bill sent pursuant to division (A) above is not paid in full
within 30 days of the date of the bill, the village shall have the authority to
file and record a priority lien against the property, pursuant to § 11-20-15.1
of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1, in the following manner.
         (a)   Notice of lien.
            1.   The village or the person performing the service by authority
of the village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of a priority
lien in the office of the Recorder of deeds in the county in which the real
estate is located. The notice of lien shall be filed within one year after the
cost and expense is incurred. If, for any one property, the village engaged in
any nuisance abatement activity described in §
91.137 on more than one occasion during the course of one year, then the
village may combine any or all of the costs of those activities into a single
notice of lien.
            2.   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
forth:
               a.   A description of the abandoned residential property real
estate that sufficiently describes the parcel;
               b.   The amount of the cost incurred or payable for the
activities;
               c.   The date or dates when such cost was incurred by the
village or someone working on behalf of the village; and
               d.   A statement that the lien has been filed pursuant to one or
more of the property maintenance activities described in §
91.137 and authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8(d), 65 ILCS 5/
11-20-12(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13(e), 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01, as applicable.
            3.   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified
mail to the property owner, his or her agent or legal representative or
occupant in legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to
the person who received the tax bill for the preceding year. The village may
not file a lien if the lender has provided notice to the village that the
lender has performed, or will perform, remedial actions; provided, however,
that the remedial actions must be performed or initiated in good faith within
30 days of the lender’s notice to the village.
         (b)   Recordkeeping. To enforce a lien pursuant to this division (C),
the village must maintain contemporaneous records that include, at a minimum:
            1.   A dated statement of a finding by the village that the
property has become abandoned residential property;
             2.   The date when the property was first observed to be
unoccupied by any lawful occupant;
            3.   A description of the actions taken by the village to contact
the legal owner of the property, or if known, any agent of the owner;
            4.   A statement that no contacts were made with the legal owner
or, if known, any agent of the owner;
            5.   A dated certification by the village official of the necessity
and specific nature of the work performed;
            6.   A copy of the agreement with the person or company performing
the work and the rates and estimated cost of the work, if applicable;
            7.   Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for the work; and
            8.   A statement whether the work was competitively bid, and if so,
a copy of all proposals submitted by the bidders.
      (3)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien. The release may
be filed of recorded by the owner at his or her sole expense as in the case of
filing notice of lien.
      (4)   Enforcement of lien. A lien under this division (C) is enforceable
by the village, or entity or person who performs work on behalf of the village,
at the hearing for confirmation of the foreclosure sale of the abandoned
residential property and is limited to a claim of interest in the proceeds of
the sale. The priority lien is superior to all other liens and encumbrances,
except tax liens.
(2009 Code, § 25-9-4) (Ord. 11-12, passed 9-12-2011)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who refuses to comply with the regulations regarding
disposal contained in §§
91.075 through
91.077 shall be fined as provided by §
10.99 of this code of ordinances, and the fine shall be in addition to any
costs provided in §
91.077.
(2009 Code, § 25-5-4)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS
Section
Regulations
   
92.01   Scope of regulations
   
92.02   Resisting or interfering with a village official
   
92.03   Impersonating a village official
   
92.04   Hindering employees or contractors
   
92.05   Damage to park property
   
92.06   Vehicles
   
92.07   Parking
   
92.08   Restricted areas of parks
   
92.09   Hours
   
92.10   Shelter reservations
   
92.11   Obstructing access
   
92.12   Fires
   
92.13   Use of water
   
92.14   Littering
   
92.15   Dumping articles
   
92.16   Bringing plants, shrubs or trees
   
92.17   Boating
   
92.18   Games and sports
   
92.19   Firearms, fireworks and dangerous missiles
   
92.20   Offering articles for sale or services for hire
   
92.21   Soliciting to buy
   
92.22   Soliciting prohibited
   
92.23   Advertisement
   
92.24   Breach of peace; unlawful assembly
   
92.25   Breach of peace; disorderly conduct
   
92.26   Breach of peace; substance abuse
   
92.27   Debris, dirt and construction materials
   
92.28   Alcoholic liquor
   
92.29   Unlawful activities
Park Fees
   
92.40   Reservation fees
   
92.41   Ball field fees
Arbor Committee
   
92.50   Purpose and definitions
   
92.51   Delegation of authority and power
   
92.52   Arbor Committee
   
92.53   Tree planting and care standards
   
92.54   Prohibition of harming public trees
   
92.55   Certain trees declared a nuisance
   
92.56   Violations and penalty; appeals
 
   
92.99   Penalty
REGULATIONS
§ 92.01 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   These regulations shall apply to any real property owned or dedicated to the
village and designated as such by the Village Board of Trustees as a park.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-1)
§ 92.02 RESISTING OR INTERFERING WITH A VILLAGE OFFICIAL.
   No person in the park system shall interfere with any police officer or
employee of the village in the discharge of his or her duty, or fail or refuse
to obey any lawful command or directive of any such Trustee or employee.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-2) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 IMPERSONATING A VILLAGE OFFICIAL.
   No person shall falsely represent himself or herself as a park or village
official.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-3) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 HINDERING EMPLOYEES OR CONTRACTORS.
   No person shall interfere with any employee or contractor of the village
while they are engaged in constructing, repairing or caring for park property.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-4) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 DAMAGE TO PARK PROPERTY.
   No person shall remove, cut, break, climb on or in any way injure or deface
any tree, shrub or plant, or any of the buildings, fences, bridges, lamps,
posts or other structure or property within the park system.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-5) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 VEHICLES.
   No person shall bring or use any vehicle upon any portion of the park system
where such vehicles are prohibited from being brought or used. No person shall
drive or ride any conveyance in village parks faster than 20 mph. Vehicles
shall include, but not be limited to, cars, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles,
go-carts and mopeds.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-6) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 PARKING.
   No person shall park a vehicle in the parks except in the areas specifically
designated for said use.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-7) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 RESTRICTED AREAS OF PARKS.
   No person shall enter upon any portion of the park system where persons are
prohibited from going by direction of the Board of Trustees, as indicated by
sign or notice. No person shall swim or wade in any park lake or pond.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-8) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 HOURS.
   No person shall use the park system during the period beginning 30 minutes
after sunset until sunrise except as otherwise scheduled in advance with the
village office, but in no event later than 11:00 p.m.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-9) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.10 SHELTER RESERVATIONS.
   No person shall interfere with access to shelters that have been formally
reserved through the village office. Reservations may be made for a calendar
year beginning on the first business day of each year on a first come first
served basis. The reservation procedure shall include payment of the required
fee and issuance of a permit by the village office for the area reserved and
the time for the area to be reserved based upon the fees as established by the
Board of Trustees of the village from time to time.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-10) (Ord. 99-13, passed 12-13-1999) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 OBSTRUCTING ACCESS.
   No person shall place objects or property of any kind so as to obstruct
travel in or use of any portion of the park system.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-11) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.12 FIRES.
   No person shall light or make use of any fire in the park system, except
such portions thereof as may be constructed for such purpose and then only
under such regulations as are prescribed.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-12) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.13 USE OF WATER.
   Water is intended for use of park patrons on park premises. No person will
waste water purposely by allowing spigots to run, by flushing toilets
needlessly or by any other wasteful means.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-13) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.14 LITTERING.
   The discarding of any trash or refuse in any park other than in designated
receptacles is prohibited.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-14) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.15 DUMPING ARTICLES.
   (A)   No person shall deposit, dump, throw or place any rubbish, garbage or
other refuse in any part of the park system, except in receptacles provided for
that purpose.
   (B)   Such discarded material can only be a byproduct of recreational
activity in the park system.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-15) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.16 BRINGING PLANTS, SHRUBS OR TREES.
   No person shall bring into park property any tree, shrub, plant or portion
of such plants unless expressly permitted to do so by the Trustees.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-16) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 BOATING.
   No person shall boat on any body of water located within the boundaries of
any park.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-17) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.18 GAMES AND SPORTS.
   No person shall engage in any sport, game or amusement on a portion of the
park designated by sign, by establishment of a playing field, or other
facilities as being for a different sport, game or activity. (For example,
volleyball shall not be played on a baseball diamond.) No person shall play at
games of change or use gambling devices in the park system.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-18) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.19 FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND DANGEROUS MISSILES.
   No person shall carry or discharge firearms in the park system, or discharge
or set off fireworks or things containing any substance of an explosive nature
in the parks. No person shall cast any stones or other missiles within the park
system so as to create a hazard to people or property.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-19) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.20 OFFERING ARTICLES FOR SALE OR SERVICES FOR HIRE.
   No person shall offer or exchange for sale any article or offer services for
hire, or do any soliciting for sale of articles or services in the park system,
except where authorized to do so by permit.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-20) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.21 SOLICITING TO BUY.
   No person shall buy or offer to buy an article or services for hire in the
park system, or solicit for such articles or services, except where authorized
to do so by permit.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-21) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.22 SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall take up any collection for charity, beg or solicit alms or
handouts or accept contributions of money or anything of value in the park
system except where authorized to do so by permit.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-22) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.23 ADVERTISEMENT.
   (A)   No person shall display any advertisement of any kind, nor shall any
person distribute such advertisement or notice in the park system except where
authorized to do so by permit from or contract with the Trustees.
   (B)   No person shall post, stencil or otherwise affix an advertisement or
other papers upon any structure or thing in the park system except where it is
specifically allowed by appropriate sign or notice.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-23) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.24 BREACH OF PEACE; UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   No person shall collect with other persons, in bodies or in crowds, for
unlawful purposes or for any purpose to the annoyance or obstruction or
disturbance of other persons.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-24) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.25 BREACH OF PEACE; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall make any improper noise, disturbance or breach of the peace
in the park system or be guilty of any disorderly conduct therein. No person
shall use any abusive, threatening, insulting, indecent, profane or obscene
language, or language calculated to occasion a breach of the peace, nor be
guilty of any indecent act or behavior in the park system.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-25) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.26 BREACH OF PEACE; SUBSTANCE ABUSE.
   No intoxicated person shall enter, be or remain in the park system, nor
shall any person bring within the park intoxicating beverages in a quantity
greater than that for his or her own gathering. No beer trucks, trailers, pony
kegs, half kegs or full kegs shall be brought into the park. No alcoholic
beverages or drinks shall be sold in the park.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-26) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.27 DEBRIS, DIRT AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to dump or deposit debris, dirt or
construction materials in the park.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-27) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.28 ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
   It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic liquor in the park except in
compliance with the liquor regulations in
Chapter 111 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-28) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.29 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES.
   It shall be unlawful to ice skate on the pond, to swim in the pond, to dump
ducks or geese or undesirable fish in the pond.
(2009 Code, § 28-1-29) Penalty, see §
92.99
PARK FEES
§ 92.40 RESERVATION FEES.
   (A)   (1)   There shall be established a schedule of reservation fees for
use of any field located in the Rochester Community Park and any team desiring
to use the park shall be registered with the village.
      (2)   The fee shall be assessed as follows:
         (a)   Five dollars per person per season upon registration for a
league team; and
         (b)   For a tournament event, the fee will be $100 per day per field.
      (3)   (a)   The responsibility for collecting the fee for each team and
remitting the appropriate fee to the village will be with the respective league
or organization responsible for scheduling the sport.
         (b)   The village will require each league or responsible organization
to complete and file with the village an application in form and substance
satisfactory to the village for the village to be able to determine the
appropriate fee to be charged.
   (B)   A LEAGUE TEAM shall be defined as any team for any sport which
consists of players who are predominantly of residents of the village or the
Rochester School District, which may play games with teams from other
communities. The season shall be defined as a finite period of time as is
scheduled by the league or organization registering the team at registration,
but shall in no event be of a duration longer than one year from the date of
registration and which does not meet the definition of a tournament. A
TOURNAMENT shall be defined as a one-time event.
(2009 Code, § 28-2-1) (Ord. 11-04, passed 2-14-2011; Ord. 19-05, passed 3-11-
2019)
§ 92.41 BALL FIELD FEES.
   There shall be established the following fees for certain of the ball fields
in Rochester Community Park for each game played in which lights are being used
for the associated activity:
 
Ball Field #5       $15
Marshall Bell Field $25
 
(2009 Code, § 28-2-2) (Ord. 11-05, passed 2-14-2011)
ARBOR COMMITTEE
§ 92.50 PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. To enhance the quality of life and the present and future
health, safety, and welfare of all residents, to enhance property values, and
to ensure proper planting and care of trees on public property, the Village
Board of Trustees herein delegates the authority and responsibility for
managing public trees, creates the Arbor Committee, establishes practices
governing the planting and care of trees on public property, and makes
provision for the emergency removal of trees on private property under certain
conditions.
   (B)   Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following words-and
phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
      (1)   BOULEVARD. The area along a public street between the curb and the
sidewalk; or if there is no curb or sidewalk, the unpaved portion of the area
between the street right-of-way line and the paved portion of the street or
alley, that is owned by the property owner, but under the control of the
village as a right-of-way.
      (2)   COMMITTEE. The Arbor Committee, as established by this subchapter.
      (3)   DAMAGE. Any injury to or destruction of a tree, including but not
limited to: uprooting; severance of all or part of the root system or main
trunk; storage of material on or compaction of surrounding soil; a substantial
change in the natural grade above a root system or around a trunk; surrounding
the tree with impervious paving materials; or any trauma caused by accident or
collision.
      (4)   NUISANCE. Any tree, or limb thereof, that has an infectious disease
or insect; is dead or dying; obstructs the view of traffic signs or the free
passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or threatens public health, safety, and
welfare of the village and/or its residents.
      (5)   PUBLIC PROPERTY. All grounds and rights-of-way owned or maintained
by the village.
      (6)   PUBLIC TREE. Any tree or woody vegetation on property or rights-of-
way owned or maintained by the village.
      (7)   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area of land between the side of the sidewalk
closest to the home on one side of the street continuous to the house side of
the sidewalk on the opposite side of the street. Right-of-way may also be
referred to as ROWs within this subchapter.
      (8)   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Public Works for the Village
and/or his or her designee.
      (9)   TOP or TOPPING. The non-standard practice of cutting back of limbs
to stubs within a tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree.
      (10)   VILLAGE. The Village of Rochester, Illinois.
(Ord. 24-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 92.51 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY AND POWER.
   (A)   Delegation of authority and responsibility. The Superintendent shall
have full authority and responsibility to plant, prune, maintain, and remove
trees and woody plants growing in or upon all village streets, rights-of-ways,
parks, and other public property. This shall include the removal of trees that
may threaten electrical, telephone, gas, or any municipal water or sewer line,
or any tree that is affected by fungus, insect, or other pest disease.
   (B)   Coordination among departments. All village departments will
coordinate as necessary with the Superintendent and will provide services as
required to ensure compliance with this subchapter as it relates to streets,
alleys, rights-of-way, drainage, easements, and other public properties not
under direct jurisdiction of the Superintendent.
   (C)   Interference. No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere
with the Superintendent or his agents while the aforesaid are carrying out the
execution or enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 24-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 92.52 ARBOR COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Committee established. The village hereby creates the Committee, which
shall have all duties, powers, and responsibilities set forth in this section.
   (B)   Duties. The Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the
Superintendent and shall:
      (1)   Coordinate and promote Arbor Day activities;
      (2)   Review and update a five-year plan to plant and maintain trees on
village property;
      (3)   Support public awareness and education programs relating to trees;
      (4)   Review village concerns relating to tree care;
      (5)   Submit an annual report of its activities to the village;
      (6)   Assist with the annual application to renew the Tree City USA
designation;
      (7)   Recommend a list of tree species for planting on public property,
and a list of prohibited species; and
      (8)   Other duties that may be assigned by the Village Board.
   (C)   Membership. The Committee shall consist of five members approved by
the Village Board. Members of the Committee will serve without compensation.
   (D)   Term of office. Committee members shall be appointed for three-year
staggered terms. If a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a
successor shall be appointed by the Village Board.
      (1)   Should the Committee ever be without any members at any point, the
Village Board may appoint members to all vacancies, provided that those
appointments are for staggered terms and delineate the term of office for each
member.
   (E)   Officers. The Committee shall annually select one of the members to
serve as chair, may appoint a second member to serve as vice-chair, and may
appoint a third member to serve as secretary.
   (F)   Meetings. The Committee shall meet a minimum of four times each year,
which may include "work days". All meetings shall be open to the public. The
Committee chair may schedule additional meetings as needed.
   (G)   Compliance with Open Records Laws. The Committee shall comply with the
Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et. seq.: the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et. seq.; the Local Records Act, 50 ILCS 205/
1 et. seq.; and any and all other applicable open records laws.
(Ord. 24-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 92.53 TREE PLANTING AND CARE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards adopted. All planting and maintenance of public trees shall
conform to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300 "Standards
for Tree Care Operations" and shall follow all tree care Best Management
Practices (BMPs) published by the International Society of Arboriculture.
   (B)   Requirements of franchise holders and utility companies. The
maintenance of public trees for utility clearance shall conform to all
applicable utility industry standards.
   (C)   Preferred species list. The Superintendent shall maintain an official
list of desirable tree species for planting on public property in two size
classes: ornamental (20 feet or less in height at maturity) and shade (greater
than 20 feet at maturity). Trees from this approved list may be planted without
special permission; other species may be planted with written approval from the
Superintendent.
   (D)   Planting distances. The Superintendent shall develop and maintain an
official set of spacing requirements for the planting of trees on public
property. No tree may be planted within the visibility triangle of a street
intersection or within ten feet of a fire hydrant.
   (E)   Planting trees under utility lines. Only ornamental trees, as
determined by the Superintendent, may be planted under or within 15 lateral
feet of any overhead utility wire.
   (F)   Planting on private property on a corner. Any trees planted on a comer
property shall comply with the provisions of §
156.035(A).
(Ord. 24-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 92.54 PROHIBITION OF HARMING PUBLIC TREES.
   (A)   Prohibition enacted. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to do one or more of the following without written permission from
the Superintendent:
      (1)   Damage, remove, or cause the damage or removal of a tree on public
property;
      (2)   Attach any cable, wire, sign, or any other object to any street,
park, or public tree; and
      (3)   "Top" any public tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other
causes, where best pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this
provision by written determination of the Superintendent.
   (B)   Application of Best Management Practices. Any person, firm,
corporation, or village department performing construction near any public tree
shall consult with the Superintendent and shall employ appropriate measures to
protect the tree, according to procedures contained in the Best Management
Practices (BMPs) for "Managing Trees During Construction" published by the
International Society of Arboriculture.
   (C)   Violations of this section. Each violation of this section, as
determined and notified by the Superintendent, shall constitute a separate
violation, in addition to mitigation values placed on the tree removed or
damaged in violation of this section.
(Ord. 24-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 92.55 CERTAIN TREES DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   (A)   Nuisance declared. Any tree, or portion thereof, determined by the
Superintendent to have contracted a lethal, communicable disease or insect; to
be dead or dying; to obstruct the view of traffic signs or the free passage of
pedestrians or vehicles; or that threatens public health, safety, and welfare
of the village and its residents, is declared a nuisance; the village may order
its treatment or removal in a manner that complies with §
95.050.
   (B)   Duty of owners of private property. Private property owners have the
duty, at their own expense, to remove or treat trees on their property that are
declared to be a nuisance. The village is empowered to remove such nuisances at
the owner's expense if the owner does not comply with treatment and/or removal
as specified by the Superintendent within the written notification period.
(Ord. 24-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 92.56 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY; APPEALS.
   (A)   Violations and penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this subchapter shall be subject to any and all penalties provided
in this subchapter. Each violation of this subchapter, as determined and
notified by the Superintendent, shall constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   Appeals. Appeals to decisions by the Superintendent or the Arbor
Committee, or to penalties imposed after violations of this subchapter, shall
be heard by the Village Board or its designee.
(Ord. 24-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
CHAPTER 93: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
93.01   Declaration of policy
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Prohibited acts
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   In furthering the policy of the state as expressed in its Constitution
and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare, peace and health
of all the inhabitants of the village may be ensured, it is hereby declared the
policy of the village, to assure equal opportunity to all residents, regardless
of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or physical
disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful, standard living quarters.
   (B)   It is the policy of the village that no owner, lessee, sub-lessee,
assignee, managing agent or other person, firm or corporation having the right
to sell, rent, lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation and/or
real property within the village, or any agent of these shall refuse to sell,
rent, lease or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or any group of
persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability of such
person or person or discriminate against any person or persons because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability in the
conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities and/or
services in connection therewith.
   (C)   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum
choice with the community’s total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities.
(2009 Code, § 13-1-1)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING. Housing which is in sound,
clean and weather-tight condition in conformance with applicable local, state
and national codes.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability of such person.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person, institution or business entity of any
kind which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a
secured interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Includes any building, structure or portion thereof
which is used or occupied, maintained, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, or
any real estate so used, designed or intended for such use.
   OWNER. Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in any real property or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodation(s).
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or
agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates, for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of a housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the village.
(2009 Code, § 13-1-2)
§ 93.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sublessee,
real estate broker or salesperson, financial institution or employee of the
financial institution, advertiser or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to
discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability with regard to
the sale, exchange or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing
accommodation and/or real property.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real
estate broker or employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial
institution dealing with housing or real property in the village:
      (1)   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the
price, terms, conditions or privileges of any kind relating to the sale,
rental, lease or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in the
village or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith;
      (2)   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated,
any notice, statement or advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any
form of application, for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real
property, or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective
purchase, rental or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or
indirectly any discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed or disability of any person;
      (3)   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing
loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for
the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance
of any housing accommodation and/or real property;
      (4)   To solicit for sale, lease or listing for the sale or lease, of any
housing accommodation and/or real property on the ground of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed or disability;
      (5)   To distribute, or cause to be distributed, written material or
statements designed to induce any owner of any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed or disability of persons in the neighborhood;
      (6)   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or
the anticipated listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real
property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or
listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or
disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located;
      (7)   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or
otherwise deal with such owner’s housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, sex, creed or disability; and
      (8)   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed or disability of the proposed buyer or
tenant.
(2009 Code, § 13-1-3) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750. Each day
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. This section shall
in no way abrogate or impair the right of the village to specifically enforce,
by any legal means, any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 13-1-4)
CHAPTER 94: FIRE PROTECTION
Section
Open Burning
   
94.001   Definitions
   
94.002   Burning prohibited
   
94.003   Restrictions on burning of landscape waste
   94.004   Fines
Fire Safety Requirements; General
   
94.015   Scope
   
94.016   Responsibility
Fire Safety Requirements; Means of Egress
   
94.030   General
   
94.031   Aisles
   
94.032   Locked doors
   
94.033   Emergency escape openings
Fire Safety Requirements; Fire-Resistance Ratings
   
94.045   Fire-resistance-rates assemblies
   
94.046   Opening protectives
Fire Safety Requirements; Fire Protection Systems
   
94.060   General
   
94.061   Smoke alarms
   
94.062   Power source
   
94.063   Interconnection
Fire Safety Requirements; Referenced Standards
   
94.075   Generally
 
   
94.999   Penalty
OPEN BURNING
§ 94.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any refuse, except garbage and dead animals, generated
on a farm or ranch by crop and livestock production practices including such
items as bags, cartons, dry bedding, structural materials and crop residues,
but excluding landscape waste.
   GARBAGE OR HOUSEHOLD TRASH. Refuse resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products; including
plastic containers.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage and
agricultural waste. The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps,
brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings.
   OPEN BURNING. The combustion of any matter in such a way that the products
of the combustion are emitted to the open air without originating in or passing
through equipment for which a permit could be issued under § 9(b) of the
Environmental Protection Act of the state.
(2009 Code, § 27-9-1)
§ 94.002 BURNING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to cause or allow open burning of agricultural waste,
household trash and garbage or building materials.
(2009 Code, § 27-9-2) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.003 RESTRICTIONS ON BURNING OF LANDSCAPE WASTE.
   The open burning of landscape waste shall be permitted only on the following
conditions.
   (A)   Dry landscape waste shall be burned on the premises on which such
waste is generated.
   (B)   Landscape waste shall be burned only when atmospheric conditions shall
readily dissipate contaminants.
   (C)   Landscape waste may be burned only if such burning does not create a
visibility hazard on roadways, walkways or railroad tracks.
   (D)   Open burning of landscape waste may only take place when a person over
18 years of age is in attendance during the entire period of burning.
   (E)   No open burning of landscape waste shall be permitted on any streets
or roadways.
   (F)   No open burning shall occur during periods of time when the Fire Chief
or the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, have determined that
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous and
dangerous.
   (G)   All open burning shall occur between 8:00 a.m. and sunset. All fires
must be extinguished by sunset and may not be left to smolder.
   (H)   Open burning is permitted after dusk for fires maintained in suitable
vessels or structures for the cooking of food and for fully supervised
“recreational” fires.
   (I)   The Public Works Department is allowed to burn in its designated area
outside the designated times, pending appropriate weather conditions, for
village burn pile maintenance purposes.
(2009 Code, § 27-9-3) (Ord. 19-03, passed 6-10-2019) Penalty, see §
94.999
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS; GENERAL
§ 94.015 SCOPE.
   The provisions of §§
94.015,
94.016,
94.030 through
94.033,
94.045,
94.046,
94.060 through
94.063 and
94.075 shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety
relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities
and equipment to be provided.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-1)
§ 94.016 RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety
facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements.
   (B)   A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person
to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of §§
94.015,
94.016,
94.030 through
94.033,
94.045,
94.046,
94.060 through
94.063 and
94.075.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-2)
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS; MEANS OF EGRESS
§ 94.030 GENERAL.
   A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from
any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall
comply with the International Fire Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-4) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.031 AISLES.
   The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code
shall be unobstructed.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-5) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.032 LOCKED DOORS.
   All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which
egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort,
except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International
Building Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-6) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.033 EMERGENCY ESCAPE OPENINGS.
   (A)   Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance
with the Code in effect at the time of construction, and the following.
   (B)   Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational
from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools.
   (C)   Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed
over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear
opening size complies with the Code that was in effect at the time of
construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside
without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for
normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-7) Penalty, see §
94.999
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS; FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS
§ 94.045 FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATES ASSEMBLIES.
   The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire
stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-9)
§ 94.046 OPENING PROTECTIVES.
   Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition.
All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire
doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise
made inoperable.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-10)
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS; FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
§ 94.060 GENERAL.
   All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or
suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an
operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-12)
§ 94.061 SMOKE ALARMS.
   (A)   Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and
maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R
occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
      (1)   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of bedrooms;
      (2)   In each room used for sleeping purposes; and
      (3)   In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and
cellars, but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings
or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for
the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level.
   (B)   Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other
groups in accordance with the International Fire Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-13) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.062 POWER SOURCE.
   (A)   Generally. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as
Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary
power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a
commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms
shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and
without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent
protection. (704.3)
   (B)   Exception. Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served
from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing
alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or
ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space
or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without
the removal of interior finishes.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-14)
§ 94.063 INTERCONNECTION.
   (A)   Generally. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed
within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not
regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in
such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms
in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over
background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. (704.4)
   (B)   Exception.
      (1)   Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not
undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.
      (2)   Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be
interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of
interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
(2009 Code, § 29-7-15)
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS; REFERENCED STANDARDS
§ 94.075 GENERALLY.
   This section lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of
this document. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency of
the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title, and
the section or sections of this document the reference the standard. The
application of referenced standards shall be as specified in §
151.021 of this code of ordinances.
ICC
International Code Council
5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600
Falls Church, VA 22041
Standard Reference Number Title Referenced in Code Section Number
Standard Reference Title                                  Referenced in Code
Number                                                    Section Number
CC ED-03           ICC Electrical Code® - Administrative 151.187,
                   Provisions                             151.581
                                                          94.032,
                                                          94.033,
IBC-03             International Building Code®          151.187,
                                                          151.226,
                                                          151.352
                                                          151.003,
IEBC-03            International Existing Building Code® 151.017,
                                                          151.187
                                                          94.015,
                                                          94.016,
                                                          94.030 through
                                                          94.033,
IFC-03             International Fire Code®              94.045,
                                                          94.046,
                                                          94.060 through
                                                          94.063,
                                                          94.075,
                                                          151.003
IMC-03             International Mechanical Code®        151.187
                                                          151.187,
IPC-03             Illinois Plumbing Code®               151.485,
                                                          151.546,
                                                          151.547
IZC-03             Village Zoning Code®                  151.187
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 29, Art. VIII)
§ 94.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Violations of §§
94.001 through
94.003 shall be punishable by a fine as follows:
 
First offense       $30
Second offense      $50
Third offense       $100
Subsequent offenses Not less than $100 nor more than $500
 
(2009 Code, § 27-9-4)
CHAPTER 95: STREET REGULATIONS
Section
Department Established
   
95.001   Department established
   
95.002   Committee on Streets
   
95.003   Definitions
General Regulations
   
95.015   Undermining
   
95.016   Open doors
   
95.017   Repairing sidewalks and the like
   
95.018   Stairway; railing
   
95.019   Closing street
   
95.020   Signs across street
   
95.021   Vehicles and skateboards on sidewalks
   
95.022   Deposits on sidewalks and streets
   
95.023   Obstructing street
   
95.024   Stormwater drains
   
95.025   Building materials in street
   
95.026   Merchandise on public street
   
95.027   Encroachments
   
95.028   Posting bills
   
95.029   Signs on poles
   
95.030   Injury to new pavements
   
95.031   Barbed wire fences
   
95.032   Burning on public streets
   
95.033   Grass mowing
Trees and Shrubs
   
95.045   Planting
   
95.046   Planting trees in right-of-way
   
95.047   Removal
   
95.048   Injury
   
95.049   Advertisements or notices
   
95.050   Dangerous trees
   
95.051   Wires
   
95.052   Gas pipes
Excavations
   
95.065   Permit required
   
95.066   Applications
   
95.067   Fees
   
95.068   Bond
   
95.069   Deposit
   
95.070   Manner of excavating
   
95.071   Sidewalks
   
95.072   Restoring surface
   
95.073   Supervision
   
95.074   Tunneling
   
95.075   Protective measures and routing of traffic
   
95.076   Clearance for vital structures
   
95.077   Protection of traffic
   
95.078   Relocation and protection of utilities
   
95.079   Abandonment of substructures
   
95.080   Protection of adjoining property
   
95.081   Placement of excavated material
   
95.082   Clean-up
   
95.083   Protection of watercourses
   
95.084   Breaking through pavement
   
95.085   Depth of structures
   
95.086   Backfilling and restoring surface
   
95.087   Trenches in pipe laying
   
95.088   Prompt completion of work
   
95.089   Urgent work
   
95.090   Emergency action
   
95.091   Noise, dust and debris
   
95.092   Preservation of monuments
   
95.093   Inspections
   
95.094   Location records
   
95.095   Liability of persons in village for damage
Street Improvements
   
95.110   Sidewalks
   
95.111   Curbs and gutters
   
95.112   Storm sewers
Culverts
   
95.125   Obstruction of drain or storm sewer
   
95.126   Permit for culvert
   
95.127   Application for permit
   
95.128   Termination of permit
   
95.129   Type of culvert
   
95.130   Replacement cost
Driveways
   
95.145   Permits required
   
95.146   Fee
   
95.147   Grade surface
   
95.148   Specifications
   
95.149   Breaking curb; bond required
   
95.150   Repair
Snow Emergency
   
95.165   Declaration of emergency
   
95.166   Streets designated
   
95.167   Markers
   
95.168   Parking prohibition
   
95.169   Violation
   
95.170   Termination
   
95.171   Costs
Standards for Access to Public Right-of-Way
   
95.185   Definitions
   
95.186   Requirements
   
95.187   Nonconforming situations
   
95.188   Existing nonconforming access
Construction of Utility Facilities in the Rights-of-Way
   
95.200   Purpose and scope
   
95.201   Definitions
   
95.202   Annual registration required
   
95.203   Permit required; applications and fees
   
95.204   Action on permit applications
   
95.205   Effect of permit
   
95.206   Revised permit drawings
   
95.207   Insurance
   
95.208   Indemnification
   
95.209   Security
   
95.210   Permit suspension and revocation
   
95.211   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status
   
95.212   General construction standards
   
95.213   Traffic control
   
95.214   Location of facilities
   
95.215   Construction methods and materials
   
95.216   Vegetation control
   
95.217   Removal, relocation or modification of utility facilities
   
95.218   Cleanup and restoration
   
95.219   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
95.220   Variances
   
95.221   Enforcement
   
95.222   Severability
 
   
95.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Excavation permit
   
Appendix B: Application for culvert/driveway permit
   
Appendix C: Culvert/driveway permit
DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED
§ 95.001 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   There is hereby established a department of the municipal government
which shall be known as the Public Works Department.
   (B)   It shall embrace the Streets Committee, the Superintendent and the
employees. The Village Engineer shall serve as ex officio officer.
(2009 Code, § 34-1-1)
§ 95.002 COMMITTEE ON STREETS.
   (A)   The Village Board Streets Committee shall exercise a general
supervision over the affairs of the Street Department.
   (B)   It shall ascertain the needs and conditions thereof and shall, from
time to time, report the same to the President and Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 34-1-2)
§ 95.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY(S) means the area of land between the side of the sidewalk
closest to the home on one side of the street continuous to the house side of
the sidewalk on the opposite side of the street. Right-of-way may also be
referred to as “ROWs” within this chapter.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any camping trailer, motor home, mini-motor home,
travel trailer, truck camper, or van camper which is designed primarily not for
use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use.
(Ord. 25-04, passed 1-21-2025)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 95.015 UNDERMINING.
   No person shall undermine in any manner, any street or any other ground or
real estate situated in the village or belonging to any private person.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-1) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.016 OPEN DOORS.
   No person shall open or allow to remain open, any door, any gate or the
grating of any vault belonging to the premises occupied by him or her, on any
street, alley or sidewalk in the village for any purpose, except the taking in
and removing goods; and any person allowing such grating to remain open shall
warn passersby of the danger.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-2) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.017 REPAIRING SIDEWALKS AND THE LIKE.
   Whenever any sidewalk, pavement or cellar door on the same becomes worn out
or out of repair, or is torn up or broken and uneven, it shall be the duty of
the Superintendent to immediately report such fact to the President or Streets
Committee, and upon verbal or written order from either of them, to give notice
to the party owning the adjoining property to repair such sidewalk or cellar
door without delay.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-3) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.018 STAIRWAY; RAILING.
   Steps or stairways leading into any building shall not extend from the wall
of such building onto any pavement or sidewalk, and in such case, the person
making or causing to be made such passage shall erect a railing on the side of
the stairs toward the street to prevent persons from falling into the street.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-4) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.019 CLOSING STREET.
   Whenever public safety or the improvement or repair of any street, alley or
public place requires it, the President may order any street, alley or public
place temporarily closed to traffic and the placing of signs indicating that
the street, alley or public place is closed by order of the President. Whenever
such signs are so placed, no person shall ride or drive upon or cross such
street, alley or public place, or in any manner, destroy, deface or remove any
such sign.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-5) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.020 SIGNS ACROSS STREET.
   No person shall place any sign, advertisement or banner over any or across
any street, alley or sidewalk in the village, unless he or she has written
approval of the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-6) Penalty, see §
95.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-17
§ 95.021 VEHICLES AND SKATEBOARDS ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall operate any skateboard or motor vehicle on or over any
sidewalk, except in crossing the same to go into a yard or parking lot.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-7) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.022 DEPOSITS ON SIDEWALKS AND STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk, any material
which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any
glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or
property.
   (B)   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks
preparatory to delivery, provided that the usable width is not thereby reduced
to less than four feet; and provided that no such article shall remain on such
walk for more than 30 minutes.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-8) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.023 OBSTRUCTING STREET.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit any material on any street which may
be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any grass
clippings, or to cause a lawn mower to blow grass clippings onto a street or
any other articles such as glass which may cause injury to any person, animal
or property.
   (B)   No person shall place or cause to be placed or erected on any public
ground, or in any public street, alley or sidewalk in the village, any debris,
materials or obstruction, except as may be permitted by this chapter.
   (C)    No person shall place or cause to be placed on any public ground, or
in any public street, alley or sidewalk in the village, a recreational vehicle
except as in conformity with sections
130.24 and
156.046 of this code.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to exercise a vigilant
supervision over such places and to notify any person found making such deposit
or responsible for same to remove the offending matter at once.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-9) (Ord. 25-04, passed 1-21-2025) Penalty, see §
95.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-3
§ 95.024 STORM WATER DRAINS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the construction of
any storm water drain or any drainage pipe in either a natural or human-made
ditch without having first obtained a permit therefor.
      (2)   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk
and shall be accompanied by a statement as to the purpose of such drainage
pipe, the premises to be served and the specification of such pipe to be
installed.
      (3)   Such application shall be referred to the Superintendent and no
such permit shall be issued unless he or she shall have found that the village
regulations would be complied with by the installation of such storm water
drain or drainage pipe and, that the installation of such storm water drain or
drainage pipe would not interfere with, overload, obstruct or otherwise
adversely affect the existing storm water drainage system within the village.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the construction of any
storm water drain which discharges water onto any sidewalk in the village and
it shall be unlawful to construct or permit the maintenance of any such drain
which discharges into any public street or alley at a height greater than 18
inches above the ground or pavement.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-10) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.025 BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREET.
   (A)   The Superintendent may move any obstruction on any street or sidewalk
of the village, but before doing so, he or she shall notify the person
responsible therefore to remove such obstruction within a reasonable time after
being notified.
   (B)   Any person engaged in erecting a building or fence or improving any
lot on such street may deposit materials thereon and contiguous to such length
of time as may be necessary for the work.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-11)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-3
§ 95.026 MERCHANDISE ON PUBLIC STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any street,
sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise
for sale; or to write or make any signs or advertisements on any such
pavements, unless permission is granted by the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-12) Penalty, see §
95.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-3
§ 95.027 ENCROACHMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street or property or right-of-way.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-13) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.028 POSTING BILLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, paint, print or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree,
lamppost, utility pole, hydrant or upon any private wall, door or gate without
the consent, in writing, of the owner of such curbstone, flagstone, sidewalk,
tree, lamppost, utility pole, hydrant, private wall, door or gate.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-14) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.029 SIGNS ON POLES.
   No person shall nail, tack, paste, paint or fasten, or cause to be nailed,
tacked, painted or fastened, any sign or any other foreign substance or
material onto any telephone, telegraph, electric light, police and/or fire
alarm pole or post, or any street or traffic sign located on any sidewalk,
street, alley or public grounds or injure or deface any such pole or post.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-15) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.030 INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon or
destroy any newly-laid sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded by a warning
sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft, newly-laid pavement.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-16) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.031 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or
in part of barbed wire, or with any similar material designed to cause injury
to persons, or any wire charged with electrical current, anywhere within three
feet of any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public way or place
unless it is constructed in accordance with §
156.038 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-17) (Ord. 17-24, passed 6-12-2017) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.032 BURNING ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or
other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleys in the
village.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-18) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.033 GRASS MOWING.
   Property owners and/or their tenants shall be jointly and separately
responsible for mowing the grass or weeds between the property lines and the
adjoining street surfaces. The height of the grass or weeds shall not exceed
eight inches.
(2009 Code, § 34-2-19) Penalty, see §
95.999
TREES AND SHRUBS
§ 95.045 PLANTING.
   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public street or
parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Superintendent and shall be
referred by him or her to the Village Board. All trees and shrubs so planted
shall be placed subject to the directions and approval of the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 34-3-1) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.046 PLANTING TREES IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   It shall be unlawful to plant any bushes, trees, shrubs or other plants on
the right-of-way of any public street, including the space on the right-of-way
between the sidewalk and the adjacent street pavement.
(2009 Code, § 34-3-2) Penalty, see §
95.999
(2009 Code §34-7-2) (Ord.21-28, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 95.047 REMOVAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub or
portion thereof in any street, parkway or other public place without having
first secured a permit therefor.
   (B)   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Superintendent and
shall be referred by him or her to the Village Board before permission shall be
granted.
(2009 Code, § 34-3-3) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.048 INJURY.
   It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in such public
place.
(2009 Code, § 34-3-4) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.049 ADVERTISEMENTS OR NOTICES.
   It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree
or shrub in any street, parkway or other public place.
(2009 Code, § 34-3-5) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.050 DANGEROUS TREES.
   (A)   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public
place in the municipality at a height less than eight feet or in such a way as
to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on such public place shall be
trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises or of the premises on which such
tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease.
   (B)   Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or
across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on
which such tree grows or stands.
   (C)   The Superintendent may, at the owner’s expense, trim or remove any
tree or shrub so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be
done away with.
(2009 Code, § 34-3-6) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.051 WIRES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to attach any wires or rope to any tree or shrub
in any public street, parkway or other public place without the permission of
the Village Board.
   (B)   Any person or company given the right to maintain the poles and wires
in the streets, alleys or other public places in the municipality shall, in the
absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires
and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such places so far as
may be possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed,
subject to the supervision of the Superintendent so that no injury shall be
done either to the poles or wires or the shrubs and trees by their conduct.
(2009 Code, § 34-3-7) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.052 GAS PIPES.
   Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the municipality shall, in
the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such
pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any trees or shrubs.
(2009 Code, § 34-3-8)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 95.065 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   For a permit to cut, dig, excavate or tunnel in, through, or under any
street, avenue, alley, roadway or other public place, the applicant shall
deposit with the Village Clerk an amount equal to the sum, as estimated by the
Village Engineer so that such street, avenue, alley, roadway or other public
place will be restored to its original condition upon completion of work
covered by the application and permit. The payment of said deposit does not
constitute a fee intended to relieve the applicant of responsibility from
restoring the street, avenue, alley, roadway or other public place to its
original condition upon completion of its work but as a security deposit to be
refunded to the applicant when the Superintendent is satisfied that the repair
and restoration work has been properly completed by the applicant or retained
by the village and applied toward the cost of such repair and restoration if
the applicant does not properly complete the restoration and repair in a timely
manner.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-1) (Ord. 97-4, passed 3-10-1997) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.066 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Clerk and shall describe
the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the
purpose therefor, and the person, firm or corporation doing the actual
excavating work; and the name of the person, firm or corporation for whom or
for which the work is being done, and it shall also contain an agreement that
the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to
be done.
   (A)   All applicants, who plan to excavate pursuant to this subchapter on
public or private property, shall contact Julie 811 or www.call811.com for
location of all utility lines at least two days prior to the excavation.
   (B)   Anyone who fails to contact Julie prior to excavating, shall receive a
written warning for the first offense.
   (C)   Anyone who fails to notify the aforementioned authorities a second
time, shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the provisions of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Anyone who damages any of the municipal utility systems and/or
appurtenances during an authorized or unauthorized excavation, shall be
assessed a charge or fee that reflects all material, labor and gas or water
losses resulting from the said damage. The Superintendent shall prepare an
itemized list of charges.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-2)
§ 95.067 FEES.
   The fee for such permit(s) shall be as follows; however, the Village Board
may waive the fees in this section:
 
Excavation in asphalt or portland cement concrete       $0.25 per square foot
pavement or surface
Excavation in brick pavement or surface                 $0.25 per square foot
Excavation in oil treated street surface                $0.25 per square foot
Excavation in untreated or unimproved street or surface $0.25 per square foot
 
(2009 Code, § 34-4-3)
§ 95.068 BOND.
   (A)   No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor
has filed with the Clerk a bond in the sum of $50,000, conditioned to indemnify
the village for any loss, liability or damage that may result or accrue from or
because of the making, existence or manner of guarding or constructing any such
tunnel or excavation. Such bond shall have as surety a corporation licensed to
do business in the state as a surety company.
   (B)   The Village Board may waive the bond provided for herein.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-4)
§ 95.069 DEPOSIT.
   No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has
deposited with the Clerk a cash deposit a sum to insure the proper restoration
of the ground and laying of the pavement, if any. From this deposit shall be
deducted the expense of the village of re-laying the surface of the ground or
pavement and of making the refill if this is done by the village or at its
expense and the balance shall be returned to the applicant without interest
after the tunnel or excavation is completely refilled and the surface or
pavement is restored. The Village Board may waive the deposit in this section
as determined by the Village Engineer.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-5)
§ 95.070 MANNER OF EXCAVATING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way
contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper
bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground; and in
excavations, the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any
portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface. All excavations shall
be in compliance with the excavation requirements set forth by the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) in the Federal Register.
   (B)   No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making
of such excavations or tunnels; and notice shall be given to the persons
maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the village department or
officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or
affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes,
cables or conduits shall be disturbed. No unnecessary damage or injury shall be
done to any tree, shrub or the roots thereof.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-6) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.071 SIDEWALKS.
   If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users. The temporary sidewalk is subject to inspection by the Superintendent
and shall not be open for use until approved by him or her.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-7)
§ 95.072 RESTORING SURFACE.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation making any excavation or tunnel in or
under any public street, alley or other public place in the village shall
restore the surface to its original condition if there is no pavement there.
Refills shall be properly tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or
excavation shall be left in the ground.
   (B)   Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be
repaired and the surface re-laid by the applicant in compliance with the
regulations of the village and under the supervision of the Superintendent.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-8)
§ 95.073 SUPERVISION.
   Supervision of such work done in, or under the public streets, avenues,
alleys, roadways and other public places of the village is hereby vested in the
Superintendent who, upon satisfactory completion of the work shall endorse his
or her charges against such applicant for work done or incurred thereon by or
on behalf of the village. Costs and charges so endorsed shall be paid by the
applicant with the application. Persons failing to promptly pay or adjust such
charges and costs may be debarred from receiving further permits pending
payment or collection of the amounts due the village. The Superintendent may
request that the Village Engineer review and/or inspect the street opening to
ensure compliance with the village regulations.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-9) (Ord. 00-07, passed 11-13-2000)
§ 95.074 TUNNELING.
   It shall be unlawful to make any excavation in any portion of a street or
sidewalk in the village which is paved with a concrete or asphalt paving
without village approval. Where necessary, and where a proper permit has been
secured, tunnels may be driven or excavated under any such pavement, provided
that upon completion of the work involved, the tunnel shall be backfilled with
compacted State Department of Transportation gradation CA-6 or flowable fill.
Sand shall not be allowed as backfill under any pavement or sidewalk.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-10) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.075 PROTECTIVE MEASURES AND ROUTING OF TRAFFIC.
   It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an excavation in or
upon any public place to place and maintain barriers and warning devices
necessary for the safety of the general public.
   (A)   Barriers, warning signs and lights shall conform to the requirements
of all applicable provisions of this chapter. Warning lights shall be
electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset
of each day to sunrise of the next day.
   (B)   Electrical markers or flashers shall emit light at sufficient
intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety.
Reflectors or reflecting material may be used to supplement, but not to replace
light sources.
   (C)   The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as nearly normal as
possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to
the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public. When traffic
conditions permit, the Superintendent may, by written approval, permit the
closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by
him or her if, in his or her opinion, it is necessary. Such written approval
may require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and
to the general public. In such cases, such written approval shall not be valid
until such notice is given.
   (D)   Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the
construction operation to alert traffic within a public street, and cones or
other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic in accordance with
the instructions of the Superintendent.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-11) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.076 CLEARANCE FOR VITAL STRUCTURES.
   The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere
with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water gates,
underground vaults, valve housing structures and all other vital equipment as
designated by the Superintendent.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-12)
§ 95.077 PROTECTION OF TRAFFIC.
   The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicle traffic
at all street intersections where possible and safe crossing for pedestrians at
intervals of not more than 300 feet. If any excavation is made across any
public street, alley or sidewalk adequate crossing shall be maintained for
vehicles and for pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold the
excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at
least one-half of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along such sidewalk
line.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-13)
§ 95.078 RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility without
the written consent of the Superintendent and the owner of the facility. If it
becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its
owner. The facility owned by the village shall not be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The cost of
moving privately-owned facilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee
unless other arrangements are made with the person owning the facility. The
permittee shall support and protect, by timbers or otherwise, all pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by
the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and
protect them under, over, along or across said work. The permittee shall secure
approval of method of support and protection from the owner of the facility.
   (B)   In case of any said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should
be damaged, and for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasement or devices
are to be considered as part of a substructure, the permittee shall promptly
notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired by the
agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged
to the permittee. It is the intent of this section that the permittee shall
assume all liability for damage to facilities and any resulting damage or
injury to anyone because of such facility damage and such assumption of
liability is a contractual obligation of the permittee. The only exception will
be such instances where damage is exclusively due to the negligence of the
owning utility. The village shall not be made a party to any action because of
this section. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and
location of all underground facilities and protect the same against damage.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-14)
§ 95.079 ABANDONMENT OF SUBSTRUCTURES.
   Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the abandonment of
service lines designed to serve single properties, the person owning, using,
controlling or having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after such
abandonment, file with the Superintendent a statement in writing giving in
detail the location of the substructure so abandoned. If such abandoned
substructure is in the way or subsequently becomes in the way of an
installation of the village or any other public body, which installation is
pursuant to a governmental function, the owner shall remove such abandoned
substructure or pay the cost of its removal during the course of excavation for
construction of the facility by the village or any other public body.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-15)
§ 95.080 PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY.
   (A)   The permittee shall, at all times, and at his, her or its own expense,
preserve and protect from injury, any adjoining property by providing proper
foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where, in the
protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for
the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall
obtain consent from the owner of such private property for such purpose and if
he or she cannot obtain such consent, the Superintendent may authorize him or
her to enter the private premises solely for the purpose of making the property
safe.
   (B)   At the permittee’s own expense, all buildings, walls, fences or other
property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work shall
be shored up and protected, and the permittee shall be responsible for all
damage to public or private property or highways resulting from failure to
properly protect and carry out the work. Whenever it may be necessary for the
permittee to trench through any lawn area, said area shall be reseeded or the
sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been
backfilled as required in this subchapter. All construction and maintenance
work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth
and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed
before such work began. The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily any
trees or shrubs which exist is parking areas without first obtaining the
consent of the appropriate village department or official having supervision of
such property.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-16)
§ 95.081 PLACEMENT OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL.
   All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in
any street shall be piled and maintained in such a manner as to eliminate
danger to those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and
so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets
and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too
narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as
might be the case in a narrow alley, the Superintendent shall have the
authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a
storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling.
It shall be the permittee’s responsibility to secure the necessary permission
and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal
sites.
All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and
kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as reasonably possible to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified by the Superintendent,
whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate the
dirt or dust nuisance. Toe boards or bins may be required by the Superintendent
to prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes. Trench excavations shall
follow OSHA recommendations.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-17)
§ 95.082 CLEAN-UP.
   As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned
of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work.
All clean-up operations at the location of such excavation shall be
accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent. From time to time as may be ordered by the
Superintendent, and in any event, immediately after completion of the work, the
permittee shall, at his, her or its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse
and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work, and upon failure to
do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the
Superintendent, said work may be done by the Superintendent and the cost
thereof charged to the permittee and the permittee shall also be liable for the
cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-18)
§ 95.083 PROTECTION OF WATERCOURSES.
   (A)   The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the
full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the
face of such curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting
street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. The
permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt,
slickings or other run-off pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing
or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its
failure to so provide.
   (B)   In no case shall these operations deposit sediment or sediment laden
water into the village storm or sanitary sewer system or watercourse. All
runoff shall be filtered of all soil particles before entering either the storm
sewer system or watercourse.
   (C)   The surety bond may be held until erosion into the cuttors has been
eliminated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-19)
§ 95.084 BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT.
   (A)   Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the Superintendent
when the use endangers existing substructures or other property.
   (B)   Saw cutting of portland cement concrete may be required when the
nature of the work or the condition of the street warrants. When required, the
depth of the cut shall not be less than one inch in depth; however, depths
greater than one inch may be required by the Superintendent when circumstances
warrant. Saw cutting may be required by the Superintendent outside the limits
of the excavation over cave-outs, overbreaks and small floating sections.
   (C)   Approved cutting of bituminous pavement surface ahead of excavations
may be required by the Superintendent to confine pavement damage to the limits
of the trench.
   (D)   Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest score line or
joint.
   (E)   Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and overbreaks and
the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
   (F)   Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned
with the centerline of the trench.
   (G)   Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the
trench line.
   (H)   Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be
required by the Superintendent.
   (I)   The permittee shall not be required to repair pavement damage existing
prior to excavation unless his or her cut results in small floating sections
that may be unstable, in which case, the permittee shall remove and pave the
area.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-20)
§ 95.085 DEPTH OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   No person shall, without written permission of the Superintendent,
install any substructure except manholes, vaults, valve casings, culverts and
catch basins at a vertical distance less than:
      (1)   Streets.
         (a)   Twenty-four inches below the established flow line of the
nearest gutter; and
         (b)   If said flow line is not established, then the depth shall be at
a minimum of 24 inches below the surface of the nearest outermost edge of the
traveled portion of the street.
      (2)   Other public places. The minimum depth of any substructure in any
other public place shall be 12 inches below the surface.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to
maintain said specifications as required herein upon subsequent changes of
grade in the surface unless the grade in said substructure interferes with the
maintenance of or travel on a public street.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-21) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.086 BACKFILLING AND RESTORING SURFACE.
   (A)   General. All backfill material shall be placed in lifts with the
number and size of each lift dependent upon the type of material involved as
required by IDOT. If, in the opinion of the Superintendent, satisfactory
compaction is not being accomplished, he or she may require soil tests to be
performed by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered professional
engineer specializing in soil mechanics. Such tests must show that the backfill
material has been compacted to a density meeting the requirements of Illinois
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition. All costs associated with the above soil testing
shall be borne by the permittee.
   (B)   Street, alley and other excavations.
      (1)   Excavations in concrete, bituminous concrete, or oil and chipped
surfaced streets shall be backfilled with concrete to the bottom of the
pavement structure. The patching shall be completed by restoring the surface
material to a condition as near the original as possible and to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent. Restoration of concrete surfaces will
require a dowelled, reinforced patch, unless waived in writing by the Village
Board.
      (2)   Excavations in aggregate surfaced streets or alleys shall be
backfilled with native material removed from the excavation in accordance with
IDOT specifications, provided the material is free from lumps, clods, bricks or
large stone, to an elevation of ten inches below the top of the original
surface. The next ten inches shall be backfilled with course aggregate
consisting of crushed limestone meeting the Illinois Department of
Transportation specification for CA 6 placed in maximum six inch lifts, loose
measure and mechanically compacted to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
      (3)   All other excavations shall be backfilled as follows.
         (a)   When the previously existing surface consisted of brick, stone
or other constructed materials, the excavation shall be backfilled with native
material removed from the excavation in accordance with IDOT specifications,
provided the material is free from lumps, clods, bricks or large stone, to an
elevation consistent with the previously existing subgrade. The surface shall
then be placed in kind to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
         (b)   When the previously existing surface consisted of soil, sod, or
grass, the excavation shall be backfilled with native material removed from the
excavation in accordance with IDOT specifications, provided the material is
free from lumps, clods, bricks or large stone, to an elevation six inches below
the top of the original surface. The top six inches shall be backfilled with
material capable of supporting vegetation, topsoil and the surface restored to
the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-22) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.087 TRENCHES IN PIPE LAYING.
   The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be in
accordance with existing codes and regulations; however at night no more than
50 feet may be open with proper barriers.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-23)
§ 95.088 PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK.
   After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with
diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit
and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original
condition, or as near as may be so as not to obstruct the public place or
travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-24)
§ 95.089 URGENT WORK.
   When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public
or the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as
emergency work, the Superintendent shall have full power to order, at the time
the permit is granted, that a crew of workers and adequate facilities be
employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the end that such excavation work
may be completed as soon as possible.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-25)
§ 95.090 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the making of such
excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for
the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, provided
that the person making such excavation shall apply to the Superintendent for
such a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-26)
§ 95.091 NOISE, DUST AND DEBRIS.
    Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such a manner
as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and
occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate
measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the
excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris and between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., shall not use, except in case of emergency as otherwise
provided herein, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient
volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-27) (Ord. 21-23, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 95.092 PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines
of any street or property subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a
permanent survey bench mark within the village shall not be removed or
disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining
permission in writing from the Village Board to do so.
   (B)   Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference points or
bench marks shall only be granted upon condition that the person applying for
such permission shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of
the monument by the village.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-28)
§ 95.093 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Superintendent shall make such inspections as are reasonably
necessary in the enforcement of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Superintendent shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to
be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to
enforce and carry out the intent of this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-29)
§ 95.094 LOCATION RECORDS.
   Every public utility, after the enactment of this subchapter, shall maintain
records showing the location of all of its underground facilities except
relatively minor facilities which connect a particular premises or building to
a facility serving more than one premises or building and except oil or gas-
gathering or field lines. Every public utility shall maintain equipment which
can locate such facilities in the field.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-30)
§ 95.095 LIABILITY OF PERSONS IN VILLAGE FOR DAMAGE.
   If any person violates any provision of this subchapter and any person or
property in consequence thereof is injured or damaged, the person so guilty of
such violation shall be liable to the village in relation thereto, and no
prosecution or other proceeding by the village of such person for any penalty
imposed for a violation shall constitute a bar to such action by the village
for such damages.
(2009 Code, § 34-4-31) Penalty, see §
95.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-1 through 5/11-80-23
STREET IMPROVEMENTS
§ 95.110 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Grade.
      (1)   No sidewalk shall be built above or below the established grade of
the village and in all cases where no grade is established, any person building
a sidewalk shall build the same according to the instructions of the
Superintendent and the Village Board.
      (2)   No one shall build a sidewalk unless it consists of new
construction. No one shall remove or destroy a sidewalk without replacing the
same with a new sidewalk.
   (B)   Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, lay or construct
any sidewalk along any property in the village or along any of the streets,
alleys or public highways thereon, without first filing an application for a
permit with the Village Clerk and approved by the Village Board.
   (C)   Subdivisions. This section is not applicable to new subdivisions.
(2009 Code, § 34-5-1) Penalty, see §
95.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-13
§ 95.111 CURBS AND GUTTERS.
   (A)   Request in writing. Any person owning property within the village who
desires to have new curbs and gutters constructed along the street adjoining
his or her premises shall file a request with the Superintendent, giving the
location of the property and the length of the curbs and gutters requested.
   (B)   Cost to owner. If the funds are available and the Village Board
approves the request, the property owner shall pay one-half of the cost of the
construction including engineering fees, and thereafter, the curbs and gutters
shall be maintained by the village.
   (C)   Approval by Village Board. The approval of the request for
construction of curbs and gutters by the Village Board shall be dependent upon
the approval of funds, priority of projects and continuity of construction for
the best benefit of the village as determined by the Village Board.
   (D)   Subdivisions. This section is not applicable to new subdivisions.
(2009 Code, § 34-5-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-13
§ 95.112 STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   Description of storm water sewers. Storm water sewers shall be any
pipe or sewer used for the carrying of surface drains, ground waters, roof
drains or storm waters, rain waters or other waters other than sanitary sewage.
   (B)   Supervision. The Superintendent shall supervise all connections made
to the public storm sewer system or excavations for the purposes of installing
or repairing the same.
   (C)   Permits. Before any connection is made to the public storm water
sewers, a permit shall be applied for and approved by the Superintendent or his
or her designated representative.
   (D)   Requirements; use of storm water sewers. New or replacement storm
sewer pipes shall be a minimum size of 12-inches diameter or larger as deemed
necessary by the Superintendent of Public Works and/or Village Engineer.
Acceptable pipe culvert materials are as follows: reinforced concrete; ductile
iron, as defined by the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest version) and any
supplemental specifications.
(2009 Code, § 34-5-3) (ord. 00-07, passed 11-13-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-7
CULVERTS
§ 95.125 OBSTRUCTION OF DRAIN OR STORM SEWER.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain or storm sewer in any public
street or property.
(2009 Code, § 34-6-1) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.126 PERMIT FOR CULVERT.
   It shall be unlawful to install any culvert or replace any culvert without
first obtaining an approved permit from the Superintendent.
(2009 Code, § 34-6-2) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.127 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person desiring a permit to install or replace any culvert shall
file an application therefor with the Village Clerk upon a form to be provided
for that purpose.
   (B)   The application and the permit issued pursuant thereto shall be on the
same form which shall be substantially as outlined in
Appendix B at the end of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 34-6-3)
§ 95.128 TERMINATION OF PERMIT.
   All such permits shall terminate upon the expiration of one year following
the date of issue.
(2009 Code, § 34-6-4)
§ 95.129 TYPE OF CULVERT.
   Culverts shall be installed where driveways or walkways cross open ditches.
The material used for the construction of the culverts shall be reinforced
concrete, corrugated steel culvert pipe with a minimum wall thickness of 16
gauge, corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe with a minimum wall thickness of
16 gauge, or of such other material as determined by the Street Department,
depending upon the conditions existing. The culverts shall be of such size,
installed at the grade and constructed with couplings as determined by the
Superintendent. The person desiring the culvert shall be responsible for cost
of materials and labor to install the culvert in conformance with IDOT standard
specifications.
(2009 Code, § 34-6-5)
§ 95.130 REPLACEMENT COST.
   The expense of replacing any culvert shall be borne by the person making
application for the permit to install the same.
(2009 Code, § 34-6-8)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-7
DRIVEWAYS
§ 95.145 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals across
any sidewalk in the village without having first obtained a permit therefor.
   (B)    Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Code
Officer, shall be accompanied by the fee required, and approved by the Public
Works Superintendent.
   (C)   No permit for construction of a driveway for commercial use, or for
the habitual use of other than the owner or occupant of the premises served
shall be issued except upon the order of the Public Works Superintendent or his
or her designee.
(2009 Code, § 34-7-1) (Ord. 21-28, passed 10-12-2021) Penalty, see §  
95.999
§ 95.146 FEE.
    The fee for all such construction shall be $30.
(2009 Code, § 34-7-2)
§ 95.147 GRADE SURFACE.
   No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step, sharp
depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be as nearly
as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to
have the surface finish of any driveway where the same crosses the sidewalk
constructed of such materials as to render it slippery and hazardous to
pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion vary from the grade of the
sidewalk or be other than level. The portion of the driveway that acts as the
continuation of the adjoining sidewalks shall have full depth cuts to designate
the sidewalk and be built to meet the American with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(2009 Code, § 34-7-3) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.148 SPECIFICATIONS.
   Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with the
specifications required by the Public Works Superintendent.
(2009 Code, § 34-7-4) (Ord. 21-28, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 95.149 BREAKING CURB; BOND REQUIRED.
   Before a permit can be issued to break a curb in the village for the
installation of a driveway or any other purpose, a bond or cash in the amount
of $100 is required to be posted in the Village office.
(2009 Code, § 34-7-5) (Ord. 21-28, passed 10-12-2021)
§ 95.150 REPAIR.
   It shall be the duty of the person maintaining the driveway to keep the same
in good repair where it crosses the sidewalk and free from obstruction and
openings.
(2009 Code, § 34-7-6) Penalty, see §
95.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-2
SNOW EMERGENCY
§ 95.165 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Whenever any two of the following persons, the Superintendent of Public
Works, the Village Manager and the Chief of Police, or in the absence of any
such person, the person charged with such person’s responsibilities, determine
that an emergency exists or is imminently forecast in the village, or in a
section or sections thereof, because of snow, freezing rain, sleet, ice,
snowdrifts or other natural phenomenon which creates hazardous road conditions
impending or likely to impede the free movement of fire, health, police,
emergency or other vehicular traffic threatening the safety and welfare of the
community, any two of the above mentioned officials together may declare a snow
emergency to exist for a period of 72 hours or less. Said declaration of snow
emergency shall be released to the public information media prior to its
effect. The snow emergency declaration may be extended or renewed as conditions
warrant.
(2009 Code, § 34-8-1) (Ord. 99-4, passed 3-8-1999)
§ 95.166 STREETS DESIGNATED.
   The following streets within the village limits are designated as snow
emergency routes and all such streets shall be posted with suitable signs or
markers at intervals not exceeding 500 feet, which signs or markers shall bear
the words “SNOW EMERGENCY” and also indicate where parking would otherwise
exist that parking is prohibited during a snow emergency:
Street
Street
East Main
First Street
North Oak
North Walnut
Oak Hill Road
South Walnut
State Street
West Main
 
(2009 Code, § 34-8-2) (Ord. 99-4, passed 3-8-1999)
Cross-reference:
   Snow emergency routes, see
Ch. 75, Sch. VI
§ 95.167 MARKERS.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall place and maintain all snow
emergency signs or markers required by this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 34-8-3) (Ord. 99-4, passed 3-8-1999)
§ 95.168 PARKING PROHIBITION.
   Upon the declaration of a snow emergency, the parking, standing or leaving
of any vehicles upon any or all of the before designated snow emergency streets
shall be prohibited. The snow emergency declaration provided for in this
subchapter may be extended to streets other than those designated as snow
emergency routes.
(2009 Code, § 34-8-4) (Ord. 99-4, passed 3-8-1999) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.169 VIOLATION.
   If any vehicle is parked, abandoned or left standing in violation of the
terms of this subchapter, the same shall be considered a hazard and may be
impounded and issued a citation.
(2009 Code, § 34-8-5) (Ord. 99-4, passed 3-8-1999)
§ 95.170 TERMINATION.
   Parking may be resumed on individual streets upon termination of the snow
emergency conditions as soon as final plowing, as announced by the
Superintendent of Public Works, has been completed on that street.
(2009 Code, § 34-8-6) (Ord. 99-4, passed 3-8-1999)
§ 95.171 COSTS.
   The owners of vehicles parked in violation of a snow emergency declaration
shall be responsible for all impounding, towing and storage charges and
administrative fees unless the location at which the vehicle was parked was not
properly marked as a snow emergency route in accordance with this subchapter,
without regard to whether or not actual notice of the declaration was received
by the owner.
(2009 Code, § 34-8-7) (Ord. 99-4, passed 3-8-1999)
STANDARDS FOR ACCESS TO PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 95.185 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, except as otherwise provided herein, all
definitions in the Subdivision Code (
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances), as in effect from time to time, shall
apply. The definitions in this section are based on the State Department of
Transportation publication, Handbook for the Policy on Permits for Access
Driveways to State Highways (latest version), and such definitions shall be
deemed to be modified to the extent modified from time to time by said
Handbook.
   ACCESS. The ability to move vehicles to and from property abutting a village
street or roadway.
   ACCESS FACILITY. A driveway, entrance or side road approach facilitating
vehicular movement between abutting property or right-of-way and a village
street or roadway. Normally includes only the part of the driveway, entrance or
side road that lies within the established right-of-way limits of the village
street or roadway.
   ACCESS FACILITY TYPES.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL ENTRANCE. Provides access to property being used for
more than a single-family residence or for commercial or industrial purposes. A
high traffic volume commercial generator is a development with substantially
more trips than average commercial generators, that is characterized by large
parking areas, high-type access facilities and traffic volumes of sufficient
magnitude to have a pronounced effect on the safety and capacity of adjacent
streets and highways. Some examples of HIGH VOLUME COMMERCIAL GENERATORS are
shopping centers, industrial parks, office parks and sports stadiums.
      (2)   NONCOMMERCIAL ENTRANCE. Provides access to a single-family
residence, or to not more than two single-family residences on adjacent
properties served by a common entrance or to agricultural land (including field
entrances but excluding entrances used for the sale of agricultural products to
the general public).
      (3)   STREET AND ROAD APPROACH. Provides a direct connection between a
village street or roadway and an intersecting public road.
   DRIVEWAY. An access facility that provides a direct connection for vehicular
movements between abutting property and a street or roadway.
   FLARE. The area of the driveway surface outlined by the edge of the highway,
the edge of the nominal width or through part of the driveway, and the normally
curved outer edge connecting the two. The edge of the FLARE is defined by a
radius, a three-centered curve or a straight edge.
   FREEWAY. A highway designated as a freeway in accordance with Article 8 of
the Illinois Highway Code, which includes both full and partial access-
controlled facilities unless otherwise specified.
   FULL ACCESS-CONTROLLED FREEWAY. A highway with full control of access
allowing access only at grade-separated interchanges.
   ISLAND. A defined area between traffic lanes for control of vehicle
movements or for pedestrian refuge. Within an intersection a median or an outer
separation is considered an ISLAND.
   MEDIAN. The portion of a divided highway or divided driveway separating the
traveled ways for traffic in opposite directions.
   PARTIALLY ACCESSED CONTROLLED FREEWAY (EXPRESSWAY). A highway where at-grade
access is allowed for public road and noncommercial access at specified
locations but all other access is prohibited.
   SERVICE DRIVE. A frontage road open only at one end.
   SHOULDER. The portion of the street or roadway contiguous with the traveled
way for the accommodation of stopped vehicles and for emergency use.
   STATE HIGHWAY. Any highway that is part of the State Highway system
prescribed in § 2-101 of the Illinois Highway Code. Basically, those highways
that are maintained by the state or state routes maintained by a local agency
under the terms of a Local Agency - State Maintenance Agreement.
   TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL AND WORK SITE PROTECTION. Traffic-control devices
for work zones including signs, signals, lighting units, pavement markings,
delineators, channelizing units, hand signaling signs and portable barriers
used to warn, guide or regulate traffic and to protect workers. All such
devices shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices and to
the Illinois Highway Standards. Placement and erection shall be the
responsibility of the applicant in accordance with the approved permit.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices that
conform to the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the
purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
   TURNING LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for the
acceleration or deceleration and storage of vehicles entering or leaving the
through traffic lanes.
   URBAN AREA. An area, either incorporated or unincorporated that has been
developed primarily for residential and/or business purposes (§ 1-214.1,
Illinois Vehicle Code). The speed limit is generally 40 mph or less, the street
or highway is normally curbed, and at least 50% of the frontage on one side of
the highway within one-half mile of the driveway location is developed with
residences and/or businesses.
(2009 Code, § 34-9-1) (Ord. 01-04, passed 3-12-2001)
§ 95.186 REQUIREMENTS.
   Any driveway which provides access to any village street or roadway shall
comply with the minimum standards specified in one or more of the following
illustrations, as such are applicable to the subject driveway, numbered 1, 2,
3, 4, 5 and 6.
(2009 Code, § 34-9-2) (Ord. 01-04, passed 3-12-2001)
   ILLUSTRATION 1: LOCATION OF DRIVEWAYS ALONG PUBLIC ROAD INTERSECTION A
   FREE WAY WITH PARTIAL ACCESS CONTROL
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6e74201582dae1d2be3145458e1ce2c64ab16101/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3058.png]
 
   ILLUSTRATION 2: TABLE OF LAYOUT REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESS FACILITIES
 Noncomme r-cial Noncomme r-cial Commercial Commercial High- Volume Streets and
 Rural           Urban           Rural      Urban      Commercial   Sideroads
            Noncomme   Noncomme   Commercial Commercial High-       Streets and
            r-cial     r-cial     Rural      Urban      Volume      Sideroads
            Rural      Urban                            Commercial
Width of                                                2 at 24 ft.
drive (at                         14 ft. min., 24 ft.   max. w/     30 ft. min.
property    12 ft. min., 24 ft.   max. 1- way operation median or   (urban)
line or     max.                  24 ft. min., 35 ft.   35 ft. max. 24 ft. min.
termination                       max. 2- way operation w/o median  (rural)
of radii)
            10 ft.     5 ft. min. 20 ft.     15 ft.     25 ft. min. 60 ft. max.
Radii of    min.       25 ft.     min.       min.       3-centered curve or
flare       40 ft.     max.       50 ft.     40 ft.     other compound curve
            max.                  max.       max.
                                                        45 deg. to 90 deg. for
Angle of    45 deg. to 90 deg. for 1-way operation      1- way operation
drive       60 deg. to 90 deg. for 2-way operation      60 deg. min., 90 deg.
                                                        desirable for 2-way
                                                        operation
                                  10 ft.     6 ft. min.
                                  min. ROW   ROW
                                  Defined by edges of   4 ft. to 18 ft. wide
Island area —                   highway and           curbed median
                                  driveways; a 10 ft.
                                  min. radius may be
                                  used for 1-way drives
Distance
from        0 ft. min. 0 ft. min. 0 ft. min. 3 ft. min. 10 ft. min. —
property
line
Distance    50 ft.     30 ft.     50 ft.     30 ft.
from        min.*      min.*      min.*      min.*      100 ft.
adjacent    5 ft. min. beginning of driveway flare to   min.*       —
road or     extension of adjacent road ROW**
street
Distance                                                440 ft. min.; 660 ft.
between     —                   0 ft. min.            desirable
drives
*   From edge of adjacent road or street to beginning of driveway flare
**   Measured along a line parallel to but not greater than 5 feet from the
edge of pavement
 
   ILLUSTRATION 3: NONCOMMERCIAL - URBAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6e74201582dae1d2be3145458e1ce2c64ab16101/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3060.png]
 
   ILLUSTRATION 4: COMMERCIAL URBAN COMBINED ENTRANCE/EXIT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6e74201582dae1d2be3145458e1ce2c64ab16101/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3062.png]
 
   ILLUSTRATION 5: COMMERCIAL URBAN SEPARATE ENTRANCE/EXIT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6e74201582dae1d2be3145458e1ce2c64ab16101/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3064.png]
 
   ILLUSTRATION 6: HIGH VOLUME COMMERCIAL TRAFFIC GENERATOR
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6e74201582dae1d2be3145458e1ce2c64ab16101/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3066.png]
 
§ 95.187 NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS.
   In the event any situation is not covered by the illustrations contained in
this subchapter, any driveway which provides access to any village street or
roadway shall comply with the requirements established by the Village Engineer.
(2009 Code, § 34-9-3) (Ord. 01-04, passed 3-12-2001)
§ 95.188 EXISTING NONCONFORMING ACCESS.
   To the extent that there exists any driveway which provides access to any
village street or roadway which was lawful prior to the date on which this
subchapter became effective, but which would not comply with the minimum
standards specified in §
95.187 above, such nonconforming driveway may continue to provide access, so
long as it otherwise remains lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No such nonconforming driveway shall be enlarged, increased, altered
or extended unless it is to make such nonconforming driveway comply with the
minimum standards specified in §
95.187;
   (B)   Should such nonconforming driveway is destroyed by any means to an
extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the minimum standards
specified in this section; and
   (C)   When the use of such nonconforming driveway is discontinued or
abandoned for six months or for 18 months during any three-year period, the
subject driveway shall not thereafter be used except in compliance with the
minimum standards specified in this section.
(2009 Code, § 34-9-4) (Ord. 01-04, passed 3-12-2001)
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 95.200 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village’s
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the village
rights-of-way and the village as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this subchapter, the village intends to exercise
its authority over the rights-of-way in the village and, in particular, the use
of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards
to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation
to:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased storm water run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the village’s residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities subject to this subchapter. This subchapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-
way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this subchapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this subchapter.
   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of
any franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with other subchapter or chapters. This subchapter
supersedes all subchapters or chapters or parts of subchapters or chapters
adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such
conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
subchapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter
to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or
regulations.
   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this subchapter and may vary the standards,
conditions and requirements expressed in this subchapter when the village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-1)
§ 95.201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term
not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill.
Adm. Code § 520.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this subchapter.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. As defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes; electrical conductors; and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electric current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this subchapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse affect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required of the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this subchapter. For
purposes of this subchapter, the term FACILITY shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Engineer or Superintendent of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads, alleys or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway
land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, sign, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
95.203 and
95.204.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radically against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane or coal-slurry.
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any
real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right-of-way.
   ROADWAY. The part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to §
95.209.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Superintendent of Public Works or his or
her designee.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable
or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to
the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 et seq.), as now or hereafter
amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in making sales
of telecommunication at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this subchapter.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in § 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).
   VILLAGE. The Village of Rochester.
   WATERLINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-2)
§ 95.202 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall register
on January 1 of each year with the Superintendent of Public Works, providing
the utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy
numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the
utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in
the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in §
95.207, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-3)
§ 95.203 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person shall construct (as defined in this subchapter) any
facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within any village
right-of-way which:
         (a)   Changes the location of the facility;
         (b)   Adds a new facility;
         (c)   Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this subchapter); or
         (d)   Materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the
facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way,
without first filing an application with the Superintendent of Public Works and
obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in
this subchapter.
      (2)   No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers’
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
subchapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed
in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant
may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy number, e-mail address and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         (a)   A written traffic-control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed.
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
95.207;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
95.209;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
subchapter (see §
95.220); and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) above, the permit application
shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that
is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any certificate of public
convenience and necessity or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
State Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have
been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the State Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control have been satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village within 30 days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this subchapter
shall be accompanied by a base fee in the amount of $100. Additional
application review costs will vary with the complexity of the project and will
be determined on a case by case basis and shall be paid prior to issuance of
final permit. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity
utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-4)
§ 95.204 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Superintendent
of Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does
not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules and regulations, the Superintendent of Public Works shall reject such
application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Superintendent of
Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements
of this subchapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, the Superintendent of Public Works shall issue a permit therefor
as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant
to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works, that
the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance
with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Additional village review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to
commence work governed by this subchapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications
and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the
facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the
village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no
excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work
requiring excavation. The Superintendent of Public Works shall specify the
portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used or
constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Superintendent of Public Works fails to
provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either:
         (a)   Ten days after service of notice to the village by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction; or
         (b)   Twenty-five days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this subchapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
95.203 the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of division (A) above.
   (C)   Additional village review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided
the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances and
regulations.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-5)
§ 95.205 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this subchapter on village rights-of-way, and
does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge
upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this subchapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this subchapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with
such village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-6)
§ 95.206 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this subchapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with §
95.220. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility
so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-7)
§ 95.207 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or similar
agreement, each utility occupying the right-of-way or constructing any facility
in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in divisions (A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) below:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly referred as
“X”, “C”, and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each
person;
            2.   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of liability;
         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: “It is hereby
understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention
not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the village, by
registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written
notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to cancel or not
to renew.” Within ten days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in
no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) above. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-
insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds
under division (A) above, or the requirements of divisions (B), (C) and (D)
above. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required under division (A) above,
such as evidence that the utility is a “private self-insurer” under the Workers
Compensation Act.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state. All insurance
carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rates “A-“ or better and of a class
size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-8)
§ 95.208 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this subchapter or by a franchise, license or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
subchapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-9)
§ 95.209 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee’s sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve a security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this subchapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
subchapter; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this subchapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this subchapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this subchapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this division (B) shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the
state at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Superintendent of Public Works, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where
the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Superintendent
of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee
to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of
the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this division (C) for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days’ advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this division (D), may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that
the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the 14-day
notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this subchapter that the
village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the
permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division
(C) above.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C) above.
   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
subchapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the
permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall
become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any
reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said
revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage
shall be refunded to the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this subchapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-10)
§ 95.210 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this subchapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Noncompliance with this subchapter;
      (3)   The permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-
way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety or
welfare; or
      (4)   The permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially
in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
subchapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and
the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such
removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
      (2)   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in this division (C).
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A)
above.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of division (C) above, the village or its
designee may, at the option of the village:
      (1)   Correct the deficiencies;
      (2)   Upon not less than 20 days’ notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or
      (3)   After not less than 30 days’ notice to the permittee of failure to
cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village. The
permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of
removal.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-11)
§ 95.211 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less
than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-
of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or
the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this subchapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village’s right-
of-way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-12)
§ 95.212 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic-Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
subchapter, the Superintendent of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise
of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall
be final. If requested, the Superintendent of Public Works shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance or operation
of a facility in the future.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-13)
§ 95.213 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices and this subchapter.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
95.219, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the village.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-14)
§ 95.214 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this division
(A).
      (1)   No interference with village facilities. No utility facilities
shall be placed in any location if the Superintendent of Public Works
determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the village’s utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the village’s utility
facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any abovegrounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities.
      (3)   Ninety degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s
rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines (83 Ill.
Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations.
(49 C.F.R. §192.707 (1989)).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities installed aboveground. Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-15)
§ 95.215 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring and jacking under rights-of-way shall
be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
Superintendent of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring
or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced
and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads
that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designed by the village to be preserved shall be bored under or around
the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Superintendent of Public Works.
 
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic- Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Superintendent of Public Works, the utility, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed
facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by
the Superintendent of Public Works.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be discouraged but may be permitted only upon location specific approval
by the Superintendent of Public Works and only if that portion of the roadway
is closed to traffic.
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Superintendent of Public Works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a Common
Ground Alliance locate: telephone 811 or www.call811.com.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair; and
            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Communication, cable or video service    18 to 24 in. (0.6 m, as determined by
lines                                    village)
Electric lines                           30 in. (0.8 m)
Gas or petroleum products                30 in. (0.8 m)
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage 3 ft. 0 in.
line
Water line                               Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                         protection
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code 305 (formerly General Order
160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled Rules for Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines, and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
          (c)   Underground facilities.
            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of “moles”, “whip
augers” or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or
               b.   The installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
            4.   Burial of drops: all temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of “moles”, “whip augers” or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. part 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
      (6)   Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Superintendent of Public Works, shrubbery
surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The
housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to
blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the State Commerce
Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies
for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Superintendent of
Public Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior
to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other
property. If material is to be stored on the right-of-way, prior approval must
be obtained from the village.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Superintendent of Public
Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact Common Ground Alliance: telephone 811
or www.call811.com and ascertain the presence and location of existing
aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied
by its proposed facilities. The village will make its permit record available
to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified
of an excavation or when requested by the village or by Common Ground Alliance,
a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48
hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois
Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
(2009 Code, § 34-10-16)
§ 95.216 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities - compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable state laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the village as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utilities - tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable state laws and regulations specifically
governing the same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this subchapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) below, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Superintendent of Public Works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-17)
§ 95.217 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this subchapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within 90
days. Following receipt of such notice, the village may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the Superintendent of Public Works
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility
that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to
the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the
alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility
or person.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-18)
§ 95.218 CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration
of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made
using materials and methods approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the Superintendent of Public Works for good cause shown.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-19)
§ 95.219 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility’s expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit.
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flags. If a hazard does not
exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Superintendent of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection
of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary
repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free
movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-20)
§ 95.220 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this subchapter must do so in writing to the
Superintendent of Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request
shall identify each provision of this subchapter from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Superintendent of Public Works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this subchapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Superintendent of Public
Works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Superintendent of Public Works may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this subchapter but which
carry out the purposes of this subchapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the
Superintendent of Public Works under the provisions of this subchapter shall
have the right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or
commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted
in writing to the Village Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The Village Board shall commence its
consideration of the appeal at the Board’s next regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board
shall timely decide the appeal.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-21)
§ 95.221 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-23)
§ 95.222 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
subchapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-24)
§ 95.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of §§
95.200 through
95.222 shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of
this code of ordinances. There may be times when the village will incur delay
or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or
cannot perform its duties under its permit and §§
95.200 through
95.222. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
village’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(2009 Code, § 34-10-22)
APPENDIX A: EXCAVATION PERMIT
VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER
EXCAVATION PERMIT
NAME _____________________________________________________
FIRM NAME ________________________________________________
ADDRESS _________________________________________________
CITY/VILLAGE ______________________   STATE _____   PHONE _________
LOCATION OF PROPOSED EXCAVATION ___________________________________________
____________________________________________
______________________________________________
NATURE OF EXCAVATION_________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
BONDING COMPANY:
NAME ___________________________________________________________   
ADDRESS ____________________________________________________________
CITY/VILLAGE ______________________   STATE ____   PHONE _________
AMOUNT OF BOND $ _____________________________________________________________
   
PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE (LIST CITIES AND/OR VILLAGES)
   CITY/VILLAGE   CITY/VILLAGE OFFICIAL
1.   ______________   ________________________
2.   ______________   ________________________
3.   ______________   ________________________
4.   ______________   ________________________
   I have read the municipal law with regard to excavations and my firm or
company intends to fully comply with the street regulations code provisions.
                                          _______________________________
                                          (Applicant’s Signature)
(2009 Code, Ch. 34)
APPENDIX B: APPLICATION FOR CULVERT/DRIVEWAY PERMIT
VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER
APPLICATION FOR CULVERT/DRIVEWAY PERMIT
   I, __________________________, do hereby request permission and authority to
construct a culvert/driveway on the right-of-way of the village in accordance
with the information provided on this application and the accompanying sketch.
(Applicant must prepare a sketch showing location, length and pertinent
details.)
ADDRESS:
   ______________________________________________________________________
Pipe material will be:
_______________________________________________________________    
Wall thickness or gauge will be:
______________________________________________________
Type of joint will be:
_______________________________________________________________
DATED: _______________________, 20____   SIGNED: ______________________
                        (APPLICANT)
(2009 Code, Ch. 34)
APPENDIX C: CULVERT/DRIVEWAY PERMIT
CULVERT/DRIVEWAY PERMIT
APPLICATION         Approved ( )         Disapproved ( )
If disapproved, state reasons:
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________
DATED: _______________________, 20____   SIGNED: ______________________
   CERTIFICATION
   The undersigned has inspected the construction and installation set forth
above and finds that the same (is) (is not) in accordance with the permit.
DATED: _______________________, 20____   SIGNED: ______________________
(2009 Code, Ch. 34)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
      
111.   LIQUOR
      
112.   RAFFLES
      
113.   HOME KITCHEN OPERATIONS
      
114.   FOOD TRUCKS
      
115.   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
      
116.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
      
117.   BUSINESS LICENSE FORMS
CHAPTER 110: SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
Section
Solicitors
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Certificate of registration
   
110.03   Application for certificate of registration
   
110.04   Issuance and revocation of certificate
   
110.05   Policy on soliciting
   
110.06   Notice regulating soliciting
   
110.07   Compliance by solicitors
   
110.08   Uninvited soliciting prohibited
   
110.09   Time limit on soliciting
   
110.10   Solicitations on public highways
   
110.11   Fees
Peddlers
   
110.25   License required
   
110.26   Definition
   
110.27   Applications
   
110.28   Investigation of applicants
   
110.29   Hours
   
110.30   Fraud
   
110.31   Photographs
   
110.32   Unwanted peddling
   
110.33   Peddlers as nuisance
   
110.34   Duty of police to abate
   
110.35   Exclusionary provision
   
110.36   Fees
SOLICITORS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REGISTERED SOLICITOR. Includes any person who has obtained a valid
certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is
in the possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in
soliciting.
   RESIDENCE. Includes every separate living unit occupied for residential
purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or
structure.
   SOLICITING. Includes any one or more of the following activities:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description
whatsoever, for any kind of consideration whatsoever;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind or character;
      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
      (4)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or non-profit
association, organization, corporation or project.
(2009 Code, § 7-1-1)
§ 110.02 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   Every person desiring to engage in soliciting as herein defined from persons
within this municipality is hereby required to make written application for a
certificate of registration as hereinafter provided. All resident charitable,
non-profit organizations in this municipality which have been in existence for
six months or longer shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 7-1-2)
§ 110.03 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Applications for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a
form provided by the Chief of Police of this municipality and filed with such
Chief.
   (B)   The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested
on the application, to-wit:
      (1)   Name and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at such address; also, business address if other than residence
address; also, Social Security number;
      (2)   Address of place of residence during the past three years if other
than present address;
      (3)   Age of applicant and marital status; and if married, the name of
spouse;
      (4)   Physical description of the applicant;
      (5)   Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association
with whom the applicant is employed or represents; and the length of time of
such employment or representation;
      (6)   Name and address of employer during the past three years if other
than the present employer;
      (7)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting in which the applicant will engage;
      (8)   Period of time for which the certificate is applied;
      (9)   The date or approximate date of the latest previous application for
a certificate under this subchapter, if any;
      (10)   Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under
this subchapter ever been revoked?
      (11)   Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter or the regulations of any other Illinois
municipality regulating soliciting?
      (12)   Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a
felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the
United States?
      (13)   The last three municipalities where the applicant carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application in this municipality and
the address from which such business was conducted in those municipalities; and
      (14)   Also, such additional information as the Chief of Police may deem
necessary to process the application.
   (C)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
   (D)   The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in his or her office an
accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all
other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of
registration issued under the provisions of this subchapter and of the denial
of applications.
   (E)   Applications for certificates issued shall be numbered in consecutive
order as filed, and every certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall be
identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was
issued.
   (F)   No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any
other state or federal law of the United States within five years of the date
of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this subchapter, nor to any person whose certificate
of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein
provided.
   (G)   All persons engaging in canvassing or soliciting within the village
shall furnish at the time of registration a certificate of insurance to the
village in amounts as required by the village from time to time.
(2009 Code, § 7-1-3) (Ord. 99-13, passed 12-13-1999)
§ 110.04 ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, after consideration of the application and all
information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the
applicant does not possess the qualifications for such certificate as herein
required, and that the issuance of a certificate of registration to the
applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this
subchapter. Endorsement shall be made by the Chief of Police upon the
application of the denial of the application. When the applicant is found to be
fully qualified, the certificate of registration shall be issued forthwith.
   (B)   Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by
the Chief of Police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a
violation of any provision of this subchapter, or has made a false material
statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance
of a certificate of registration under the terms of this subchapter.
Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the
Chief of Police to the holder of the certificate in person or by certified
(return receipt requested) U. S. mail, addressed to his or her residence
address set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of such
notice, the certificate of registration shall become null and void.
   (C)   The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date
thereof.
(2009 Code, § 7-1-4)
§ 110.05 POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is declared to be the policy of this municipality that the occupant or
occupants of the residences in this municipality shall make the determination
of whether solicitors shall be or shall not be invited to their respective
residences. If no determination is made as is provided in §
110.07 hereof, then in that event, registration is not required.
(2009 Code, § 7-1-5)
§ 110.06 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by
the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this subchapter shall
comply with the following directions.
   (A)   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors or the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence shall be
given in the manner provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches in size
shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence
indicating the determination by the occupant and containing the applicable
words, as follows:
   “ONLY REGISTERED SOLICITORS INVITED”
   or
   “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”
   (C)   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(2009 Code, § 7-1-6)
§ 110.07 COMPLIANCE BY SOLICITORS.
   (A)   It is the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in this
municipality upon which a residence as herein defined is located to first
examine the notice provided for in §
110.06 if any is attached and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice.
   (B)   If the notice states “ONLY REGISTERED SOLICITORS INVITED”, then the
solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration as herein provided
for shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises; and if the
notice states, “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”, then the solicitor, whether registered
or not shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   (C)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(2009 Code, § 7-1-7)
§ 110.08 UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
   It is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person
to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create
any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, in defiance of the
notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
110.06.
(2009 Code, § 7-1-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.09 TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this subchapter or not, to go upon any
premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located
thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence for the
purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in
soliciting as herein defined, prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. of any
weekday or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday.
(2009 Code, § 7-1-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.10 SOLICITATIONS ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.
   Charitable organizations shall be allowed to solicit upon public highways
under the following terms and conditions:
   (A)   The charitable organization must be one that is registered with the
Attorney General for the state as a charitable organization as provided by “An
Act to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes,
Providing for Violations Thereof, and Making an Appropriation Therefor”,
approved July 26, 1963, as amended;
   (B)   Solicit only at intersections where all traffic from all directions is
required to come to a full stop;
   (C)   Be engaged in a state-wide fund-raising activity;
   (D)   Be liable for any injury to any person or property during the
solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent;
   (E)   Any person so engaged in such solicitation shall be at least 16 years
of age and shall wear a high visibility vest;
   (F)   Solicit only during daylight hours; and
   (G)   Any one charitable organization shall be limited to conducting no more
than two solicitations per calendar year.
(2009 Code, § 7-1-10)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 626 ILCS 5/11-1006
§ 110.11 FEES.
   Upon making an application for a certificate, the applicant shall pay a
license fee, which shall be as follows:
   (A)   Daily license: $10 per person per day; and
   (B)   Annual license: $50 per person per year.
(2009 Code, § 7-1-11)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5
PEDDLERS
§ 110.25 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of hawker or peddler of any merchandise, article or thing without
having first secured a license therefor.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-1)
§ 110.26 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLE. The selling, bartering or exchanging or the offering for sale,
barter or exchange of any tangible personal property upon or along the streets,
highways or public places of this municipality or from house-to-house, whether
at one place thereon or from place-to-place, from any wagon, truck, pushcart or
other vehicle or from movable receptacles of any kind, but shall not include
the delivery of any item previously ordered or the sale of items along delivery
routes where the purchaser has previously requested the seller to stop and
exhibit his or her items. Nor shall PEDDLE be taken to include the solicitation
of orders by sample where the goods are not delivered at the time the order is
taken.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-2)
§ 110.27 APPLICATIONS.
   A person desiring a license may obtain the same by making application with
the Clerk and providing the following information:
   (A)   Name and physical description of applicant;
   (B)   Permanent home and address and local address if operating from such an
address;
   (C)   A brief description of the business and of the goods to be sold;
   (D)   Name and address of the employer, if any;
   (E)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
   (F)   Evidence that the agent is acting on behalf of the corporation he or
she represents;
   (G)   Statement of the applicant’s criminal record other than a traffic
record; and
   (H)   The last three municipalities where the applicant carried on business
immediately preceding the date of application to this municipality and the
address from which such business was conducted in those municipalities.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-3)
§ 110.28 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANTS.
   Upon receipt of each application, it shall be referred to the Chief of
Police, who shall investigate the business and moral character of the
applicant. If the facts show the applicant unfit to receive the license, then
it shall be denied.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-4)
§ 110.29 HOURS.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this Code or not, to engage in peddling as
herein defined prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on any day of the week,
including Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a State or National
holiday. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a licensed peddler, upon application to
and approval of Village Board, may operate until 7:30 p.m. on any of the day of
the week, including Saturday, and may also apply to operate on Sunday or on a
state or national holiday, if such operation is integral to the peddler's
business. Whether to allow such operating times shall in the sole discretion of
the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-5) (Ord. 20-26, passed 12-14-2020)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.30 FRAUD.
   No licensed peddler or hawker shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or
misrepresentation, whether through himself or herself or through an employee
while acting as a peddler in this municipality, or shall barter, sell or peddle
any goods or merchandise or wares other than those specified in his or her
application for a license.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-6)
§ 110.31 PHOTOGRAPHS.
   Two photographs of the applicant and such of its employees as will be used
in the peddling or merchandising, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the
filing of the application, which pictures shall be two inches by two inches,
showing the head and shoulders of the applicant or its agent(s) and/or employee
(s) in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-7)
§ 110.32 UNWANTED PEDDLING.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter, nor the issuance of any license
hereunder shall entitle the licensee to go in or upon any private residence for
the purpose of peddling if such licensee, his or her agents or employees are
directed to depart from said private residence by the owner or person in charge
thereof.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.33 PEDDLERS AS NUISANCE.
   The practice of going in and upon private residences, business
establishments or offices in the municipality by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers,
itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise without having been
requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of
said private residences and business establishments or offices for the purpose
of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking of merchandise is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and is punishable as a violation of this subchapter. No person
shall peddle in a public square.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.34 DUTY OF POLICE TO ABATE.
   The Police Department of this municipality is hereby required and directed
to suppress the same and to abate any such nuisance as described in §
110.33.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-10)
§ 110.35 EXCLUSIONARY PROVISION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to persons employed or
representing an established merchant, business firm, or corporation located and
regularly doing business in the municipality or to farmers selling any food
items raised or produced by themselves and/or to permanently established
residents who are voters in the municipality or anyone duly licensed.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-11)
§ 110.36 FEES.
   The license fees per person to be charged for licenses to peddle in this
municipality, each payable in advance, are hereby fixed and established as
follows:
   (A)   Daily license: $10 per person per day; and
   (B)   Annual license: $50 per person per year.
(2009 Code, § 7-2-12)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5
CHAPTER 111: LIQUOR
Section
Generally
   
111.001   Definitions
Licenses
   
111.015   License required
   
111.016   Applications
   
111.017   Examination of applicant
   
111.018   Prohibited licensees
   
111.019   Term; fee submitted in advance
   
111.020   Classification; fee; limitation
   
111.021   Video gaming; limitation
   
111.022   Nature of license
   
111.023   Limitation of licenses
   
111.024   Dramshop insurance
   
111.025   Display of license
   
111.026   Record of licenses
Regulations
   
111.040   Closing hours for all licenses
   
111.041   Happy hour restrictions
   
111.042   Prohibited locations
   
111.043   Change of location
   
111.044   Stores selling school supplies, lunches and the like
   
111.045   Transporting and the like in motor vehicles
   
111.046   Open alcoholic liquor prohibited
   
111.047   Liquor in vehicles; underage
   
111.048   Restricted residential areas
   
111.049   Election days
   
111.050   Unlawful acts
   
111.051   Unlawful entertainment
   
111.052   Sanitary conditions
   
111.053   Diseased employees
   
111.054   Health permit
   
111.055   Peddling
   
111.056   Gambling
   
111.057   Disorderly house
   
111.058   Prohibited sales; generally
   
111.059   Persons selling liquor
   
111.060   Unlawful purchase of liquor
   
111.061   Identification required
   
111.062   Transfer of identification card
   
111.063   Posting warning
   
111.064   Exclusionary provision
   
111.065   Inspections
   
111.066   Books and records; available upon reasonable notice and maintained in
state records
   
111.067   Restrictions on licensee
   
111.068   Selling false identification
   
111.069   False identification
   
111.070   Underaged drinking on streets
   
111.071   Residential drinking
   
111.072   Renting hotel rooms for drinking
   
111.073   Temporary adoption of state guidelines for outdoor service
   
111.074   Rules for temporary outdoor service for licensed establishments
Violations and Penalties
   
111.085   Owner of premises permitting violation
   
111.086   Acts of agent or employee; liability; knowledge
   
111.087   Revocation of license after conviction
   
111.088   Revocation of license when employee convicted
   
111.089   Misbranding
   
111.090   Abatement of place used in violation
   
111.091   Use of premises for one year after revocation
   
111.092   Revocation of licenses
   
111.093   Complaint by residents
   
111.094   Appeals from order of Liquor Commissioner
   
111.095   Subsequent violations in a year
   
111.096   Appeal limitations for subsequent violation
 
   
111.999   Penalty
GENERALLY
§ 111.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and
capable of being consumed by human beings. The provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in
accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder or to
any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent or less of alcohol by
volume.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.05 and 235 ILCS 5/6-33)
   BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.04)
   CATERER RETAILER. A person who serves alcoholic liquor for consumption,
either on-site or off-site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as
an incidental part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic liquor are
sold at a package price agreed upon under contract.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.34)
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of this state and not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor, kept, used and maintained by its
members, through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and
employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and
their guests; provided that such CLUB files with the Local Commissioner at the
time of its application for a license under this chapter, two copies of a list
of names and residences of its members, and similarly files within ten days of
the election of any additional member, such member’s name and address; and
provided further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of
directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their
annual meeting and that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is
paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other
compensation any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to
the club or its members or guests introduced by members, beyond the amount of
such salary as may be fixed and voted at the annual meeting by the members or
by the board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of
the club.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.24)
   CORPORATION. Any corporation, domestic or foreign, qualified to do business
in the state under the Business Corporation Act of Illinois (Rule 100.10(b)).
   DISTILLED SPIRITS. See SPIRITS.
   EVENT. A single theme (Rules and Regulations 100.10(o)).
   HOTEL. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers
and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 25 or more
rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or
more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping
accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or
buildings in connection therewith, and such building or buildings, structure or
structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen or dining room
equipment and capacity.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.25)
   LOCAL COMMISSIONER. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner as provided in the
ILCS Chapter 235, entitled “Dramshop” and all references to Liquor Commissioner
shall refer to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner unless otherwise provided.
   MANAGER or AGENT. Any individual employed by any licensed place of business,
provided said individual possess the same qualifications required of the
licensee. Satisfactory evidence of such employment will be furnished the
Commission in the form and manner as such Commission shall from time to time
prescribe (Rule 100.10(f)).
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who is licensed by the Illinois Liquor Control
Commission as a manufacturer (as that term is defined under the Illinois Liquor
Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1 et seq.) and more than 50% of revenue from the sale
of liquor is from wine products manufactured on site.
   MEAL. Food that is prepared and served on the licensed premises and excludes
the serving of snacks (Rules and Regulations 100.10(n)).
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead
or other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed
and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey
any alcoholic liquor.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.06)
   PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE. Any public place where packaged liquor is offered for
sale in the original, unopened container for consumption away from the
premises.
   PARTNER. Any individual who is a member of a co-partnership. CO-PARTNERSHIP
means an association of two or more persons to carry on as co-owners of a
business for profit (Rules and Regulations 100.10(d) and (e)).
   PREMISES/PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place or location where alcoholic beverages
are manufactured, stored, displayed, offered for sale or where drinks
containing alcoholic beverages are mixed, concocted and served for consumption.
Not included are sidewalks, street, parking areas and grounds adjacent to any
such place or location (Rules and Regulations 100.10(g)).
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any premises enclosed or unenclosed or partly enclosed and
partly unenclosed wherein any service or goods, chattels or merchandise are
offered for sale to the public or any such premises used as a clubhouse, club
room or meeting place. The terms PUBLIC PLACE and PUBLIC PREMISES shall be
interchangeable for the purposes of this chapter.
   RESIDENT. Any person (other than a corporation) who has resided and
maintained a bona fide residence in the state for at least one year and in the
city, village and county in which the premises covered by the license are
located for at least 90 days prior to making application for such license (Rule
100.10(a)).
   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals actually are
served and regularly served, and where the sale of alcoholic liquor is an
incidental part of the food service and in no case more than 40% of the gross
revenues of the food and alcoholic liquor service, without sleeping
accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen
and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient
number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its
guests.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.23)
   RETAILER. A person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form, and where the sale of alcoholic
liquor is an incidental part of the food service and in no case more than 40%
of the gross revenues of the retailer’s sales.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.17)
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.21)
   SELL AT RETAIL and SALE OF RETAIL. Refers to any mean sales for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.18)
   SPECIAL EVENT. An event conducted by an educational, fraternal, political,
civic, religious or non-profit organization.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.30)
   SPECIAL EVENTS RETAILER. An educational, fraternal, political, civic,
religious or non-profit organization which sells or offers for sale beer or
wine, or both, only for consumption at the location and on the dates designated
by a special event retail license.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.17.1)
   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquor and such liquor when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.02)
   TO SELL. Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to
sell.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.22)
   VILLAGE. The Village of Rochester, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits as above defined.
(235 ILCS 5/1-3.03)
(2009 Code, § 21-1-1) (Ord. 10-08, passed 10-12-2010)
Editor’s note:
   All references to “Rules” refer to Illinois Liquor Control Commission Rules
located in 11A Ill. Adm.
    Code Chapter 1, Part 1, §§ 100.5 et seq.
LICENSES
§ 111.015 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall sell, keep or offer for sale at retail, or conduct any
place for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor within the limits and
territory of this village without having a license to do so, issued by the
Local Commissioner of this village in the manner hereinafter provided, and a
valid license for such purpose issued by the State Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (B)   A similar valid license issued by the Local Commissioner of this
village is hereby required for and with respect to each building, location and
premises, within the aforesaid territory of this village, at or upon which
alcoholic liquor is to be sold or kept or offered for sale at retail.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 111.016 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   The Local Commissioner is authorized to grant and issue licenses to
individuals, firms and corporations to sell at retail and to keep and offer for
sale at retail alcoholic liquor within the limits and territory of this village
upon the conditions and in the manner provided by this chapter and by the Act
of the General Assembly of Illinois, and not otherwise. Such license shall be
in writing, signed by the Local Commissioner and attested by the Municipal
Clerk, with the seal of the village affixed thereto.
   (B)   Prior to issuance of a license, the applicant must submit to the Local
Commissioner an application in triplicate, in writing and under oath, stating
the following:
      (1)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation for profit or a club, the
date of incorporation, the object for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the officers, directors and the name of the person who will be
managing the establishment for which the license is sought, and if a majority
in interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or such
person’s nominee, the address and name of such person;
      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, the applicant’s place of birth
and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of the naturalization of the
citizen;
      (3)   The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed;
      (4)   The length of time that the applicant has been engaged in the
business of that character or in the case of a corporation, the date on which
its charter was issued;
      (5)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license;
      (6)   Whether the applicant has made similar application for a similar
other license on premises other than described in the application and the
disposition of such application;
      (7)   The applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not
disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in
the aforesaid Act of the General Assembly or in this chapter or resolution and
amendments thereto;
      (8)   Whether a previous license issued to the applicant by any state, or
subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked and the
reasons therefor; and
      (9)   The applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of
the United States, or any of the provisions of this chapter or resolution and
amendments thereto in the conduct of the applicant’s place of business.
   (C)   In the case of a partnership or corporation, the information and
statements required by this section shall be furnished as to each partner, and
with respect to a corporation, the information and statements required by this
section shall be furnished as to the Local Commissioner of the corporation, the
secretary of the corporation, the directors of the corporation, and with
respect to the person who is to manage the establishment for which a license is
sought.
   (D)   If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, firm,
association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to by
at least one member of such partnership, firm, association or club, or by the
president and secretary of such corporation.
   (E)   One copy of the application shall be retained by the Local Commission,
one copy given to the Chief of Police; the Chief of Police shall endorse on the
copies the Chief of Police’s recommended approval or disapproval of the
application and may make further comments regarding that application. The
copies shall be returned to the Local Commissioner and the endorsement and
comment of the Chief of Police shall be considered by the Local Commissioner as
an aid in deciding whether the license should be issued or refused.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-1
§ 111.017 EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT.
   The Local Commissioner shall have the right to examine or cause to be
examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for renewal thereof,
or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in
the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the
books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take
proof for the Local Commissioner’s information in the performance of the Local
Commissioner’s duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be
effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the
information desired by the Local Commissioner under this section, the Local
Commissioner may authorize one or more agents to act on the Local
Commissioner’s behalf. The Local Commissioner shall cause a background check to
be made of the applicant, including any owner of more than 5% of any applicant,
and shall charge the applicant an amount in addition to any license fee for any
fee incurred by the village in connection with the background check.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-5
§ 111.018 PROHIBITED LICENSEES.
   Except as otherwise provided in division (U) below, no license of any kind
shall be issued by the Local Commissioner to the following:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of this village;
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which the applicant resides;
   (C)   A person who is not 21 years of age or older;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, unless the Commission determines that such person has been sufficiently
rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth
in such person’s application and the Commission’s investigation. The burden of
proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a
house of ill-fame;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality;
   (G)   A person whose license issued under this Act has been revoked for
cause;
   (H)   A person who, at the time of the application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon first
application;
   (I)   A co-partnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than 5% of the aggregate limited partner
interest in such co-partnership would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than residence within the political subdivision,
unless residency is required by local ordinance;
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the political
subdivision;
   (K)   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act of
1983 to transact business in the state;
   (L)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee;
   (M)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this Act or has forfeited the person’s bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
   (N)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;
   (O)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor
control commissions, any Local Commissioner of the Village Board of Trustees,
any member of a Village Board of Trustees, and no such official shall be
interested directly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic
liquor, except that a license may be granted to such official in relation to
premises that are not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction
of that official if the issuance of such license is approved by the State
Liquor Control Commission and except that a license may be granted, to any
member of a village board of trustees in relation to premises that are located
within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if:
      (1)   The sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is incidental
to the selling of food;
      (2)   The issuance of the license is approved by the State Commission;
      (3)   The issuance of the license is in accordance with all applicable
local ordinances in effect where the premises are located; and
      (4)   The official granted a license does not vote on alcoholic liquor
issues pending before the board or council to which the license holder is
elected.
   (P)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   (Q)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
the Criminal Code of 1961 § 28-1.1(a)(3) through (a)(11), or as proscribed by
§§ 28-1.1 or 28-3 or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the
aforesaid statutory provisions;
   (R)   A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a
license under the Raffles Act or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act;
   (S)   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquor for use or consumption
on the person’s licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts set out in 235 ILCS 5/6-21;
   (T)   A person who is delinquent in the payment of any indebtedness or
obligation to the village; and
   (U)   A criminal conviction of a corporation is not grounds for the denial,
suspension or revocation of a license applied for or held by the corporation if
the criminal conviction was not the result of a violation of any federal or
state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
the offense that led to the conviction did not result in any financial gain to
the corporation and the corporation has terminated its relationship with each
director, officer, employee or controlling shareholder whose actions directly
contributed to the conviction of the corporation. The Local Commissioner shall
determine if all provisions of this division (U) have been met before any
action on the corporation’s license is initiated.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-4)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-2
§ 111.019 TERM; FEE SUBMITTED IN ADVANCE.
   (A)   Retail liquor licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
12-month period upon the payment of the license fee as hereinafter set forth
unless sooner revoked or suspended. The 12-month period shall be from January 1
to December 31 of the same year.
   (B)   The license fee shall be payable in advance by the applicant for a
license at the time the application for a license is submitted to the Local
Commissioner as hereinbefore provided. In the event the license is denied, the
license fee shall be returned to the applicant. The fee shall be deposited in
the Municipal General Fund. The application for a license shall be filed with
the Municipal Clerk.
   (C)   Licenses shall state thereon the names of the licensees and the
address and description of the premises for which they are granted and the
dates of their issuance and expiration.
   (D)   With respect to a corporation operating an establishment for which a
liquor license has been issued, should the manager of said establishment change
after the issuance of said liquor license, the corporation must submit the new
manager’s name and shall be submitted within 30 days. Continuation of the
license will be contingent upon a background check of the new manager as set
out in this chapter, and all fees shall be waived should the license be changed
only as a result of a change of managers. If, for some reason, the manager is
not acceptable, the licensee shall have 30 days to submit a new name before
revocation. Failure to provide new information shall be grounds for suspension
or revocation of said license.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 111.020 CLASSIFICATION; FEE; LIMITATION.
   Every person engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the village
shall pay an annual license fee. Such licenses shall be divided into the
following classes:
   (A)   Class B license: banquet halls. There is hereby created a Class B
liquor license, which shall authorize retail sale of alcoholic liquor only in
the course of a rental hall business or similar banquet hall business for
consumption only on the premises where sold. In the course of this business,
the licensee is responsible for control of patrons in the premises and at no
time may patrons be allowed to act as bartenders or to otherwise dispense
alcoholic liquor. At all times that the premises are used for the sale of
alcoholic liquor, the licensee or a manager acting for the licensee must be on
the premises. The annual fee shall be $800. There shall be a limit of one
license.
   (B)   Class C license: package liquor store.
      (1)   There is hereby created a Class C liquor license, which shall
authorize the licensee to make:
         (a)   Retail sales of all alcoholic liquor, in their original package,
for consumption off the premises; and
         (b)   Retail sale of beer, wine, wine coolers and pre-mix package
drinks sold in bottles or cans for consumption within a designated video gaming
area on the premises.
      (2)   Sale of alcoholic beverages poured from a bottle or dispensed from
a tap by employees of the licensee shall not be permitted. The annual fee shall
be $600. There shall be a limit of zero licenses.
   (C)   Class C-G license: package liquor store with gaming.
      (1)   There is hereby created a Class C-G liquor license, which shall
authorize the licensee to make:
         (a)   Retail sales of all alcoholic liquor, in their original package,
for consumption off the premises; and
         (b)   Retail sale of beer, wine, wine coolers and pre-mix package
drinks sold in bottles or cans for consumption within a designated video gaming
area on the premises.
      (2)   Sale of alcoholic beverages poured from a bottle or dispensed from
a tap by employees of the licensee shall not be permitted. The annual fee shall
be $800. There shall be a limit of one license.
   (D)   Class CR license: caterer retailers. There is hereby created a Class
CR liquor license, which shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor only
by a caterer retailers for consumption on the premises where sold. The licensee
is responsible for control of patrons in the premises and at no time may
patrons be allowed to act as bartenders or to otherwise dispense alcoholic
liquor. At all times that the premises are used for the sale of alcoholic
liquor, the licensee or a manager acting for the licensee must be on the
premises. The annual fee shall be $600 There shall be a limit of two licenses.
   (E)   Class R license: restaurants. There is hereby created a Class R liquor
license, which shall authorize retail sale of alcoholic liquor only by
restaurants for consumption on the premises where sold or for consumption off
the premises only in the original package where the sale of alcoholic liquor is
incidental to the sale of other merchandise at retail and in no event more than
40% of the gross revenues of the retailer. The annual fee shall be $600. There
shall be a limit of two licenses.
   (F)   Class RS licenses: retail stores. There is hereby created a Class RS
license, which shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off
the premises and only in the original package by a retailer where the sale of
alcoholic liquor is incidental to the sale of other merchandise at retail and
in no event more than 40% of the gross revenues of the retailer. Alcoholic
liquor in said places of business shall be inaccessible to customers during all
times other than those hours of operation specified in §
111.040. There shall be no facility for the sale of alcoholic liquor to anyone
in a motor vehicle without parking and physically entering the premises. The
annual license fee shall be $600. There shall be a limit of four licenses.
   (G)   Class SE licenses: special event. Upon application, the Liquor
Commissioner is authorized, upon approval by two-thirds of the Board of
Trustees of the village, to issue a Class SE license for a period not to exceed
24 hours to any organization which keeps or desires to keep any place selling
or offering for sale or in any manner dealing in any alcoholic liquor only for
consumption on the premises where sold. The licensee is responsible for control
of patrons so that no sales to minors will be allowed. At all times that the
premises are used for the sale of alcoholic liquor, the licensee or a manager
acting for the licensee must be on the premises. There will be no background
check required, but the hours of sale, types of alcoholic liquor sold,
location, security arrangements and other requirements may be required for
approval of the licensee. The fee shall be $50 per license. There shall be a
limit of one license.
(235 ILCS 5/4-1)
   (H)   Class M licenses: manufacturer sale. There is hereby created a Class M
license, which shall permit the manufacturing, bottling, consumption, tasting
and sale of alcoholic liquor by a manufacturer for consumption on the premises
where sold or for consumption off the premises only in the original package by
a retailer who is also a manufacturer of alcohol. Alcoholic liquor in said
places of business shall be inaccessible to customers during all times other
than those hours of operation specified in §
111.040. There shall be no facility for the sale of alcoholic liquor to anyone
in a motor vehicle without parking and physically entering the premises. The
annual license fee shall be $600. There shall be a limit of three licenses.
   (I)   Outdoor permit. The holder of a Class B, R, RS, M, R-G or M-G license
may be issued an outdoor permit. An outdoor permit shall, upon issuance,
entitle the holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquor as authorized by the
primary classification, outside of the permanent structure of the premises
under the following conditions.
      (1)   The holder of an outdoor permit must conclude all sales and clear
the area no later than the time specified in the liquor license.
      (2)   A permanent fence made of wood or other similar material, and when
erected not less than six feet in height from the sidewalk or ground level
shall be erected. The fence shall be designed in such a manner so that the
vision of a person on either side of the fence is obscured when viewing through
the fence. The fencing shall be positioned between the area in which alcoholic
liquor can be consumed outside and any adjoining residential or commercial
property.
      (3)   Access into the outdoor area shall be from the permanent structure
only and no access shall be permitted from the street, sidewalk or adjoining
property.
      (4)   No music of any kind may be played or broadcast from the outdoor
area or within the permanent structure which is of such a volume so as to
disturb the neighborhood in any manner.
      (5)   No sales or dispensing of alcoholic liquor may be made from the
outside area or the permanent structure to any person upon any adjoining
property, public street, sidewalk or alley, and no alcoholic liquor served in
an open container may be removed from the outdoor area or the permanent
structure.
      (6)   The annual fee for an outdoor permit shall be $100.
   (J)   Class R-G license: restaurants with gaming. There is hereby created a
Class R-G liquor license, which shall authorize retail sale of alcoholic liquor
only by restaurants for consumption on the premises where sold or for
consumption off the premises only in the original package where the sale of
alcoholic liquor is incidental to the sale of other merchandise at retail and
in no event more than 40% of the gross revenues of the retailer. The annual fee
shall be $800. There shall be a limit of four licenses.
   (K) Class M-G license: manufacturer sale with gaming. There is hereby
created a Class M-G license, which shall permit the manufacturing, bottling,
consumption, tasting and sale of alcoholic liquor by a manufacturer for
consumption on the premises where sold or for consumption off the premises only
in the original package by a retailer who is also a manufacturer of alcohol.
Alcoholic liquor in said places of business shall be inaccessible to customer
during all times other than those hours of operation specified in §
111.040. There shall be no facility for the sale of alcoholic liquor to anyone
in a motor vehicle without parking and physically entering the premises. The
annual license fee shall be $800. There shall be a limit of one license.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-6) (Ord. 10-08, passed 10-12-2010; Ord. 16-02, passed 2-8-
2016; Ord. 16-18, passed 8-8-2016; Ord. 16-26, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 18-02,
passed 1-8-2018; Ord. 21-20, passed 8-9-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 111.021 VIDEO GAMING; LIMITATION.
   (A)   No person, establishment or business issued a license shall allow
video gaming on the licensed premises unless the person, establishment or
business holds a Class C-G, R-G or M-G license.
   (B)   Holders of C-G, R-G and M-G licenses must apply with the State Gaming
Commission for a gaming license within 90 days of being granted said C-G, R-
G and/or M-G license.
   (C)   Operation of a video gaming terminal by any other license holder shall
be cause for revocation of the applicable liquor license in addition to any and
all other penalties allowed by law and this chapter. Except as otherwise
provided herein, it shall be unlawful to permit all other types of gambling on
any premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-7) (Ord. 15-18, passed 12-14-2015; Ord. 18-02, passed 1-8-
2018; Ord. 18-14, passed 6-11-2018) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.022 NATURE OF LICENSE.
   A license issued under this chapter shall be purely a personal privilege,
good for a term not to exceed the end of the calendar year in which the license
is issued, unless sooner revoked as in this chapter authorized and provided,
and shall not constitute property nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment or execution; nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated.
Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution,
but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors and
administrators of any estate of the deceased licensee and the trustees of any
insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic
liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under the
order of the court having jurisdiction of such estate and may exercise the
privileges of such deceased, insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of
such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such
license, but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-8)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-1
§ 111.023 LIMITATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Annexing license holders. The restrictions contained in this chapter
shall in no way affect any business holding a retail liquor license, duly
licensed by the county, which is located in territory annexed after the
effective date of this chapter. Licenses may be issued to any such business or
renewed by the duly constituted authorities upon annexation; provided that
thereafter, all of the restrictions and contingencies contained herein shall
apply.
   (B)   Destroyed or damaged business.
      (1)   No license shall be held in existence by the mere payment of fees
by any person, firm or corporation for a period longer than 90 days without a
liquor business being in complete and full operation. However, if a liquor
business has been destroyed or damaged by fire or act of God and cannot be
rebuilt or repaired within the 90-day period, then, in that event, the Local
Commissioner shall extend the period of time for which a liquor license may be
held by the mere payment of fees without the liquor business being in full and
complete operation for an additional 90 days.
      (2)   If either of the above stated periods of time passes without the
particular liquor business returning to complete and full operation, the
license for that particular business shall expire and not be subject to
renewal, unless all other requirements of this chapter shall have been met.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-9)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 111.024 DRAMSHOP INSURANCE.
   No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant shall file with
the application a certificate by an insurance company authorized to do business
in the state, certifying that the applicant has coverage in an amount no less
than the full amount of potential liability as set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes as may be in effect from time to time.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-10)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-21
§ 111.025 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee under this chapter shall cause the license to be framed and
hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-11)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-24
§ 111.026 RECORD OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The Local Commissioner shall keep a complete record of all licenses
issued by the Local Commissioner, and shall supply the Clerk, Treasurer and
Chief of Police a copy of the same.
   (B)   Upon issuance or revocation of a license, the Local Commissioner shall
give written notice to these same officers within 48 hours.
(2009 Code, § 21-2-12)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
REGULATIONS
§ 111.040 CLOSING HOURS FOR ALL LICENSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to give or sell or offer for sale or
gift or in any way provide any alcoholic liquors, spirits, beer or wine in the
village during the hours of 10:00 p.m. until 8:00 a.m. on the following day;
provided, however, that licensees holding a Class B and a Class CR, license may
sell alcoholic liquor from 11:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. on each Friday and
Saturday, and from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m. on each Sunday through Thursday
and the sale for consumption off the premises where sold in the original
package by any licensee may continue until 12:00 a.m. daily. The hours of a
Class C or a Class C-G license may sell alcoholic liquor from 6:00 a.m. until
12:00 a.m. daily. The hours of a Class M or a Class M-G license may sell
alcoholic liquor from 9:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. on each Friday and Saturday,
and from 9:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m. on each Sunday through Thursday and the
sale for consumption off the premises where sold in the original package by any
licensee may continue until 12:00 a.m. daily. The hours of a Class R or a Class
R-G license may sell alcoholic liquor from 9:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. on each
Friday and Saturday and from 9:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m. on each Sunday through
Thursday and the sale for consumption off the premises where sold in the
original package by any licensee may continue until 12:00 a.m. daily. The hours
for a licensee holding a Class SE license shall be specified on the application
and shall be approved by the Local Commissioner and the Board of Trustees of
the village. The times referred to above shall refer to Daylight Savings Time
or when the same is in effect in the village and upon cessation of Daylight
Savings Time, shall be Central Standard Time. All patrons or customers shall
leave the premises at the specified closing time and shall not remain on the
premises thereafter.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-1) (Ord. 17-19, passed 3-13-2017; Ord. 18-13, passed 6-4-
2018) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 111.041 HAPPY HOUR RESTRICTIONS.
   All licensees shall adhere to the same terms and provisions restricting
certain sales of alcoholic liquor as set forth in 235 ILCS 5/6-28.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-28
§ 111.042 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale of any alcoholic liquor at
retail within 100 feet of any church, school (other than an institution of
higher learning), hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons, or for
veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station; provided,
that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service,
regularly organized clubs or to restaurants, food shops or other places where
the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on if such
place of business so exempted shall have been established for such purposes
prior to the taking effect of this chapter; nor to the renewal of a license for
the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on the premises within 100 feet of any
church or school where such church or school has been established within such
100 feet since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church,
the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building
used for worship services or educational programs and not to property
boundaries.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a
church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales
are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquor.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-11
§ 111.043 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   (A)   A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only on the premises described in the application and license.
   (B)   Such location may be changed only upon the written permit to make such
change issued by the Local Commissioner.
   (C)   No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the law
of this state and the code of ordinances of this village.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-4)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-14
§ 111.044 STORES SELLING SCHOOL SUPPLIES, LUNCHES AND THE LIKE.
   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted
consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such
minors.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-5) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-12
§ 111.045 TRANSPORTING AND THE LIKE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person shall, within this village, transport, carry, possess or have any
alcoholic liquor in, upon, or about any motor vehicle in or on any public
street, alley or place, except in the original package and with the seal
unbroken.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-6) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.046 OPEN ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR PROHIBITED.
   A licensee shall not knowingly permit any person to leave his or her
premises where the sale occurred with any open alcoholic liquor other than in
the original package.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-7) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.047 LIQUOR IN VEHICLES; UNDERAGE.
   The presence in a vehicle other than a public vehicle of any alcoholic
liquor shall be prima facie evidence that it is in the possession of and is
being carried by all persons occupying such vehicle at the time of which such
alcoholic liquor is found, except under the following circumstances:
   (A)   If such liquor is found on the person of one of the occupants therein;
or
   (B)   If such vehicle contains at least one occupant over 21 years of age.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-8) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.048 RESTRICTED RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful to establish a retail liquor business within the
village in violation of the restrictions of the village’s zoning regulations as
in effect from time to time.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-9) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.049 ELECTION DAYS.
   All such licensees may sell alcoholic liquor at retail, by the drink or in
the original package for consumption either on or off the premises licensed on
the day of any national, state, county or municipal election, including primary
elections during the hours the polls are open within the political area in
which such election is being held and on Sundays; subject to all the remaining
terms, conditions and opening hours and closing hours as set forth in this
chapter.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-10)
§ 111.050 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do or commit any of the following
acts within the village, to-wit:
   (A)   Drink any alcoholic liquor on any public street, alley, sidewalk or
other public way except in compliance with all applicable village ordinances,
rules and regulations;
   (B)   Drink any alcoholic liquor in any public park, except in compliance
with all applicable village ordinances, rules and regulations;
   (C)   Drink alcoholic liquor on any private property without permission of
an owner thereof; and
   (D)   Appear on or in any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public
place, including parks and recreation areas, in an intoxicated condition.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-11) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.051 UNLAWFUL ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   No licensee, or any agent or employee of a licensee, shall permit or
allow any lewd or lascivious act or any topless and/or bottomless employee and/
or employees, or entertainment to be performed within the licensed premises by
an entertainer employed therein, or by any employee or guest. The term TOPLESS
is defined as naked or substantially without clothing or covering of the body
from the waist to the neckline and the term BOTTOMLESS is defined as naked or
substantially without clothing or covering of the body from the waist downward.
   (B)   Nor shall any licensee, or any agent, servant or employee of a
licensee, permit or allow any employee or guest or any other person whomever to
solicit or encourage the purchasing of any alcoholic liquor or beverage of any
description, or the giving of any gratuity or gift by any patron or guest to or
for the benefit of such employee or guest.
   (C)   The following kinds of conduct on premises in this village licensed to
sell alcoholic liquor are prohibited:
      (1)   The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts;
      (2)   The actual or simulated exhibition, touching, caressing, or
fondling of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals;
      (3)   The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, buttocks, pubic
hair, anus, vulva or genitals;
      (4)   The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the
licensed premises who exposes to view any portion of such person’s breasts,
buttocks, genitals, vulva or anus; and
      (5)   The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live
performance of which are prohibited by the regulations quoted above.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-12) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.052 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage
of such liquor for such sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition,
and shall be kept in full compliance with the codes regulating the condition of
the premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-13) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 410 ILCS 650/1 et seq.
§ 111.053 DISEASED EMPLOYEES.
   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor, any person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of any
contagious disease, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful
for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work
in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation
or distribution of such liquor.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-14) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 410 ILCS 650/10
§ 111.054 HEALTH PERMIT.
   Every licensee shall have, at all times, a valid operating permit from the
County Health Department which regulates health standards, if applicable.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-15)
§ 111.055 PEDDLING.
   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in this village.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-16) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 111.056 GAMBLING.
   It is unlawful to keep, place, maintain or operate any gambling device or
instrument in and upon the premises used or occupied as a place where alcoholic
liquor is sold or given away except for a licensed video gaming machine or
machines in accordance with this chapter and the laws of the state. It shall be
unlawful for any licensee, or any agent and/or employee of a licensee, to give
or award a cash prize or equivalent to any person playing any devices or
machines defined as a coin-operated amusement device pursuant to § 7-4-1 of the
Illinois Revised Code except for a licensed video gaming machine or machines in
accordance with this chapter and the laws of the state.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-17) (Ord. 16-19, passed 9-12-2016) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/28-1
§ 111.057 DISORDERLY HOUSE.
   Any person licensed under this chapter shall not suffer or permit any
disorder, drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful games or riotous or
disorderly conduct in any house or premises kept or occupied by such person for
the sale of liquor.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-18) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 111.058 PROHIBITED SALES; GENERALLY.
   No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person or to any person
known by him or her to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane or mentally
ill. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall
sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of
21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-19)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 111.059 PERSONS SELLING LIQUOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to attend any
bar or to sell, draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail
premises.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-20) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1
§ 111.060 UNLAWFUL PURCHASE OF LIQUOR.
   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic
liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in such person’s possession.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-21) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 111.061 IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   If a licensee or any agent or employee of the licensee, believes or
has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of the age of the prospective recipient, such person shall,
before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of
positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in
the performance of that officer’s official duties.
   (B)   Proof that the licensee or the licensee’s employee or agent demanded,
was shown, and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any transaction
forbidden by this section is competent evidence and may be considered in any
criminal prosecution therefore or in any proceedings for the suspension or
revocation of any license based thereon.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-22)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 111.062 TRANSFER OF IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use
the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this chapter. The consumption of alcoholic
liquor by any person under the age of 21 years is forbidden.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-23)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 111.063 POSTING WARNING.
   In every licensed business where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be
displayed at all times in a prominent place, a printed card which shall be
supplied by the Municipal Clerk, and which shall read as follows:
 
UNDERAGE LIQUOR WARNING
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UP TO $750 UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THIS VILLAGE IF
YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF
PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
 
(2009 Code, § 21-3-24) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.064 EXCLUSIONARY PROVISION.
   The possession and dispensing or consumption by any person of alcoholic
liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the
consumption by any person under the direct supervision and approval of the
parent or parents of such person in the privacy of a home is not prohibited by
this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-25)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 111.065 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant admittance to the premises for which
a license has been issued at any time upon the verbal request of the Chief of
Police, any police officer or the Liquor Commissioner for the purpose of making
an inspection of such premises or any part thereof.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-26) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-4
§ 111.066 BOOKS AND RECORDS; AVAILABLE UPON REASONABLE NOTICE AND MAINTAINED IN
STATE RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every retail licensee to make books and records
available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and control
by the Local Commissioner having jurisdiction over the licensee. Such books and
records need not be maintained on the licensed premises, but must be maintained
in the state.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-27)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-10
§ 111.067 RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSEE.
   In addition to the restrictions on licensing, the holder of a license is
subject to the following restrictions.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any licensee to accept, receive or borrow money or
anything of value directly or indirectly from any manufacturer or distributor
of alcoholic liquor.
(235 ILCS 5/6-5)
   (B)   No licensee licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall deny
or permit any agent or employee of the licensee to deny any person the full and
equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of
any premises in which alcoholic liquor is authorized to be sold subject only to
the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all
citizens.
(235 ILCS 5/6-17)
   (C)   No licensee shall sell liquor to any persons on credit, or in payment
for services rendered but this does not apply to clubs and hotels and liquor
purchased for consumption off the premises.
(235 ILCS 5/6-19)
   (D)   No licensee shall fill or refill in whole or in part any original
package of alcohol with the same or other liquor and no liquor shall be sold
except in original packages.
(235 ILCS 5/6-22)
   (E)   No alcoholic liquor shall be sold or delivered in any building
belonging to or under the control of the village except in connection with the
operation of an established food service facility or at a site specifically
provided for in the Act and where dram shop insurance coverage is provided.
(235 ILCS 5/6-15)
   (F)   An established place of business is a prerequisite to the issuance of
a license. Revocation of a license when a licensee ceases to operate the
business before the license expires is within the authority of the Commissioner
on the grounds of nonuse.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-28)
§ 111.068 SELLING FALSE IDENTIFICATION.
   Any person who sells, gives, or furnishes to any person under the age of 21
years any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of the
age and identity of such person or who sells, gives or furnishes to any person
under the age of 21 years evidence of age and identification of any other
person is guilty of violating this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-29) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 111.069 FALSE IDENTIFICATION.
   Any person under the age of 21 years who presents or offers to any licensee,
or any agent or employee of a licensee, any written, printed or photostatic
evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not actually such
person’s own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic
beverage, or who has in such person’s possession any false or fraudulent,
written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity, is guilty of
violating this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-30) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 111.070 UNDERAGED DRINKING ON STREETS.
   Any person under the age of 21 years who has any alcoholic beverage in such
person’s possession on any street or highway or in any public place, or in any
place open to the public is guilty of violating this chapter. This section does
not apply to possession by a person under the age of 21 years making a delivery
of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance of the order of such person’s parent or
in pursuance of such person’s employment.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-31)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 111.071 RESIDENTIAL DRINKING.
   (A)   Any person shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter where such
person knowingly permits a gathering at a residence which such person occupies
of two or more persons where any one or more of the persons is under 21 years
of age and the following factors also apply:
      (1)   The person occupying the residence knows that any such person under
the age of 21 is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic beverage;
      (2)   The possession or consumption of the alcohol by the person under 21
years of age is not otherwise permitted by this chapter; and
      (3)   The person occupying the residence knows that the person under the
age of 21 leaves the residence in an intoxicated condition.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section where the residence has an owner and
a tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-32) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 111.072 RENTING HOTEL ROOMS FOR DRINKING.
   Any person who rents a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or agent
thereof for the purpose of or with the knowledge that such room shall be used
for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21 years
shall be guilty of violating this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 21-3-33) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/6-16
§ 111.073 TEMPORARY ADOPTION OF STATE GUIDELINES FOR OUTDOOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Temporary adoption of state guidelines for outdoor service. All
license holders authorized by the State Commission to sell alcoholic liquor,
non-alcoholic liquor and food at retail for consumption off the licensed
premises may conduct “in-person” in accordance with state law.
   (B)   Suspension of certain ordinance provisions. All liquor license holders
are permitted to establish outdoor seating areas for service and are permitted
to serve alcohol in such area. The outdoor area must comply with any rules and
regulations established by the Liquor Commissioner. All sales must be conducted
outside of the permitted license structure and patrons may not be allowed
inside the licensed structure for the purpose of mingling, loitering, consuming
food and beverages, or purchasing food and beverages.
   (C)   Powers of Liquor Commissioner. The Village President, as Liquor
Commissioner, is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations
addressing the temporary relaxation of certain provisions for outdoor service.
The Village President is hereby authorized to allow establishments to
temporarily reduce required parking to open space for outdoor service,
including closing public parking directly adjacent to a licensed premise. The
Village President is hereby authorized to impose discipline upon a licensed
establishment in violation of the code or the rules and regulations including,
but not limited to, revocation of the temporary privileges granted herein.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village President may only expand rights of
licensees to the extent provided by state law, state executive orders,
regulations promulgated by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, Restore
Illinois operating guidance by the Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic
Opportunity, the Illinois Department of Public Health, or the like, and the
Village President cannot expand rights greater than those allowed by the state
and cannot promulgate rules that directly conflict with the code provisions not
suspended herein.
   (D)   Sunset. This chapter shall immediately cease and no longer be of
effect if and when either of the following occurs:
      (1)   Bars and restaurants are allowed to serve food and beverages on and
off premises as they were prior to the Governor’s restrictions put in place due
to the COVID-19 pandemic;
      (2)   The Illinois Liquor Control Commission issues a compliance
directive that conflicts with this chapter or any part hereof; or
      (3)   By ordinance passed by the village that conflicts with this chapter
or any part hereof, or which repeals this chapter.
(Ord. 20-11, passed 5-27-2020)
§ 111.074 RULES FOR TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SERVICE FOR LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   A licensee may serve alcoholic liquor, as authorized by his or her
primary classification, outside of the permanent structure and off his or her
premises for consumption purposes only, including onto a defined portion of the
village’s streets, alleys and/or sidewalks (hereinafter “permitted area”),
subject to the following restrictions and conditions:
      (1)   Providing temporary fencing around the permitted area and no
alcoholic liquor is permitted outside of said designated and fenced area. The
fencing shall provide at least one primary means of ingress and egress around
the permitted area, as well as an emergency exit, unless additional areas or
exits are necessary for fire and safety reasons as determined by the Village
Liquor Commissioner;
      (2)   The holder of the license shall be responsible for monitoring the
means of ingress and egress, as well as other areas of the permitted area so as
to provide for adequate crowd control and to prevent any alcoholic liquors from
being removed from the permitted area by invitees or customers;
      (3)   The holder of the license shall be required to participate in a
meeting with representatives from the village’s law enforcement officers to
review the physical layout of the site for the event and the designated area,
to address the fencing and all other safety issues;
      (4)   The holder of the license is responsible for removal of all refuse,
litter, debris, garbage and the like from the permitted area within two hours
of the close of business for the day. Any license holder that fails to remove
all refuse, litter, debris, garbage and the like as required shall be billed
for the village’s services in performing such removal which the holder agrees
to pay within 60 days of billing;
      (5)   The holder of the license, or an employee or agent thereof, shall
be responsible for checking the identification of all invitees or guests that
will consume alcoholic liquor within the permitted area and shall provide a
wristband or other form of identification to demonstrate the individual is 21
years of age or over;
      (6)   The holder of the license is required to provide necessary restroom
facilities as determined by the village if such restroom facilities do not
exist at the permitted area;
      (7)   Proper barriers and signage are erected to protect the permitted
area as approved by the village law enforcement and state law; and
      (8)   The license holder shall indemnify the village for any and all
damages or claims associated with the event and permit and shall be responsible
for any damage done to village property associated with the event and permit.
   (B)   The licensee shall be subject to all other regulations governing the
class of license held by the licensee, including but not limited to,
regulations governing hours and the sale of food, except as specifically
amended herein.
(Ord. 20-11, passed 5-27-2020)
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
§ 111.085 OWNER OF PREMISES PERMITTING VIOLATION.
   If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee
derives the right to possession of such premises, or the agent of such owner or
person shall knowingly permit the licensee to use said licensed premises in
violation of the terms of this chapter, said owner, agent or other person shall
be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter to the same extent as said
licensee and be subject to the same punishment.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-1) Penalty, see §
111.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/10-2
§ 111.086 ACTS OF AGENT OR EMPLOYEE; LIABILITY; KNOWLEDGE.
   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other
agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of
such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in
the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by such
licensee or employer personally.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/10-3
§ 111.087 REVOCATION OF LICENSE AFTER CONVICTION.
   Whenever any licensee shall be convicted of any violation of this chapter,
the license of said licensee may, in the discretion of the Local Commissioner,
be revoked and forfeited and all fees paid thereon shall be forfeited, and it
shall thereafter be unlawful and shall constitute a further violation of this
chapter for said licensee to continue to operate under such license.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-3)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/10-4
§ 111.088 REVOCATION OF LICENSE WHEN EMPLOYEE CONVICTED.
   Whenever any officer, director, manager or other employee in a position of
authority of any licensee under this chapter shall be convicted of any
violation of this chapter while engaged in the course of such person’s
employment or while upon the premises described by the license, the license
shall be revoked and the fees paid thereon forfeited, both as to the holder of
the license and as to the premises, as if said licensee had been convicted.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-4)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/10-5
§ 111.089 MISBRANDING.
   Any person who shall knowingly possess, sell or in any way dispose of any
alcoholic liquor under any other than the proper name or brand known to the
trade as designating the kind and quality of the contents of the package or
other containers of the alcoholic liquor, or who shall cause any such act to be
done, shall forfeit the alcoholic liquor and the packages and containers to the
state and shall be subject to the punishment and penalties provided for
violation of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/10-6
§ 111.090 ABATEMENT OF PLACE USED IN VIOLATION.
   Every lot, parcel or tract of land, and every building, structure, tent,
railroad car, boat, wagon, vehicle, establishment or place whatsoever, together
with all furniture, fixtures, ornaments and machinery located thereon, wherein
there shall be conducted any unlawful sale of any alcoholic liquor, or whereon
or wherein there shall be kept, stored, concealed or allowed any alcoholic
liquor intended for illegal sale or to be sold, disposed of or in any other
manner used in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated as provided by the laws of
this state for the abatement of public nuisances.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-6)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/10-7
§ 111.091 USE OF PREMISES FOR ONE YEAR AFTER REVOCATION.
   When any license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted
for the same premises for a period of one year thereafter.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-7)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-13
§ 111.092 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   The Local Commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties
with respect to licenses granted under this chapter:
   (A)   In addition to, and not limited by, the specific penalties set out for
violations of specific sections of this chapter, the Local Commissioner may
suspend for 30 days or revoke any liquor license issued under this chapter for
violation of any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
licensee or any licensee’s agent, servant or employee;
   (B)   To suspend or revoke any liquor license if the licensee makes any
false statement or misrepresentation in the application for a license;
   (C)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by him or her or
by the Local Commissioner or by the State Commission have been or are being
violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in
connection therewith;
   (D)   To notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under the
General Not for Profit Corporation Act or a foreign corporation functioning as
a club in this state under a certificate of authority issued under that Act has
violated this chapter by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic
liquor without a retailer’s license;
   (E)   To receive complaint from any citizen within the Local Commissioner’s
jurisdiction that any of the provisions of this Act, or any rules or
regulations adopted pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated and to act
upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided; and
   (F)   The Local Commissioner shall also have the power to levy fines in
accordance with §
111.999.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-8)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/4-4
§ 111.093 COMPLAINT BY RESIDENTS.
   (A)   Any five residents of the village shall have the right to file a
complaint with the Liquor Commissioner, stating that a licensee under this
chapter has been or is violating the provisions of this chapter or any
amendments hereto, or of any of the statutes of this state, enacted with
reference to the control of liquor. Such complaint shall be made in writing and
shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining.
   (B)   The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule or regulation
believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which such belief
is based. If the Liquor Commissioner is satisfied that the complaint
substantially charges a violation, and that from the facts alleged, there is
reasonable cause for such belief, the Local Commissioner shall set the matter
for hearing, and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of
such hearing and of the particular charges in the complaint.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-9)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-7
§ 111.094 APPEALS FROM ORDER OF LIQUOR COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   Except as provided in this section, any order or action of a Local
Liquor Control Commissioner levying a fine or refusing to levy a fine on a
licensee, granting or refusing to grant a license, revoking or suspending or
refusing to revoke or suspend a license or refusing for more than 30 days to
grant a hearing upon a complaint to revoke or suspend a license may within 20
days after notice of such order or action by appealed by any resident of the
village under the jurisdiction of the Liquor Commissioner or any person
interested, to the State Commission.
   (B)   In any case where a licensee appeals to the State Commission from an
order or action of the Liquor Commissioner having the effect of suspending or
revoking a license, denying a renewal application or refusing to grant a
license, the licensee shall resume the operation of the licensed business
pending the decision of the State Commission and the expiration of the time
allowed for an application for rehearing. If an application for rehearing is
filed, the licensee shall continue the operation of the licensed business until
the denial of the application or, if the rehearing is granted, until the
decision on rehearing.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-11)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-9
§ 111.095 SUBSEQUENT VIOLATIONS IN A YEAR.
   In any case in which a licensee appeals to the State Commission a suspension
or revocation by a Local Liquor Control Commissioner that is the second or
subsequent such suspension or revocation placed on that licensee within the
preceding 12-month period, the licensee shall consider the suspension or
revocation to be in effect until a reversal of the Liquor Commissioner’s action
has been issued by the State Commission and shall cease all activity otherwise
authorized by the license. The State Commission shall expedite, to the greatest
extent possible, its consideration of any appeal that is an appeal of a second
or subsequent suspension or revocation within the past 12-month period.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-12)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-9
§ 111.096 APPEAL LIMITATIONS FOR SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION.
   Any appeal of the decision and findings of the Liquor Commissioner in §
111.095 shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings
of said Liquor Commissioner. The official record shall be a “certified official
record” of the proceedings taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or
certified shorthand reporter. A copy of this record shall be filed by the
Liquor Commissioner within five days after notice of the filing of such appeal
is received by the Village from State Commission.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-13)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-9
§ 111.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   The Liquor Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued by
the Local Commissioner if the Local Commissioner determines that the licensee
has violated any of the provisions of the Illinois Liquor Act, any valid
ordinance adopted by the village, any applicable rule or regulation established
by the Liquor Commissioner or the State Commission which is not inconsistent
with law.
      (1)   Fine as opposed to suspension or revocation. In addition to the
suspension, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner in any county or village may
levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not
exceed $1,000 for a first violation within a 12-month period, $1,500 for a
second violation within a 12-month period, and $2,500 for a third or subsequent
violation within a 12-month period. Each day on which a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than $15,000 in fines under
this division (A) may be imposed against any licensee during the period of his
or her license. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the general
corporate fund of the municipal treasury.
      (2)   Revocation and suspension: notice. However, no such license shall
be so revoked or suspended and no licensee shall be fined except after a public
hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with a three-day written
notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and
defend. All such hearings shall be open to the public and the Liquor
Commissioner shall reduce all evidence to writing and shall maintain an
official record of the proceedings. If the Liquor Commissioner has reason to
believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will
immediately threaten the welfare of the community, the Local Commissioner may,
upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and
without notice or hearing order the licensed premises closed for not more than
seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period,
except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another
business or businesses on the licensed premises such order shall not be
applicable to such other business or businesses.
      (3)   Hearing. The Liquor Commissioner shall, within five days after such
hearing, if the Local Commissioner determines after such hearing that the
license should be revoked or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such
determination in a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a
copy of such order within the five days upon the license. The findings of the
Commissioner shall be predicated upon competent evidence.
(2009 Code, § 21-4-10)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 235 ILCS 5/7-5 and P.A. 89-0063
CHAPTER 112: RAFFLES
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Administration
   
112.03   License required
   
112.04   Applications for license
   
112.05   Application: issuance
   
112.06   Prohibited licensees
   
112.07   Restrictions on the conduct of raffles
   
112.08   Records
   
112.09   Term and fees
   
112.10   Limited construction
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
      RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in § 28-2(b) of the Criminal Code
of 1961, conducted by an organization licensed under this subchapter in which:
         (a)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a
chance, presented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of
numbers, or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be
designated the winning chance; and
         (b)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by
some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the
part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the
winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited
sporting contest.
   (B)   The definitions contained in 230 ILCS 15/2 are hereby adopted by
reference as if fully set out herein.
(2009 Code, § 7-3-1)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/1
§ 112.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The President is hereby charged with the administration of the appropriate
provisions of this chapter, and may appoint persons to assist in the exercise
of the powers and the performance of the duties herein provided, including, but
not limited to, the members of his or her staff, the Village Attorney, the
Village Clerk and the Chief of Police.
(2009 Code, § 7-3-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/2
§ 112.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or organization shall conduct or partake in the selling of
raffle chances within the limits and territory of this village without having a
license to do so issued by the President in a manner hereinafter provided and a
valid license for such purpose as provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   (B)   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable,
labor, fraternal, educational or veterans’ organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five years immediately before making application for a license and
which have had during that entire five-year period a bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out their objectives or to a non-profit fundraising
organization that the licensing authority determines is organized for the sole
purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group
of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an
illness, disability, accident or disaster.
(230 ILCS 15/2)
      (1)   The above mentioned types of organizations shall be defined
pursuant to the Illinois Compiled Statutes and incorporated herein;
      (2)   No person or organization shall be issued more than one license in
a period of one week;
      (3)   The manager of a raffle game shall give a fidelity bond in the sum
of $1,000 in the performance of his or her duties. The President or his or her
designated representative is authorized to waive requirement for bond by
including a waiver provision in the license issued, provided that the license
containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by majority vote of the
members of the licensed organization. The terms of the bond shall provide that
notice shall be given in writing to the licensing authority not less than 30
days prior to its cancellation; and
      (4)   Any license issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable.
(2009 Code, § 7-3-3)
§ 112.04 APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   The President is authorized to grant and issue licenses to eligible
organizations to conduct raffles and to participate in the sale of raffle
tickets within the limits and territory of the village upon the conditions and
in the manner provided by this chapter and by the Act of the General Assembly
of the state, and not otherwise. Such license shall be in writing, signed by
the President and attested by the Village Clerk with the seal of his or her
office affixed thereto.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of a license, the applicant shall submit to the
Village Clerk an application, in triplicate, in writing and under oath stating
the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the organization;
      (2)   The type of organization that is conducting the raffle, i.e.,
religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, veterans or other;
      (3)   The length of time the organization has continually existed
immediately before making application for a license;
      (4)   The applicant shall give the aggregate retail value of all prizes
or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle;
      (5)   The applicant will give the maximum retail value of each prize
awarded by a licensee in a single raffle;
      (6)   The amount that the organization plans to charge for each raffle
chance issued or sold;
      (7)   The time and location where the raffle is to be held;
      (8)   The purpose for which the proceeds of the raffle will be used;
      (9)   The name and address of the person conducting and performing the
raffle, and his or her relationship with the organization;
      (10)   The last date which the applicant has applied for a raffle
license;
      (11)   The area in which the organization plans to sell or issue its
raffle chances; and
      (12)   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony.
(2009 Code, § 7-3-4)
§ 112.05 APPLICATION: ISSUANCE.
   All licenses issued by the President or Village Clerk are subject to the
following restrictions.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances
without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   The license and application for a license shall specify the area or
areas within the licensing authority in which raffle chances will be sold or
issued, the time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the
time of determination in winning chances, and the location or locations with
which winning chances will be determined.
   (C)   The application shall contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-
for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization signed by the
presiding officer and the secretary of that organization.
   (D)   The President shall act upon a license application within 30 days from
the date of application.
   (E)   The application for a license shall be prepared in accordance with
this chapter.
   (F)   A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles as defined in
this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 7-3-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/3
§ 112.06 PROHIBITED LICENSEES.
   The following are ineligible for any raffle license:   
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;   
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in divisions (A),
(B) or (C) above has a propriety, equitable or credit interest, or in which
such a person is active or employed;
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or
(C) above is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not; and
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or
(C) above is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as
defined by this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 7-3-6)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/3
§ 112.07 RESTRICTIONS ON THE CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine a winning chance
or chances in a raffle only from an organization which has also been licensed
under the Raffle Act.
   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
   (F)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting
of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the
area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian.
   (G)   If a lessor rents premises where a winning chance or chances on a
raffle are determined, the lessor shall not be criminally liable if the person
who uses the premises for the determining of winning chances does not hold a
license issued by the governing body of any county or municipality under the
provisions of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 7-3-7)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/4
§ 112.08 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from the gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description
of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment.
   (B)   (1)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the state,
and placed in a separate account.
      (2)   Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The
person who accounts for the gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the
operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other
revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership and to the village its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds
from raffles and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required by this
section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three years,
and the organization shall make available their records relating to operation
of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(2009 Code, § 7-3-8)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/6
§ 112.09 TERM AND FEES.
   (A)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $25,000.
   (B)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed $15,000.
   (C)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall not exceed $100.
   (D)   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
shall not exceed 120 days;
   (E)   Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for one
raffle and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 7-3-9)
§ 112.10 LIMITED CONSTRUCTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting or
operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than
raffles as provided for herein.
(2009 Code, § 7-3-10)
Editor’s note:
   Political committees are required by 230 ILCS 15/8.1 to secure raffle
licenses from the State Board
    of Elections.
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 230 ILCS 15/2
CHAPTER 113: HOME KITCHEN OPERATIONS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Direct sales conditions
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAKED GOODS. Food that includes, but is not limited to, breads, cookies,
cakes, pastries and high-acid fruit pies including: apple; apricot; grape;
peach; plum; quince; orange; nectarine; tangerine; blackberry; boysenberry;
cherry; cranberry; strawberry; red currants; or a combination of these fruits.
   HOME KITCHEN OPERATION. A person who produces or packages non-potentially
hazardous food in a kitchen of that person’s primary domestic residence for
direct sale by the owner or a family member, or for sale by a religious,
charitable or non-profit organization, stored in the residence where the food
is made.
   POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD. A food that is potentially hazardous according
to the Department of Public Health administrative rules, generally meaning food
that requires time and temperature control for safety to limit pathogenic
microorganism growth or toxin formation. The following are potentially
hazardous and prohibited from production and direct sale by a home kitchen
operation: pumpkin pie; sweet potato pie; cheesecake; custard pie; creme pie;
and pastries with potentially hazardous filling or toppings.
(2009 Code, § 7-4-1)
§ 113.02 DIRECT SALES CONDITIONS.
   The direct sale of baked goods from home kitchen operations is allowed in
the village pursuant to 410 ILCS 625/3.6 and subject to the following
conditions:
   (A)   Monthly gross sales do not exceed $1,000;
   (B)   The food is not a potentially hazardous food;
   (C)   A notice is provided to the purchaser that the product was produced in
a home kitchen;
   (D)   The food package is affixed with a label or other written notice as
provided to the purchaser that includes:
      (1)   The common or usual name of the food product; and
      (2)   Allergic labeling as specified in the federal labeling requirements
by the United States Food and Drug Administration.
   (E)   The food is sold directly to the consumer;
   (F)   The food is stored in the residence where it is produced or packaged;
and
   (G)   Home kitchen operations may be inspected by the Department of Public
Health or the County Health Department in the event of a complaint or disease
outbreak.
(2009 Code, § 7-4-2) (Ord. 16-04, passed 3-14-2016)
CHAPTER 114: FOOD TRUCKS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Permit required
   
114.03   Application for permit; fee
   
114.04   Requirements
   
114.05   Investigation of applicant
   
114.06   Issuance or denial of permit
   
114.07   Expiration of permit; renewal
   
114.08   Revocation of permit
   
114.09   Appeals
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIXED POINT. The location of a mobile food vending operation that is the
primary place from which the business will operate within the village.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. A food vending operation that prepares/serves food from
a permitted vehicle, trailer or cart.
   SPECIAL EVENT. For the purposes of mobile food vending, a SPECIAL EVENT
shall mean a temporary operation and location, as part of an event or gathering
such as fundraisers, company picnics, block parties, weddings and the like.
(Ord. 19-09, passed 4-8-2019)
§ 114.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to engage in such
business within the village without first obtaining a permit in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   A violation of this section shall be subject to penalty.
(Ord. 19-09, passed 4-8-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE.
   (A)   Application. Every mobile food vendor shall, prior to engaging in such
activity, makes application to the village for a mobile food vendor permit with
the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and federal employer identification number of the
business;
      (2)   A brief description of the nature of the business;
      (3)   Name and address of applicant;
      (4)   The length of time and the hours of operation the applicant wishes
to be engaged in such activity (special event permit or fixed point mobile food
vendor permit);
      (5)   A description of the vehicle, trailer or cart including any license
plate number or other means of identification; and
      (6)   A drawing depicting the location of the vehicle, trailer or cart
and identifying any additional requirements as required in this chapter.
   (B)   Fee.
      (1)   At the same time of filing the application, a fee equal to the cost
of the investigation or the current fee charged by the investigation service
provider shall be delivered to the village payable to the village or the
investigation service provider, as the case may be, at the time the license
application is submitted to cover the cost of investigation.
 
      (2)   Further, at the same time of filing the application, the following
fees shall be paid to the village by the applicant:
         (a)   Special event mobile food vendor permit: $25 per permit; and
         (b)   Fixed point mobile food vendor permit: $300 per period of three
consecutive months.
   (C)   False information. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage as a
mobile food vendor within the village if any of the information furnished by
the applicant, as required by this chapter, which is material to his or her
character and responsibility or to the activity he or she proposed to engage
in, has been falsely stated or is converse to his or her character.
(Ord. 19-09, passed 4-8-2019 ; Ord. 20-13, passed 8-10-2020 ) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.04 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Special event mobile food vendors.
      (1)   Permits for the operation of special event mobile food vending will
be reviewed on a case-by-case basis with an emphasis on public safety. Zoning,
location, hours of operation, parking requirements and the like will be
reviewed as a special event following the same process used for outdoor special
events permits defined in this chapter; however, mobile food vendors shall not
be permitted in any village parks. Notwithstanding the foregoing, special event
permits to operate in the parks may be granted by the Village Board, in the
Village Board’s sole discretion, for fundraisers being held in a village park
by a not-for-profit company.
      (2)   All mobile food vendors for special events shall possess a permit
and remain in good standing with the village.
   (B)   Fixed point mobile food vendors. Fixed point mobile food vendors are
permitted in B-l, B-2, I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts, except mobile food vendors
shall not be permitted in any village parks, and provided the location meets
the following:
      (1)   Each vendor must receive written authorization from the property
owner on the form provided by the village;
      (2)   The location cannot be within 250 feet from the property line of
any other permanent prepared food service vendor. This provision may be waived
in writing by the impacted business(es);
      (3)   The entire vehicle, trailer or cart must comply with all setback
requirements for the zoning district in which the mobile food vending operation
will occur. A minimum 25-foot setback is required for any zoning classification
if the required setbacks are less. The location of mobile food vending
operations and equipment shall be entirely at or behind the front plane of any
building or structure related to the primary use of the property. An exception
will be made to allow mobile food vendors to operate beyond the front plane of
the building when a business or property has more than 100 parking stalls
(subject to staff review);
      (4)   A minimum of five dedicated parking spaces beyond those required
for the primary business are required;
      (5)   Fixed point mobile food vendors shall not operate before 10:00 a.m.
or after 9:00 p.m. No vehicle, trailer or equipment related to mobile food
vending operations shall be on the property from 10:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.;
      (6)   Fixed point mobile food vendors shall only be permitted to operate
from May 1 through the second to last full weekend in October; and
      (7)   A drawing to scale depicting the location of any vehicles or
equipment used in the mobile food vending operation, including compliance with
setbacks and dedicated parking spaces is required to be submitted with the
application for a fixed point mobile food vendor permit.
   (C)   General requirements.
      (1)   Signs. No freestanding signage, flags, banners and the like shall
be allowed.
      (2)   Public health and safety. All mobile food vendors shall meet public
safety requirements, including health, sanitation, and fire and life safety
requirements. Food may only be dispensed from a properly sanitized conveyance
licensed by the County Public Health Department. Applicants shall demonstrate
proof of valid food safety permit from the County Health Department and comply
with all required regulations during the duration of the village’s permit.
Failure to maintain a food safety permit from the County Health Department will
result in an immediate termination of the village’s mobile food vendor permit.
      (3)   Fire and life safety. Requirements for fire and life safety shall
generally be the same as those applied to other restaurants within the village.
Additionally, mobile food vendors preparing food on-site shall conform with
NFPA standards for Mobile and Temporary Cooking Operations (NFPA 1: Fire Code,
Ch. 50.7 and annex “B”) and standards for Ventilation Control and Fire
Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations (NFPA 96) and ensure gas or fuels
are separated from the cooking/serving area and smoke and carbon monoxide
detectors are installed.
      (4)   Safety inspections. Any vehicle over 8,000 pounds and trailers with
a gross weight over 5,000 pounds shall obtain an State Department of
Transportation certificate of safety. Safety inspections are required every six
months. Garages or service stations licensed by the Illinois Department of
Transportation (IDOT) may conduct safety inspections.
      (5)   Sight triangle. Vehicles and equipment shall be arranged so as not
to limit sight of vehicles and drivers on village streets.
      (6)   Advertisement by loud noises or bright lights. No mobile food
vendor shall carry on his or her trade by means of loud outcries or other
noises that unreasonably alarm residents of the village. No mobile food vendor
shall employ lights that create a nuisance across lot lines. Determination of
nuisance or unreasonable alarm shall be made by the Village Manager or his or
her duly appointed agent.
      (7)   Sanitization. Mobile food vendors shall have access to a toilet
with hand sanitization, within 300 feet of the portable vending operation, at
all hours that the facility is open for business.
      (8)   Waste. Mobile food vendors shall provide a stable waste receptacle
that is emptied and maintained on a regular basis.
      (9)   Electricity. If any power is required, it shall be protected with
ground fault circuit interrupters and be provided through a properly sized, UL
approved card that is safely installed.
      (10)   Inspection. Staff will conduct inspections to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter as necessary. A re-inspection fee of $25
may be charged for failed inspections.
(Ord. 19-09, passed 4-8-2019 ; Ord. 20-13, passed 8-10-2020 )
§ 114.05 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   (A)   Verification of information. The Village Clerk shall promptly submit
the complete application to the Police Department for verification.
   (B)   Police Department. The Police Department shall complete the
verification and investigation in no more than 30 days.
(Ord. 19-09, passed 4-8-2019)
§ 114.06 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Submittal to village.
      (1)   All such applications, upon being processed by the Police
Department, shall be submitted to the Village Manager with a determination as
to whether or not all requirements of this chapter have been met.
      (2)   If the applicant does not satisfactorily meet any of the above
requirements or background verification, no permit should be issued. If the
above requirements are satisfactorily met, then a permit shall be issued.
   (B)   Contents of permit; transferability.
      (1)   The permit herein required shall express the time the mobile food
vendor is permitted to operate and continue, the name of the person and the
article, identification of a vehicle, if any, and whether said permittee will
pass from place to place or remain at a fixed point or place within the
village.
      (2)   Permits shall not be assignable or transferable and shall be
identified as a “mobile food vendor permit”, specifying “special event” or
“fixed point” with an identifying number and date of purchase.
      (3)   Each registrant shall affix his or her signature to the “mobile
food vendor permit” as required by this section.
(Ord. 19-09, passed 4-8-2019)
§ 114.07 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT; RENEWAL.
   Fixed-point mobile food vendor permits shall be granted for three
consecutive months and special event mobile food vendor permits shall be for
the period requested within the requirements outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. 19-09, passed 4-8-2019 ; Ord. 20-13, passed 8-10-2020 )
§ 114.08 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Cause for revocation. The permits issued pursuant to this chapter may
be revoked, after notice, for any of the following causes:
 
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for permit; and
      (2)   Any violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Notice of revocation. Notice of revocation of a permit shall be given
in writing and set forth specifically the grounds for revocation.
(Ord. 19-09, passed 4-8-2019)
§ 114.09 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village Manager regarding
the denial of application for a permit as provided in this chapter or in
connection with the revocation of a permit as provided for in this chapter,
shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Such appeal shall be taken by filing a written statement setting forth
the grounds for the appeal, with the Village Manager within 14 days after
notice of the decision by the Village Manager has been mailed to the
applicant’s last known address.
   (C)   The Village Board of Trustees shall schedule a hearing on such appeal
at the next regular Board meeting. Notice of hearing shall be given to such
person in the same manner as provided for notice of hearing on revocation.
(Ord. 19-09, passed 4-8-2019)
CHAPTER 115: CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Section
Franchise Code
   
115.01   Title
   
115.02   Definitions
   
115.03   Grant of franchise
   
115.04   Rights reserved to the grantor
   
115.05   Rights of subscribers
   
115.06   Finance and insurance
   
115.07   Services
   
115.08   Design and construction
   
115.09   Operations and maintenance
   
115.10   Violations
   
115.11   Termination and receivership
   
115.12   Franchise applications
   
115.13   Records
   
115.14   Enforcement mechanism; notice of franchise default
   
115.15   Miscellaneous provisions
Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Fee
   
115.30   Definitions
   
115.31   Cable/video service provider fee imposed
   
115.32   PEG access support fee imposed
   
115.33   Applicable principles
   
115.34   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
115.35   Audits of cable/video service provider
   
115.36   Late fees/payments
Cable and Video Customer Protection Law
   
115.50   Customer service and privacy protection law
   
115.51   Enforcement
   
115.52   Customer credits
 
   
115.99   Penalty
FRANCHISE CODE
§ 115.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Cable Communications
Franchise Code”.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-1) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the content, words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the singular number include
the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
      ADDITIONAL SERVICE. Any service not included in basic service or
institutional service.
      ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. The Village Manager or his or her designee.
      ATTACHMENT POINT. The point at which the grantee’s drop attaches to
subscriber-owned equipment.
      BASIC EQUIPMENT. The lowest service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
      BROADCAST SIGNAL. A signal transmitted over the air to a side public
geographic audience and received by a cable system.
      CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or SYSTEM, CABLE TV SYSTEM, CATV SYSTEM or
BROADBAND COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK OR NETWORK. A system within the village of
antennas, cables, amplifiers, towers, microwave links, cable-casting studios
and any other conductors, converters, terminals, equipment or facilities,
designed and constructed for the primary purpose of distributing television
programming to subscribers or users, and for the secondary purpose of
producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing or distributing audio,
video, digital or other forms of electronic or electrical signals.
      CABLECAST SIGNAL. A nonbroadcast signal that originates within the
facilities of the cable communications system, whether from a live or recorded
source.
      CHANNEL. A frequency band capable of carrying a standard video signal or
some combination of video signals, or a frequency band assigned to carry a
nonstandard video signal or some combination of such video signals.
      COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER. A subscriber who receives a residential service in
a place of business, or anyone whose service is utilized in a business, trade
or profession, including, but not limited to, hotels, motels, bars, restaurants
and other similar establishments.
      COMPLAINT. A billing dispute or service call in which a subscriber is
notifying the grantee of an outage and/or degradation in picture quality.
      CONVERTER or TERMINAL. A device which converts signals from one frequency
to another.
      DROP. The cable and related equipment connecting the system’s plant to
equipment at the subscriber’s premises.
      EDUCATION CHANNEL. Any channel where non-profit educational institutions
are the primary designated programmers.
      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission or its designated
representative(s).
      FRANCHISE. A written legal undertaking or action of the grantor which
awards permission to a specific named person or entity to use the streets and
public ways for the purpose of installing, operating and maintaining a cable
communications system.
      GOVERNMENT CHANNEL. Any channel where local government agencies are the
primary designated programmers and programming is noncommercial informational
programming regarding governmental activities and programs.
      GRANTEE. The entity to which a franchise is granted for the construction,
operation, maintenance and reconstruction of a cable communications system and
the lawful successors, transferees or assignees of said entity.
      GRANTOR. The entity establishing this chapter for territory within its
present and future jurisdiction, its elected governing body and/or such
representative person or entity as it may designate to act on cable
communication matters in its behalf.
      GROSS ANNUAL RECEIPTS or GROSS RECEIPTS. The annual total monies or
revenues actually received by the grantee related to, or stemming from, any
village operations, programming, channel leasing, advertising, interconnection
or retransmission of signals to/from other cable systems, except for taxes
collected by a system grantee on behalf of taxing authorities or franchise fees
if separately stated in customers’ bills.
      HEADEND. That central portion(s) of the system where signals are
introduced into and received from the balance of the system.
      LEASED CHANNEL. Any channel where someone other than the grantor or
grantee is sold the rights to air programming.
      LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL. Any channel where the grantee is the primary
designated programmer.
      MONITORING or TAPPING. Observing or receiving a signal, or the absence of
a signal, where the observer is neither the sending nor receiving party and is
not authorized by the sending and/or receiving party to observe said signal,
whether the signal is observed or received by visual, electronic or any other
means whatsoever.
      NONBROADCAST SIGNAL. A signal that is not involved in over-the-air
broadcast for general public reception.
      OPEN CHANNEL. Any channel that can be received by all subscribers,
without the use of special equipment not normally processed by, or available
to, anyone who may become a subscriber.
      PAY CABLE or PAY SERVICE, PREMIUM SERVICE, PAY-PER-VIEW or PAY
TELEVISION. Signals for which there is a fee or charge to users over and above
the charge for basic service or other tiers of service; provided, however, the
sale or lease of studio facilities, equipment and/or tapes to local users shall
not be deemed pay or premium services.
      PEG CHANNEL. A public, education or government channel.
      PERSON. Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual or
organization authorized to do business in the state, or any natural person.
      PLANT. The transmitting medium and related equipment which transmits
signals between the headend and subscribers, including drops.
      PRIVATE CHANNEL. Any channel carrying material available in intelligible
form only to subscribers provided with special equipment to receive such
signals and render the intelligible.
      PROGRAM or PROGRAMMING. The information content of a signal and the act
or process of creating such content, whether that content is intended to be
pictures and sound, sound only or any other form of information whatsoever.
      PROGRAMMER. Any person or entity who or which provides program material
or information for transmission by means of a system.
      PROPERTY OF GRANTEE. All property owned or leased within the franchise
area by the grantee in the conduct of its system business under a franchise
granted hereunder.
      PUBLIC CHANNEL, COMMUNITY SERVICE CHANNEL or COMMUNITY CHANNEL. Any
channel for which any member of the general public or any community
organization may provide noncommercial, non-profit programming on a
nondiscriminatory basis.
      RESIDENT. Any person residing in the franchised area or as otherwise
defined by applicable law.
      RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER. A subscriber who receives a service in a dwelling
unit, and whose service is not utilized in business, trade or profession.
      SCHOOL. Any non-profit educational institution, public or private.
      SECTION. Any section, division or provision of this chapter or of a
franchise hereunder.
      SERVICE. Any specific kind or type of benefit or ability provided by the
grantee, or group of related benefits or abilities, obtained or made available
to any person or entity, involving the use of a signal transmitted via a cable
communications system, whether the signal and its content are the entire
service or comprise only a part of a service which involves other elements of
any number or kind.
      SERVICE AREA. The Village of Rochester, within its present or future
jurisdiction. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall have the
right to provide cable television system services to the entirety of this
service area. However, any grantee shall not be obligated to serve any areas
already provided service by another franchised cable operator or any other
multi-channel video services provider.
      SERVICE OUTAGE. A complete disruption in cable service.
      STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS. The surface and the space above and below any
public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way or right-of-way of any type
whatsoever.
      SUBSCRIBER. Any person or other entity electing to subscribe to, for any
purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with
its cable system.
      TIER. A channel or combination of signals and/or channels for which a
specific identifiable price is charged.
      UNIT. A discrete place where system services are used, such as a
residence, apartment, office, store and the like.
      USER(S). Any person or entity who either receives services from a cable
system or who accomplishes any purpose by, in part or in whole, transmitting or
receiving information via a cable system, or who creates programming for that
purpose, or who receives and uses programming.
      YEAR. A specific year or part of a year referred to, or a full calendar
year.
   (B)   Terms not defined. Words, terms or phrases not defined herein shall
first mean their special meaning or connotations in any industry, business,
trade or profession where they commonly carry such special meanings. In the
event such special meanings are not common, they shall mean their standard
definitions as set forth in commonly used and accepted dictionaries of the
English language.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-2) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.03 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Authority to grant franchise. The grantor may grant a franchise to any
person who offers to provide a system under and pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Form. A franchise may, at the grantor’s sole option, take the form of
an ordinance, license, permit, contract, agreement, resolution or any other
form elected by the grantor.
   (C)   Grants not required. Consistent with applicable state and federal law,
no provision of this chapter shall require the granting of a franchise when, in
the opinion of the grantor, it is in the public interest not to do so.
   (D)   Purpose. The purpose of a franchise shall be to identify and authorize
its specific grantee and to identify and specify those terms, conditions,
definitions, itemizations, specifications and other particulars of the
agreement between the grantor and grantee which it represents. In so doing a
franchise may clarify, extend and interpret the provisions of this chapter.
Where a franchise and this chapter conflict both shall be liberally interpreted
to achieve a common meaning or requirement. In the event this is not possible
within reasonable limits, the franchise shall prevail.
   (E)   Mutual consideration. The award of a franchise authorizing the use of
public property or public rights for private purposes shall be deemed
consideration by the grantee in the form of agreement to provide the system and
services offered in accordance with the provisions hereof and of the franchise.
   (F)   Compliance with law. Neither this chapter nor a franchise granted
under it relieves the grantee of any requirement of the grantor or of any
ordinance, rule, regulation or specification of the grantor now or hereafter in
effect, including, but not limited to, the payment of all normal permit and
inspection fees so long as said ordinance, rules, regulations or specifications
do not materially conflict with or alter the express terms of this chapter and
the franchise.
   (G)   Franchise nonexclusive. The grantor may, at its option, grant one or
more franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct a cable
communications system. Said franchises shall constitute both a privilege and an
obligation to provide the system and services required by this chapter and the
franchise.
   (H)   Limitation. No privilege shall be granted or conferred by a franchise
except those specifically prescribed herein or in the franchise agreement.
   (I)   Duration. The term of any franchise, and all rights, privileges,
obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be specified in the
franchise agreement. The effective date of any franchise shall be as specified
in the franchise.
   (J)   Status. Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor
specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional
franchises, as it deems appropriate.
   (K)   Use of public streets and ways. For the purposes of operating and
maintaining a cable communications system in the franchised area, a grantee may
place and maintain within the public rights- of-way such property and equipment
as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable communications
system. Prior to construction or alteration of plants in public rights-of-way,
the grantee shall apply for and receive all necessary permits.
   (L)   Use of other utilities. Any person or entity who provides a system or
services as defined herein shall be deemed a grantee and shall not do so except
in accordance with a franchise granted hereunder. If such grantee uses
distribution channels furnished by a telephone company or other public utility,
said grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions hereof as a
“licensee”, and the term “grantee” herein shall include “licensee” in its
meaning.
   (M)   Nontransferable. Except for transfers between and among wholly-owned
subsidiaries of the grantee, or affiliates of the grantee which are wholly-
owned by the same parent, the franchise shall not be sublet or assigned, nor
shall any of the rights or privileges therein granted or authorized be leased,
assigned, sold or transferred, either in whole or in part, nor shall title
thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein,
pass to or vest in any person except the grantee, either by act of the grantee
or by operation of law, without the prior written consent of the grantor, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The granting of such consent shall
not render unnecessary, disapprove or conditionally approve said request within
a reasonable period of time upon the receipt of all reasonably necessary
requested information.
   (N)   Change in control.
      (1)   The grantee shall promptly notify the grantor of any proposed
change in control of the grantee. Such change in control shall make the
franchise null and void unless the grantor shall have consented thereto, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The grantor may condition said
transfer upon reasonable terms and conditions.
      (2)   Except for transfers between and among wholly-owned subsidiaries of
the grantee, or affiliates of the grantee which are wholly-owned by the same
parent, for the purpose of this section, a change in control will exist upon
sale or transfer of 30% or more of the grantee’s stock ownership or other
control even if there is no change in the management entity.
   (O)   Sales notice. The grantee, at least 90 days prior to any franchise
transfer or change in control as heretofore described, shall file with the
grantor a notice of intent to enter into said transfer and then file a
certified copy attesting to said sale within 90 days of approval of said
transfer.
   (P)   Sales approval. Every such transfer or change in control as heretofore
described, whether voluntary or involuntary, shall be deemed void and of no
effect unless the grantee shall have filed said certified copy as is required
and the grantor has given written approval by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
   (Q)   Violation. If the grantee shall violate this section, this franchise
shall terminate subject to all applicable due process safeguards.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-3) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.04 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE GRANTOR.
   (A)   Reservation. There is hereby reserved to the grantor every right it
may have in relation to its power to eminent domain over the grantee’s
franchise and property.
   (B)   Nonwaiver or bar. Neither the granting of any franchise, nor any
provisions hereof, shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any
governmental right or power by the grantor.
   (C)   Delegation of powers. Any right or power in, or duty retained by or
imposed upon the grantor, or any commission, officer, employee, department or
board of the grantor, may be assigned or transferred by the grantor to any
officer, employee, department or board of the grantor.
   (D)   Right of inspection of construction. The grantor shall have the right
to inspect all construction or installation or other physical work performed by
the grantee in connection with the franchise, and to make such tests as it
shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise and
other pertinent provisions of law, so long as said inspection and testing does
not unreasonably interfere with the grantee’s operations.
   (E)   Right to require removal of property. Consistent with applicable law,
at the expiration of the term or any renewal term or extension for which the
franchise is granted, or upon its lawful revocation, expiration or termination,
the grantor shall have the right to require the grantee to remove, at the
grantee’s expense, all portions of its system and any other property from all
streets and public ways within the franchise area within a reasonable period of
time.
   (F)   Right of intervention. The grantor shall have the right of
intervention in any suit, proceeding or other judicial or administrative
proceeding in which the grantor has any material interest, to which the grantee
is party.
   (G)   Place of inspection. The grantor shall have the right to inspect all
relevant information that is reasonably necessary for the exercise of the
grantor’s regulatory authority upon reasonable notice on the grantee’s local
premises at any time during normal business hours, and any grantee records kept
at another place shall, within ten days of the grantor’s request, be made
available for the grantor’s inspection, so long as said inspection does not
unreasonably interfere with the grantee’s operations.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-4) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.05 RIGHTS OF SUBSCRIBERS.
   (A)   Discriminatory practices prohibited. The grantee shall not deny cable
television service or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, or others on
the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age or sexual
preference. The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment
opportunity requirements of federal, state or local governments and shall
comply with all applicable laws and executive and administrative orders
relating to nondiscrimination.
   (B)   Tapping and monitoring. The grantee shall not tap or monitor or permit
any other person controlled by the grantee to tap or monitor any cable, line,
signal input device or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose whatsoever
without the express written consent of the subscriber or a court order
therefor; provided, however, that the grantee shall be entitled to monitor
customer service calls for quality control purposes and to conduct system-wide
or individually addressed “sweeps” for the purpose of verifying system
integrity, controlling return path transmission or checking for unauthorized
connections to the cable television system or service levels or billing for pay
services.
   (C)   Data collection. Except for its own internal use, or in connection
with the provision of cable services, the grantee shall not permit its system
to be used for data collection purposes, nor shall it otherwise collect data
which would reveal the commercial product or other preferences or opinions of
individual subscribers, members of their families or their guests, licensees or
employees, except for the grantee’s own internal uses, unless the grantee shall
have received the prior consent of such subscriber.
   (D)   Revealing subscriber preferences.
      (1)   The grantee shall not reveal individual subscriber preferences,
viewing habits, beliefs, philosophy, creeds or religious beliefs to any third
person, firm, agency, governmental unit or investigating agency without court
authority or prior written consent of the subscriber.
      (2)   Such written consent, if given, shall be limited to a period of
time not to exceed one year or a term agreed upon by the grantee and
subscriber.
      (3)   The grantee shall not condition the delivery or receipt of cable
services to any subscriber on any such consent.
      (4)   Such a subscriber may revoke without penalty or cost any consent
previously made by delivering to the grantee in writing a substantial
indication of his or her intent to so revoke.
   (E)   Other persons affected. The prohibitions contained in this division
(E)(1) through (E)(4) below shall extend and apply to all of the foregoing, as
well as to the grantee:
      (1)   Officers, directors, employees and agents of the grantee;
      (2)   General and limited partners of the grantee;
      (3)   Any person or combination of persons owning, holding or controlling
5% or more of any corporate stock or other ownership interest of the grantee;
      (4)   Any affiliated or subsidiary entity owned or controlled by the
grantee, or in which any officer, director, stockholder, general or limited
partner or person or group of persons owning, holding or controlling any
ownership interest in the grantee, shall own, hold or control 5% or more of any
corporate stock or other ownership interest; and
      (5)   Any person, firm or corporation acting or serving in the capacity
of holding or controlling company of the grantee.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-5) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.06 FINANCE AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   Payments to the grantor.
      (1)   As compensation for any franchise to be granted, and in
consideration of permission to use the streets and public ways of the grantor
for the construction, operation, maintenance and reconstruction of a cable
communications system, the grantee shall pay to the grantor such amounts as
specified in the franchise.
      (2)   Payments due the grantor under this provision shall be computed
annually for the preceding year, and shall be paid within 45 days of the close
of each calendar year. The payment shall be accompanied by a report showing the
basis for the computation and such other relevant facts as may be required by
the grantor to determine the accuracy of a said payment.
   (B)   Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise
payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified
herein, the grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge,
computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the prevailing
commercial prime interest rate in effect upon the due date.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-6) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.07 SERVICES.
   (A)   Nondiscrimination. The grantee shall not discriminate between
individual, nondelinquent subscribers within one type or class in the
availability of services at either standard or differential rates according to
published rate schedules. No charges may be made for individual services except
as listed in published schedules which are available to inspection by anyone at
the grantee’s office quoted by the grantee on the telephone, and displayed or
communicated to all potential subscribers. The grantee may provide discounts to
groups of customers at rates determined by the grantee.
   (B)   Prepayment. The grantee may, at its option, charge subscribers for
services not more than two months in advance unless an individual subscriber
requests a longer period.
   (C)   Disconnect for cause. The grantee may disconnect a subscriber only for
cause, which shall include, without limitation, the following:
      (1)   Payment delinquency in excess of 45 days;
      (2)   Willful or negligent damage to or misappropriation of the grantee’s
property;
      (3)   Monitoring, tapping or tampering with the grantee’s system, signals
or service; and
      (4)   Threats of violence to the grantee’s employees or property.
   (D)   Reconnection. The grantee shall, upon subscriber’s written request,
reconnect service which has been disconnected for payment delinquency when
payment has removed the delinquency. A published standard charge may be made
for reconnection. The grantee shall not be required to make more than three
reconnections for the same subscriber if the disconnections involved were
caused by payment delinquency within the past 24 months. Reconnection for
disconnects covered by divisions (B) or (C) above or this division (D) shall be
at the grantee’s sole discretion.
   (E)   Installations.
      (1)   The grantee shall promptly provide and maintain service to the
residential, commercial and industrial structures as provided in the franchise
agreement, in the service area as defined in the franchise agreement, upon
request of the lawful occupant or owner.
      (2)   In the case of a new drop, the grantee shall advise each subscriber
that he or she has the right to require his or her installation be done over
any route on his or her property, and in any manner he or she may elect which
is technically and economically feasible if he or she so elects, require that
any such request be made in writing. If the subscriber requests installation
other than a standard installation, then the subscriber may be required to pay
a reasonable fee for the time and materials occasioned by the installation and
to sign an agreement releasing the grantee from liability for poor service or
damage to person or property resulting from the nonstandard installation.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, a STANDARD INSTALLATION shall include
installation of drop cable with fittings up to 150 feet from the CATV
distribution system measured along the cable from the centerline of the street
or utility easement through the house wall or at the customer’s option through
the floor from a house vent or crawl space directly to the customer’s entry to
the television set. Also included as part of a standard installation is the
grounding cable, fine tuning of the television set and the provisions of the
appropriate literature.
   (F)   Converters/terminals. At such time as a converter or terminal becomes
necessary for subscribers to have access to services on its system, the grantee
shall make them available to subscribers. The grantee may require each
subscriber who elects to take a converter or terminal to furnish a security
deposit therefor and/or pay a monthly fee.
      (1)   Each device shall be and remain the property of the grantee unless
the grantor approves its sale to the subscriber. The grantee shall be
responsible for maintenance and repair of all equipment owned by the grantee
and may replace it as he or she may from time to time elect, except that
subscriber shall be responsible for loss of or damage to any such device while
in his or her possession.
      (2)   Upon termination or cancellation of subscriber’s service, the
subscriber shall promptly return the grantee’s property to the grantee in the
same condition as received, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
      (3)   The grantee may apply the security deposit against any sum due from
subscriber loss of or damage to such converter exceeding reasonable wear and
tear. In the event that no security deposit has been required, the grantee may
charge the subscriber for any such damage exceeding reasonable wear and tear.
      (4)   If the grantee has no claim against the deposit, the grantee shall
return it, or the balance, to the subscriber.
   (G)   Nonstandard installations. For each nonstandard drop installed, the
grantee may charge the subscriber for the cost of material and labor in excess
of that for a standard drop. The grantee shall provide each subscriber an
estimate of all charges prior to installation and obtain subscriber’s
authorization in advance for all nonstandard drop charges.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-7) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.08 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   System construction. The system shall be constructed in accordance
with the provisions of the franchise agreement.
   (B)   Construction components and techniques. Construction components and
techniques shall be in accordance with the franchise and all applicable law.
   (C)   Technical and performance standards. Consistent with applicable law,
system technical and performance standards shall be in accordance with the
franchise.
   (D)   Construction codes. The grantee shall strictly adhere to all building
and zoning regulations currently or hereafter in force and obtain all necessary
permits. The grantee shall arrange its lines, cables or other appurtenances, on
both public and private property, in such a manner as to cause no unreasonable
interference with the use of said property by any person. In the event of such
interference, the grantor may require the removal of the grantee’s lines,
cables and appurtenances from the property in question. Except for service
drops, the grantee shall give at least 48 hours’ advance notice to all property
owners and the grantor prior to installing any aboveground and underground
structures upon easements located on private property. The grantor shall not
modify its construction requirements subsequent to the completion of
construction so as to require reconstruction or retrofit unless the public
health and safety so requires.
   (E)   System construction schedule.
      (1)   The grantee shall begin to offer cable television service no later
than the schedule contained in the franchise.
      (2)   The grantee shall provide a detailed construction plan indicating
progress schedule, area construction or reconstruction maps, test plan and
projected dates for offering service.
   (F)   Geographical coverage. The grantee shall have the right to design and
construct the system to have the capability to service every residential
structure within the service area of the franchise and any annexations thereto,
as defined and provided by the franchise agreement, with any exceptions
requiring specific the grantor approval. Service shall be provided to
subscribers in accordance with the schedules and line extension policies
specified in the franchise. The route of separate cables serving institutional
subscribers shall be as approved by the grantor and specified in the franchise.
   (G)   Provision of service. After service has been established for any area,
the grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that area
within times and terms set forth in the franchise.
   (H)   Construction default. Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of the
grantee to cause any construction, repair or other necessary work to comply
with the terms of the franchise agreement to be properly completed in, on, over
or under any right-of-way within a time prescribed in the franchise agreement
or the construction permit, the grantor may (but shall not be required to)
cause such work to be completed in whole or in part, and upon so doing shall
submit to the grantee an itemized statement of costs thereof. The grantee shall
be given reasonable notice of the grantor’s intent to exercise this power and
15 days to cure thereafter. The grantee shall, within 30 days of billing, pay
to the grantor the actual costs thereof.
   (I)   Vacation or abandonment. In the event any street, alley, public
highway or portion thereof used by the grantee shall be vacated by the grantor,
or the use thereof discontinued by the grantee, upon reasonable notice, the
grantee shall forthwith remove its facilities therefrom unless specifically
permitted to continue the same, and on the removal thereof, restore, repair or
reconstruct the area where such removal has occurred, to such condition as may
be required by the grantor not in excess of the original condition. In the
event of failure, neglect or refusal of the grantee, after 30 days’ notice by
the grantor to do such work, the grantor may cause it to be done, and the cost
thereof shall be paid by the grantee within 30 days’ notice by a grantor to do
such work, the grantor may cause within 30 days and collection may be made by
the grantor.
   (J)   Abandonment in place. The grantor may, upon written application by the
grantee, approve the abandonment of any property in place by the grantee, under
such terms and conditions as the grantor may approve. Upon grantor-approved
abandonment of any property in place, the grantee shall cause to be executed,
acknowledged and delivered to the grantor such instruments as the grantor shall
prescribe and approve, transferring and conveying the ownership of such
property to the grantor.
   (K)   Removal of system facilities. In the event that the grantee’s plant is
deactivated for a continuous period of 30 days except for reasons outside the
grantee’s control, without prior written notice to and approval by the grantor,
then the grantee shall, at the grantor’s option and at the expense of the
grantee and at no expense to the grantor, and upon demand by the grantor,
promptly remove from any streets or other area all property of the grantee, and
the grantee shall promptly restore the street or any other area from which such
property has been removed to its condition prior to the grantee’s use thereof;
provided, that the grantee shall not be required to remove conduit from
underground, where the grantor may determine no damage to the surface of any
structures may result from such nonremoval.
   (L)   Movement of facilities. In the event it is necessary to temporarily
move or remove any of the grantee’s property at the grantor’s direction for a
public purpose in order lawfully to remove a large object, vehicle, building or
other structure, the grantee, upon reasonable notice, at least seven business
days, shall move, at the expense of the grantee, its property as may be
required to facilitate such movements. No such movement shall be deemed a
taking of the grantee’s property. Nothing herein shall limit the right of the
grantee to seek reimbursement from any party.
   (M)   Undergrounding of cable. Cables shall be installed underground at the
grantee’s cost where all existing utilities are already underground. Previously
installed aerial cable shall be installed underground at the grantee’s pro rata
cost in concert with other utilities when all such other utilities may convert
from aerial to underground construction. If the grantor reimburses all or a
portion of the monetary expenses for similar easement users, the grantor shall
reimburse the grantee in like manner.
   (N)   Facility agreements. No franchise shall relieve the grantee of any
obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of
the grantor, utility company or from others maintaining utilities in streets.
   (O)   Extension of franchise area. If the grantor elects to grant one or
more franchises hereunder, and if thereafter one or more of the franchises
expires or is otherwise ended, the grantor may, if it so elects, require a
remaining grantee, or more than one, to extend its system to provide service to
the area served by the ended franchise; provided, that it is financially
reasonable and the grantee shall not be required to overbuild any existing
system. The terms and requirements of such extension shall not exceed those
contained herein or in the grantee’s franchise.
   (P)   Repair of streets and public ways. Any and all streets and public ways
disturbed or damaged by the grantee or its contractors, during the
construction, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the system, shall be
restored within the time frame and limits specified by the grantor or agent of
the grantor, at the grantee’s expense, to their original condition unless
otherwise authorized in writing by the grantor.
   (Q)   Trimming of trees. The grantee may cut or trim any trees in any
street, alley or public way, and the grantee may cut or trim trees pursuant to
a prior agreement with the owner of property on which they stand, or as
otherwise authorized in writing by the grantor.
   (R)   Reservations of street rights. Nothing in franchise shall prevent the
grantor from constructing, repairing and/or altering any public work. All such
work shall be done, insofar as practicable, in such manner as not to
unnecessarily obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation of any
property of the grantee. However, if any such property of the grantee shall
interfere with the construction, maintenance or repair of any public
improvement, all such property shall be removed or replaced in such manner as
directed by the grantor so that the same shall not interfere with the said
public work, such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of the grantee
if other affected utilities also remove or replace his, her or its property at
his, her or its expenses.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-8) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.09 OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Maintenance and complaints.
      (1)   Business hours. The grantee shall maintain an office open during
all usual business hours, but in no case less than 40 hours per week. The
grantor shall have a publicly listed non-toll-charge telephone number, and
operated as to receive subscriber complaints and requests on a 24-hour basis.
      (2)   Preventative maintenance crew. The grantee shall maintain a
preventative maintenance crew plus a force of technicians capable of responding
within eight hours after receipt of request for repairs relating to a service
outage and 48 hours excluding Sundays for all other complaints and requests for
repair. A service outage is a minimum of ten customers losing total cable
service.
      (3)   Telephone service. The grantee shall provide a telephone system to
receive all construction and service complaints. The telephone number of the
local office shall be listed in at least one telephone directory serving the
village. The telephone service shall be operable to accept complaints 24 hours
a day, seven days a week.
   (B)   Procedures for handling complaints. The grantee’s complaint handling
procedures shall be designed to accomplish the following:
      (1)   Receipt and acknowledgment of any complaint made in person or by
telephone within 12 business hours;
      (2)   Acknowledgment of any complaint received by mail at the grantee’s
office within five business days of the date such complaint is received;
      (3)   Maintain information, available to the grantor upon the grantor’s
request, of all complaints, including the complainant’s name, address and
telephone number, the date of its acknowledgment, and information given as to
how the complaint would be resolved, and the action taken; and
      (4)   The grantee shall respond within five business days to complaints
made or referred by the grantor.
   (C)   System technical data. The grantee shall maintain in its office a
complete and up-to-date set of as-built system maps and drawings upon
completion of construction or reconstruction, equipment specification and
maintenance publications and signal level diagrams for each active electronic
piece of equipment in the system. As-built drawings show all lines and
installed equipment, and tap values and spigots. The scale of maps and drawings
shall be sufficient to show the required details as easily readable form and
size. Technical data at the office shall also include approved pole
applications, details and documentation of satellite and microwave equipment
normally used in the operation of the system. If the grantor requires use of
technical data in its own offices, it may make copies of any items at the
grantor’s expense.
   (D)   Availability of technical data. All technical data shall be available
to the grantor’s inspection during normal business hours, upon reasonable
notice, and, in the event of system failure or other operating emergency, at
any time, so long as the provision of said data does not unreasonably interfere
with the grantee’s operations.
   (E)   Emergency repair capability. It shall be the grantee’s responsibility
to assure that its personnel qualified to make repairs are available at all
reasonable times and that they are supplied with keys, equipment location
instructions and technical information necessary to begin repairs upon
notification of need to maintain or restore continuous service to the system.
   (F)   Customer service standards and procedures.
      (1)   Information to customers. The grantee shall, at the time service is
initiated, provide each new customer information covering the time allowed to
pay outstanding bills and grounds for termination of service.
      (2)   Billing.
         (a)   Generally. Except as provided in §
115.07, bills for service shall be rendered monthly, unless otherwise
authorized by the customer and the grantee or unless service is rendered for a
period less than one month. Bills shall be rendered as promptly as possible.
All bills shall contain a telephone number and a mailing address for billing
inquiries or disputes.
         (b)   Disputed bills.
            1.   In the event of a dispute between the customer and the grantee
regarding the bill, the grantee shall promptly make such investigation as is
required by the particular case and report the results to the customer.
            2.   The customer shall not be required to pay the disputed portion
of the bill until the earlier of the following:
               a.   Resolution of the dispute; and
               b.   Expiration of the 45-day period beginning on the date of
issuance; provided, that the procedures established in division (F)(2)(b)1.
above have been followed.
            3.   Pending resolution of the bill dispute, the grantee shall
attempt to ensure that no termination notices are issued for the disputed
portions of the bill, or any other collection procedures initiated for said
amount.
      (3)   Referral of amounts to collection agencies. Uncollected accounts
may be referred to private collection agencies for appropriate action if the
bill has not been paid by the earlier of:
         (a)   Fifteen days following date of involuntary termination; or
         (b)   The 45 days following the date of issuance of the original
uncollected amount, provided no notification of billing dispute has been made,
or if procedures for resolution of billing disputes have not been followed as
required above.
    (G)   Refund. When a subscriber voluntarily discontinues service, the
grantee shall refund the unused portion of any advance payments after deducting
any charges currently due through the end of the present billing period within
60 days of discontinuance of service. Unused payment portions shall be the
percentage of time for which subscriber has paid for service and will not
receive it because of his or her discontinuation of service.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-9) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.10 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Use of public street. From and after the effective date hereof, it
shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain in any
public place within the grantor’s territory, or upon any easement owned or
controlled by a public utility, or within any other public property of the
grantor, or within any privately-owned area within the grantor’s jurisdiction
which is not yet, but is designated as, a proposed public place on a tentative
subdivision map approved by the grantor, any equipment, facilities or system
for distributing signals or services through a cable television system, unless
a franchise has first been obtained hereunder, and is in full force and effect.
   (B)   Unauthorized connections. It shall be unlawful for any person to make
or use any unauthorized connection to, or to monitor, tap, receive or send any
signal or service via a franchised system, or to enable anyone to receive or
use any service, television or radio signal, picture, program or sound or any
other signal without payment to the owner of said system.
   (C)   Tampering with facilities. It shall be unlawful, without the consent
of the owner, to willfully attach to, tamper with, modify, remove or injure any
physical part of a franchised cable television system.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-10) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.11 TERMINATION AND RECEIVERSHIP.
   (A)   Revocation. Consistent with applicable law, in addition to any rights
set out elsewhere in this document, the grantor reserves the right to revoke a
franchise, subject to notice to the grantee and the provision of a hearing
consistent with due process requirements, in the event that:
      (1)   The grantee willfully, grossly or negligently violates any material
provision of its franchise; and
      (2)   The grantee’s construction schedule is materially delayed as set
forth in the franchise and such delays were within the control of the grantee.
   (B)   Forfeiture. Consistent with applicable law, upon failure of the
grantee to comply with the material terms of its franchise, the grantor may by
resolution after a full hearing affording the grantee due process, declare a
forfeiture, and the grantee may be required to forthwith remove its structures
or property from the streets and restore the streets to their prior condition
within a reasonable period of time and upon failure to do so the grantor may
perform the work and collect all actual costs, including all direct and
indirect costs, thereof from the grantee. The cost thereof shall be a lien upon
all plant, property or other assets of the grantee, within the village limits.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-11) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.12 FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applicants for a franchise, or renewal thereof, may submit to the
grantor, or a designated agency, written application in a format provided by
the grantor, at the time and place designated by the grantor for accepting
applications, and including the designated application fee.
   (B)   This provision is deemed procedural and shall not constitute the grant
of any right to the applicant.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-12) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.13 RECORDS.
   (A)   Records.
      (1)   There shall be kept in the grantor’s office a separate record for
the franchise, which record shall show the things hereafter set forth in
division (B) below. The grantee shall provide such information in such form as
may be required by the grantor for said records, so long as the provision of
said documents does not unreasonably interfere with the grantee’s operations
and said information is reasonably necessary for the grantor to carry out its
regulatory functions.
      (2)   The grantee shall keep true and accurate books and records in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles consistently applied,
showing all income, expenses and expense transfers, borrowing, payments,
investments of capital and all other transactions relating to the system. The
grantor shall, upon reasonable notice, have the right to inspect said records
and receive copies thereof to the extent said information is reasonably
necessary for the grantor to carry out its regulatory functions.
   (B)   Reports of financial and operating activity.
      (1)   Written report. No later than 90 days after the close of the
grantee’s fiscal years, the grantee shall present a written report to the
grantor which shall include:
         (a)   A financial report verified by the chief financial officer of
the grantee, of his or her designee, for the previous fiscal year including
gross receipts from all sources; and
         (b)   If requested by the grantor, a summary of complaints received
and remedial action taken.
      (2)   Performance tests and compliance reports. If requested by the
grantor, the grantee shall provide a written report of any FCC or other
performance tests required or conducted.
      (3)   Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the
grantor in writing at the times and in the form prescribed by the grantor, such
additional reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or
property as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance of
any of the rights, functions or duties of the grantor, as specified by grantor,
and for good cause so long as the provision of said reports does not
unreasonably interfere with the grantee’s operations and said information is
reasonably necessary for the grantor to carry out its regulatory functions.
   (C)   Communications with regulatory agencies. Upon the grantor’s request,
copies of all communications between the grantee and the Federal Communications
Commission or any other agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters
affecting cable communications operations authorized pursuant to a franchise
within the village shall be submitted promptly to the grantor upon receipt or
mailing by the grantee.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-13) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.14 ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM; NOTICE OF FRANCHISE DEFAULT.
   Except as provided in the franchise agreement prior to formal consideration
by the grantor of termination of the grantee’s franchise because of willful, or
gross or negligent, failure to correct a default attributed to the grantee, the
grantor shall make written demand on the grantee to correct the default
alleged. The grantor and grantee shall expeditiously meet to discuss the
alleged problem, at which time the grantee shall indicate, in writing, the
amount of time necessary to resole the alleged problem. During this time
period, but in no event fewer than ten days before the final date for
correction, the grantee may request additional time to correct the problem and
the grantor shall grant said request if it determines, in the exercise of its
discretion, that such time is necessary due to delays beyond the grantee’s
control. If the default continues for a period of 30 days following such
deadline for corrections, plus any extension thereof, franchise termination may
be placed on the next available regular grantor’s meeting agenda. The grantee
shall be served a written notice of such termination at least ten days in
advance giving the time and place of the grantor’s meeting. At its meeting, the
grantor shall hear the grantee and any person interested in the matter and
shall determine, at that or subsequent meetings, an appropriate course of
action for enforcement or termination of the grantee’s franchise.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-14) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
§ 115.15 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Captions. The section and division numbers and captions throughout
this chapter are intended to facilitate reading and reference. Such numbers and
captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of any part of this
chapter.
   (B)   Franchise references. A franchise which cites, refers to or otherwise
incorporates this entire chapter or portions thereof shall be deemed to be a
franchise issued under, and subject to this chapter. Such a franchise may
employ, as sufficient for citation, reference or incorporation the section or
division number and caption hereof, followed by a statement of the detail
specification or requirement of the franchise pursuant to such reference.
   (C)   Filing. When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matter herein
required to be filed with the grantor shall be filed with the grantor’s
official or agency as designated by the grantor.
   (D)   Nonenforcement by the grantor. A grantee shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or of its
franchise or any law or regulation, by reason of any failure of the grantor to
force prompt compliance.
   (E)   Continuity of service. It shall be the right of all subscribers to
receive all available services within the obligations of the franchise insofar
as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the
event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify or sell the system, the
grantee shall use its reasonable efforts to ensure that all subscribers receive
continuous, uninterrupted service to the extent reasonably possible. In the
event of purchase by the grantor, or a change of the grantee, the current
grantee shall cooperate with the grantor or new grantee to operate the system
for a temporary period, to maintain continuity of service to all subscribers.
   (F)   Notices. All notices and other communications to the grantee shall be
addressed to it at the address at which the grantee conducts its business. All
notices and other communications to the grantor shall be addressed to it at its
published address for receipt of public communications.
   (G)   Force majeure; grantee’s inability to perform. In the event the
grantee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations or
requirements of this chapter or any franchise granted hereunder, is prevented
or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control and not reasonably
foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused, and no
penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. Such causes beyond
the grantee’s reasonable control and not reasonably foreseeable shall include,
but not be limited to, any acts of God, civil emergencies, labor unrest,
strikes, inability to obtain gratis access to an individual’s property, and any
inability of the grantor to secure all necessary permissions or permits to
utilize necessary poles or conduits so long as the grantee utilizes due
diligence to timely obtain said permissions or permits.
   (H)   Application. All of the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable
only to those “franchises”, as defined in §
115.02, granted or renewed subsequent to the enactment of this chapter.
   (I)   Severability. If any provision of this subchapter is determined to be
void or invalid by any administrative or judicial tribunal, said provision
shall be deemed severable and such invalidation shall not invalidate the
entirety of this chapter or any other provision thereof.
   (J)   Level playing field. The grantor shall grant and administer all cable
television franchises it grants such that no individual grantee has a material
advantage or disadvantage in its franchise obligations than any other grantee.
(2009 Code, § 8-1-15) (Ord. 93-5, passed 4-11-1993)
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS FEE
§ 115.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABLE SERVICE. As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   GROSS REVENUES.
      (1)   All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within
the village.
      (2)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;
         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment;
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation and
repair charges;
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges;
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments;
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement;
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder’s network,
such as a “home shopping” or similar channel, subject to division (i) below;
         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities or applications,
the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business; and
         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
      (3)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);
         (b)   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service;
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder’s books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards or orders;
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service;
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the date-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes;
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
      (4)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of GROSS REVENUES to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be
paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-
401.
   SERVICE. The provision of CABLE SERVICE or VIDEO SERVICE to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and 220 ILCS 5/
21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail or other services offered over the
public Internet.
(2009 Code, § 8-2-1) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 115.31 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 3% of the
holder’s gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at least
ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
   (D)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this subchapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
subchapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder’s application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the
village.
   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit to
prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such
credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B) above.
(2009 Code, § 8-2-2) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 115.32 PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to §
115.31(B).
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be 1% of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of
gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its
designee for PEG access support in the village.
   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in §
115.31(D).
   (D)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (E)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at
the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that
would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been
terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable
operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees
that the operator owed under division (B) above.
(2009 Code, § 8-2-3) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 115.33 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this subchapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(2009 Code, § 8-2-4) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 115.34 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax
that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with
respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
village’s simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it
applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to
payment of the local unit of government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
(2009 Code, § 8-2-5) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 115.35 AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et
seq. found in §§
38.020 through
38.037 of this code of ordinances. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct. (See
Chapter 38, Finance and Revenue of this code of ordinances.)
   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the municipality’s submission of an invoice for the
sum.
(2009 Code, § 8-2-6) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 115.36 LATE FEES/PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this municipality pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill
of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
(2009 Code, § 8-2-7) (Ord. 08-04, passed 5-12-2008)
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
§ 115.50 CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW.
   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by
reference and may applicable to the cable or video providers offering services
within the village’s boundaries.
   (B)   Amendments.
      (1)   Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that
becomes effective after the effective date of this subchapter shall be
incorporated into this subchapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable
or video providers offering services within the municipality’s boundaries.
      (2)   However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for
adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this subchapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(2009 Code, § 8-3-1) (Ord. 08-05, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 115.51 ENFORCEMENT.
   The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
village.
(2009 Code, § 8-3-2) (Ord. 08-05, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 115.52 CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501
(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing
cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The
cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the
customer is under no obligation to request the credit.
(2009 Code, § 8-3-3) (Ord. 08-05, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   The village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide
for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video
Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a completely neutral
basis and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach, and shall
not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
      (1)   MATERIAL BREACH means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
      (2)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice
of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
      (3)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall
be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in division (B)(2) above.
(2009 Code, § 8-3-4) (Ord. 08-05, passed 5-12-2008)
CHAPTER 116: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   
116.01   Purpose and scope
   
116.02   Definitions
   
116.03   Regulation of small wireless facilities
   
116.04   Dispute resolution
   
116.05   Indemnification
   
116.06   Insurance
§ 116.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the village’s jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act.
   (B)   Conflicts with other ordinances. This chapter supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws
or regulations.
(Ord. 18-23, passed 7-23-2018)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing or mechanical
codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to
those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended;
mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended; or wireless
service other than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK:. A building, property, or site or
group of buildings, properties or sites that are either:
      (1)   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list
properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
accordance with Section VI.D.l.a.i through Section VI.D.l.a.v of the Nationwide
Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 C.F.R. part 1, Appendix C; or
      (2)   Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site or
historic district by an ordinance adopted by the village pursuant to a
preservation program that meets the requirements of the certified local
government program of the State Historic Preservation Office or where such
certification of the preservation program by the State Historic Preservation
Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village in
public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village to perform an action
or initiate, continue or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical or other emergency services to respond
to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. RIGHT-
OF-WAY does not include village-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and
         (b)   All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole
associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
volume.
      (2)   The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not
included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter; concealment
elements; telecommunications demarcation box; ground-based enclosures;
grounding equipment; power transfer switch; cut-off switch; and vertical cable
runs for the connection of power and other services.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including:
         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
         (b)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration.
      (2)   WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities.
      (3)   WIRELESS FACILITY does not include:
         (a)   The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or
         (b)   Wire line backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that
is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber
optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 18-23, passed 7-23-2018)
§ 116.03 REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
division (C)(9) below regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject
to zoning review or approval if they are collocated:
      (1)   In rights-of-way in any zoning district; or
      (2)   Outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial
or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements.
      (1)   Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the village, together with the village’s small cell
facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s
knowledge; and
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      (2)   Application process. The village shall process applications as
follows.
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the village fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed application. The permit
shall be deemed approved on the latter of the ninetieth day after submission of
the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed
approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall
not preclude the village’s denial of the permit request within the time limits
as provided under this chapter.
         (c)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the village fails to approve or
deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
105 days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be
deemed approved on the latter of the one hundred-twentieth day after submission
of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed
approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall
not preclude the village’s denial of the permit request within the time limits
as provided under this chapter.
         (d)   1.   The village shall deny an application which does not meet
the requirements of this chapter. If the village determines that applicable
codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or
wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation,
approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or
wireless support structure at the cost of the provider. The village shall
document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or
application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the documentation
to the applicant on or before the day the village denies an application. The
applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the village and resubmit the
revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the
applicant without paying an additional application fee. The village shall
approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the applicant
resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the
revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the application to
submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the
village’s review period. The applicant must notify the village in writing of
its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved
basis, which may be submitted with the revised application.
            2.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         (e)   Pole attachment agreement: within 30 days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
village and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement,
provided by the village for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole
by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant
shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
      (3)   Completeness of application. Within 30 days after receiving an
application, the village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
30 days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in
the village’s permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the
village. Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the village sends the
notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
      (4)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
village; or
         (b)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      (5)   Consolidated applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at
the applicant’s discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the
collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless
facility and substantially the same type of structure. If an application
includes multiple small wireless facilities, the village may remove small
wireless facility collocations from the application and treat separately small
wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been
provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied.
The village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in
a consolidated application.
      (6)   Duration of permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of not less than five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities
or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable village
codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter. If
the Act is repealed as provided in § 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be
subject to the applicable village code provisions or regulations in effect at
the time of renewal.
      (7)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the village by personal
delivery at the village’s designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
   (C)   Collocation requirements and conditions.
      (1)   Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the village’s
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      (2)   Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      (3)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The
wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications. A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency’s communications equipment. Unacceptable interference will
be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the
FCC’s regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety
spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. If a small
wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been
given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the
wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a
manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference
with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 C.F.R. §§
22.970 through 22.973 and 47 C.F.R. §§ 90.672 through 90.675. The village may
terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if
the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations
cited in the previous sentence. Failure to remedy the interference as required
herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      (4)   Collocation on electric distribution utility poles. The wireless
provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on village utility poles
that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the
communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the
pole. However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility
may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on
the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole. For
purposes of this division (C)(4), the terms COMMUNICATIONS SPACE, COMMUNICATION
WORKER SAFETY ZONE and ELECTRIC SUPPLY ZONE have the meanings given to those
terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      (5)   Public safety. The wireless provider shall comply with all
applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.
      (6)   Written design standards. The wireless provider shall comply with
written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility
poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are
set forth in a village ordinance, written policy adopted by the village, a
comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers
of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic
district.
      (7)   Alternate placements. Except as provided in this division (C), a
wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities
on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to
collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with
respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility
associated with a new utility pole, the village may propose that the small
wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which
the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure
on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure
does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by
the applicant. If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the village,
the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property
rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does
not satisfy the criteria in this division (C)(7).
      (8)   Height limitations.
         (a)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the
small wireless facility is collocated.
         (b)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures
on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
            1.   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the village, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
village, provided the village may designate which intersecting right-of-way
within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures
shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
            2.   Forty-five feet above ground level.
      (9)   Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in conformance with and utilizing the same
procedures, terms and conditions set forth in the village’s development
ordinance.
      (10)   Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall
comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the village and
a private property owner that concern design or construction standards
applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-
of-way.
      (11)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      (12)   Under grounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply
with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of
existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests
to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do
not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.
      (13)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is
caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the village grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows.
      (1)   The applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an
application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless
facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one
small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support
structures.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      (4)   The village shall not require an application, approval or permit,
or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the village at least ten days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with division (B)(1)(d) above; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (E)   Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this chapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      (1)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled
by the village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      (2)   Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      (3)   (a)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service or an electric utility as defined in § 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility’s wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of § 16-108.5(i) of the Public Utilities Act or the purposes of this
division (E)(3), PUBLIC UTILITY has the meaning given to that term in § 3-105
of the Public Utilities Act.
         (b)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person
from any requirement:
            1.   To obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer
cable service or video service; or
            2.   To obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain
or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities
subject to this chapter.
   (F)   Pre-existing agreements. Existing agreements between the village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the village’s utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter. A wireless provider that
has an existing agreement with the village on the effective date of the Act may
accept the rates, fees and terms that the village makes available under this
chapter for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of
new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the
subject of an application submitted two or more years after the effective date
of the Act by notifying the village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and
terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable
termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider
has collocated on the village’s utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the village before the wireless provider provides such notice and
exercises its option under this division (F).
   (G)   Annual recurring rate.
      (1)   A wireless provider shall pay to the village an annual recurring
rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility pole located
in a right-of-way that equals:
         (a)   Two hundred dollars per year; or
         (b)   The actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider’s use of space on the village utility pole.
      (2)   If the village has not billed the wireless provider actual and
direct costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first
annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (H)   Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the
facility shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt
of written notice from the village notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days
of such notice, the village may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery. A wireless provider shall provide
written notice to the village if it sells or transfers small wireless
facilities within the jurisdiction of the village. Such notice shall include
the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
(Ord. 18-23, passed 7-23-2018)
§ 116.04 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of the county shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to
be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 18-23, passed 7-23-2018)
§ 116.05 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the village harmless against
any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that it may have against the village with respect to consequential,
incidental or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability.
(Ord. 18-23, passed 7-23-2018)
§ 116.06 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      (1)   Property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all
risks;
      (2)   Worker’s compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      (3)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of village
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
   (B)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification
and documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility. A wireless provider
may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit
requirement required by the village. A wireless provider that self-insures is
not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the
requirement for the name of additional insureds under this division (B).
   (C)   A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage limits required by the village.
(Ord. 18-23, passed 7-23-2018)
CHAPTER 117: BUSINESS LICENSE FORMS
Form
   
1.   Business license application
   
2.   Official business license
   
3.   Application for raffle license
   
4.   Applicant/field check information card
FORM 1. BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION
   BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION
APPLICATION NO.                  ANNUAL LICENSE FEE DUE MAY 1: $__________
   (PLEASE TYPE OR PRINT)
   1.   Applicant’s Name:______________________Phone ( )_____________
   2.   Applicant’s Address _________________________________
      City _______________________State ___   Zip ______________
   3.   Length of resident at above address ______years _______ months
   4.   Applicant’s date of birth _____/_____/_____   Social Security No.
______________________
   5.   Marital Status _______   Name of Spouse ________________________
   6.   Citizenship of Applicant ________________________________________
   7.   Business Name ________________________________________
   8.   Business Address __________________________________
      City ____________   State ________________   Zip ______________
   9.   Length of employment __________years _________ months
   10.   All residences and addresses for the last three (3) years if different
than above:
      _____________________________________________________________
      _____________________________________________________________
   11.   Name and address of employers during the last three (3) years if
different than above:
      _____________________________________________________________
      _____________________________________________________________
   12.   List the last three (3) municipalities where applicant has carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application
       _____________________________________________________________
   13.   A description of the subject matter that will be used in the
applicant’s business:
      _____________________________________________________________
   14.   Has the applicant ever had a license in this municipality?   
      [ ] Yes   [ ] No
      If so, when?
________________________________________________________________
   15.   Has a license issued to this applicant ever been revoked?   
      [ ] Yes   [ ] No
      If “yes”, explain
___________________________________________________________
   16.   Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this code, etc.?
      [ ] Yes   [ ] No      If “yes”, explain:
______________________________________
      ____________________________________________________________
   17.   Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a felony?
      [ ] Yes   [ ] No
      If “yes”, explain
___________________________________________________________
   18.   LICENSE DATA:   Term of License ______________________________
               Fee for License _____________________________
               Sales Tax Number ____________________________
               License Classification _________________________
   19.   LIST ALL OWNERS IF LICENSE IS FOR LOCAL BUSINESS (PERMANENT):
      ____________________________________   
      ____________________________________   
____________________________________
(2009 Code, Ch. 7)
FORM 2. OFFICIAL BUSINESS LICENSE.
OFFICIAL BUSINESS LICENSE
STATE OF ILLINOIS            )
COUNTY OF SANGAMON         ) ss.
VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER      )
         ILLINOIS SALES TAX NUMBER _______________________
   TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL BECOME GREETINGS:
   WHEREAS ________________________________________________________ having
complied with all the requirements of the laws of the State of Illinois and the
ordinances of the Village of Rochester, Illinois in this behalf made and
required license is, by the authority of the Village of Rochester, Illinois
given and granted to the _____________________ to _____________________ at
_________________________ in the Village of Rochester, County of Sangamon and
State of Illinois, from the _____________________ date hereof until the
__________ day of _____________, _____, said _________________________ to be
subject to all the laws of the State of Illinois and all ordinances of the
Village of Rochester, Illinois not in conflict therewith, which are now or
hereafter may be in force touching the premises.
(L.S.)
   Given under the hand of the President of the Village of Rochester, County of
Sangamon, Illinois and the seal thereof, this ________ day of __________,
_________.
                                       _________________________________
                                       PRESIDENT
VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER
COUNTERSIGNED:
_________________________________
VILLAGE CLERK
VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER
(SEAL)
(2009 Code, Ch. 7)
FORM 3. APPLICATION FOR RAFFLE LICENSE.
   APPLICATION FOR RAFFLE LICENSE
Organization Name:
_____________________________________________________________________
Address: _____________________________________________________________________
Type of Organization:
________________________________________________________________________________
Length of Existence of Organization:
____________________________________________________________________
If organization if incorporated, what is the date and state of incorporation?
Date: ___________________________   State: ____
List the organization’s presiding officer, secretary, raffle manager and any
other members responsible for the conduct and operation of the raffle.
PRESIDENT:
SECRETARY: ___________________________   Birth Date: ___________
Address: _______________________________________________________________
Social Security No. __________________________   Phone Number: _____________
RAFFLE MANAGER: _________________   Birth Date: ________________
Address: ___________________________________________________________________
Social Security No. ________________________   Phone Number: ___________
List any other members responsible for the conduct and operation of the raffle
on the back of this page. List names, date of birth, address, Social Security
number and phone number.
______________   The request if for a single raffle license.
______________   The request if for a multiple raffle license.
The aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded:
$_____________________________________________________
Maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded in the raffle
$______________________________________________
The maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued:
__________________________________________________
The area or areas in which raffle chances will be sold or issued:
______________________________________________
________________________________________________
Time period during which raffle chances will be issued or sold:
_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________
The date, time and location at which winning chances will be determined:
______________________________________
________________________________________
Date: __________   Time: _____________________
Location:___________________________________________________________
If multiple raffles license is requested, list on a separate sheet, the date,
time and location for each raffle to be held within the one-year period of time
from the date of the issuance of the license.
THE APPLICATION FEES ARE NONREFUNDABLE EVEN SHOULD THE APPLICATION BE REJECTED
BY THE VILLAGE BOARD.
(2009 Code, Ch. 7)
FORM 4. APPLICANT/FIELD CHECK INFORMATION CARD.
                                                               
Name                                                           Location      Date      Time
 
Residence Address                                              D.L.#
                                                                
Business Address Info                                          Vehicle      Color   Yr.      Body   License
 
Occupation                                                     Vehicle Modifications:
 
Social Security Number                                          
 
Race            Sex             HeightAction Leading to Check:
 
Weight            Eyes          Hair      
 
Complexion                Date of Birth          
 
Unusual Features:                                               
 
                                                              Comments:
                                                                
                                                               
                                                               
                                                               
                                                               
Hat                         Coat      Associates:
                                                                
Cap                         Jacket     
 
Blouse                      Dress         
 
Shirt                      Sweater        
 
Skirt                      Trousers       
 
(2009 Code, Ch. 7)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND DECENCY
      
133.   LITTER
      
134.   TRESPASS
      
135.   PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
      
136.   TRUANCY AND CURFEW
      
137.   CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Definitions
   
130.01   Meanings of words and phrases
   
130.02   Criminal Code adopted
General Provisions
   
130.15   Disturbing police officer
   
130.16   Impersonation of officer
   
130.17   Disturbing lawful assemblies
   
130.18   Unlawful assembly
   
130.19   Disturbing the peace with noise
   
130.20   Admission fees: fraudulently avoiding payment of
   
130.21   Sale of cigarettes or tobacco to minors
   
130.22   Smoking prohibited in village buildings
   
130.23   Smokeless tobacco
   
130.24   Unlawful conduct on a public way
   
130.25   Aid in escape
   
130.26   Escapes
   
130.27   False pretenses
   
130.28   Renting premises for unlawful purposes
   
130.29   Aid to an offense
   
130.30   Posting bills
   
130.31   Intoxication in public
   
130.32   Begging
   
130.33   Concealed weapons
   
130.34   Discharge of firearms or bow and arrow
   
130.35   Games in street
   
130.36   Storage of explosives
   
130.37   Throwing rocks
   
130.38   Destruction of public property
   
130.39   Fortune telling
   
130.40   Abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes
   
130.41   Halloween curfew
   
130.42   Theft of recyclables unlawful
   
130.43   Throwing objects from motor vehicles
   
130.44   Depositing of snow and ice restricted
   
130.45   Protective covering or fencing
   
130.46   Curfew hours for minors
   
130.47   Sanctity of funeral and memorial services
   
130.48   Use of upholstered furniture in outdoor locations prohibited
 
   
130.99   Penalty
DEFINITIONS
§ 130.01 MEANINGS OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this title the words and phrases of the 720 ILCS 5/
2-1 through 5/2-11; 720 ILCS 5/2-13 through 5/2-16; 720 ILCS 5/2-19 and 5/2-20,
as approved, adopted and amended are hereby adopted by the village, as fully as
if set out herein.
   (B)   To the extent certain words or phrases contained in this chapter are
not defined in provisions identified above, then, for the purpose of this
chapter, said words or phrases should be given their commonly understood
meaning, excepting the following definitions;
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any camping trailer, motor home, mini-motor home,
travel trailer, truck camper, or van camper which is designed primarily not for
use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use.
(2009 Code, § 27-1-1) (Ord. 25-04, passed 1-21-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2
§ 130.02 CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5, as passed, approved and amended by
the Illinois General Assembly is hereby adopted by the village; the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the village;
provided, however, the penalties as provided by this title shall apply.
(2009 Code, § 27-1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2 and 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.15 DISTURBING POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall, by violent conduct, disturb any police officer in the
discharge of his or her duties; nor shall any person assault, strike or fight
with any police officers in the discharge of his or her duties or permit such
conduct in or upon any house or premises in the village owned or possessed by
him or her or under his or her management and control.
   (B)   Abusive or vulgar language in the presence of an officer does not
constitute a crime unless the language is directed at the officer and provokes
a breach of the peace.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1
§ 130.16 IMPERSONATION OF OFFICER.
   No person in the village shall falsely represent himself or herself to be an
officer of the village or shall, without being duly authorized by the village,
exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of the
village officer, or hinder, obstruct, resist or otherwise interfere with any
village officer in the discharge of the duties of his or her office.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-2) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/32-5.1
§ 130.17 DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interrupt or disturb any
funeral assembly, funeral procession, school, any assembly met for the worship
of God or any other assembly met for a lawful purpose by any offensive
behavior, or by any disorderly conduct.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-3) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2
§ 130.18 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   It shall be illegal for persons to assemble unlawfully in the following
situations:
   (A)   The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two or
more persons acting together and without authority of law;
   (B)   The assembly of two or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
   (C)   The assembly of two or more persons, without authority of law, for the
purpose of doing violence to the person or property of any one supposed to have
been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising
correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-4) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2 and 720 ILCS 5/25-1
§ 130.19 DISTURBING THE PEACE WITH NOISE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this noise section is to protect, preserve and
promote the health, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of the residents of the
village through the reduction, control and prevention of noise that
unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace
or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity. This section seeks to
establish common sense guidelines that residents and businesses can follow,
that promotes a more restful, pleasant environment.
   (B)   Policy. It shall be the policy of the village to discourage, reduce
and, where reasonably feasible, require the mitigation of any noise, regardless
of how generated, produced or broadcasted, which is perceived by an individual
of ordinary and reasonable sensibilities to be of such a level, duration,
nature or character as annoying, disturbing, injurious, harmful, dangerous or
otherwise unsafe.
   (C)   Authority. The corporate authorities of each municipality may prevent
or suppress riots, routs, affrays, noises, disturbances, trespasses and
disorderly assemblies in any public or private place.
   (D)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      NOISE DISTURBANCE. Sound that:
         (a)   Is loud and raucous which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers
the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of
the village regardless of time of day or night; or
         (b)   Exceeds the sound level limit set forth in this section, as
measured by a sound level meter or is a sustained sound left unattended.
   (E)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Cries or loud calls for emergency assistance or of warning;
      (2)   Radios, sirens, horns or bells which emanate from police, fire,
ambulance or other emergency response vehicles;
      (3)    Special events such as parades, races, fireworks displays, outdoor
music, and block parties, for which the village has issued a special events
permit pursuant to village approval, permit or license and all village codes;
      (4)   Activities on or in municipal and school athletic facilities and on
or in publicly owned property and facilities provided that such activities have
been authorized by the owner or operator of such municipal or school property;
      (5)   Fire alarms and security alarms prior to the giving of notice and a
reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant of the premises, Police
Department, Fire Department or other first responders to turn off or otherwise
cancel the alarm or security system;
      (6)   Religious worship activities including, but not limited to, the
ringing of bells, the playing of musical instruments, the singing or chanting
of choirs, or the singing or chanting of those in attendance at such worship
activities;
      (7)   Clock towers, bell towers and carillons;
      (8)   Sounds generated between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in
construction, demolition or repair work pursuant to duly authorized permit or
franchise or license agreement;
      (9)   Sounds generated in construction, demolition or repair work of an
emergency nature or in work on public improvements authorized by a governmental
body or agency;
      (10)   Rail locomotives and other railroad equipment;
      (11)   Aircraft;
      (12)   Generators and pumps used to relieve an emergency situation such
as electrical power outages or flooding of buildings and the like, and their
required scheduled maintenance operation;
      (13)   Power equipment for property maintenance from dawn to dusk,
including, but not limited to, mowers, weed trimmers, leaf blowers, air
compressors, chainsaws, saws, drills, and other similar power tools; and
      (14)   Mechanical stationary noise of less than 80 decibels at its
source.
   (F)   Enforcement.
      (1)   If a police officer determines that there is a noise disturbance,
he or she may enforce this section by issuing an ordinance violation citation
to the violators.
      (2)   Residents are encouraged to report a noise disturbance in their
areas by providing the following information:
         (a)   Name, address and phone numbers. A caller may wish to remain
anonymous, but this information is helpful in successful enforcement of this
section and is required to enforce a noise violation based solely on disturbing
a reasonable person of normal sensitivities;
         (b)   Location of the source of the noise disturbance and address is
possible; and
         (c)   Description of the type of noise, such as loud music, a loud
party and the like (being as descriptive as possible), and the length of the
disturbance.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-5) (Ord. 15-01, passed 3-9-2015; Ord. 21-23, passed 10-12-
2021) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2
§ 130.20 ADMISSION FEES: FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently enter, without payment
of the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other
place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police
officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public
entertainment or amusement.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-6) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.21 SALE OF CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO TO MINORS.
   (A)   No minor under 21 years of age shall buy any cigar, cigarette,
smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms. No person shall sell, buy
for, distribute samples of or furnish any cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco
or tobacco in any of its forms, to any minor under 21 years of age.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, SMOKELESS TOBACCO is defined in §
130.23(A).
   (C)   Tobacco products listed above may be sold through a vending machine
only in the following locations:
      (1)   Factories, businesses, office, private clubs and other places not
open to the general public;
      (2)   Places to which minors under 21 years of age are not permitted
access;
      (3)   Places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the
premises;
      (4)   Places where the vending machine is under the direct supervision of
the owner of the establishment or an employee over 21 years of age. The sale of
tobacco products from a vending machine under direct supervision of the owner
or an employee of the establishment is considered a sale of tobacco products by
that person. As used in this division (C)(4), DIRECT SUPERVISION means that the
owner or employee has an unimpeded line of sight to the vending machine; and
      (5)   Places where the vending machine can only be operated by the owner
or an employee over age 21 either directly or through a remote control device
if the device is inaccessible to all customers.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-7) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 675/1
§ 130.22 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN VILLAGE BUILDINGS.
   No person shall use any tobacco products in any village building or
structure, built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattel or property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to the ground
and which is owned or maintained by the village, but does not include any
picnic shelters located in a public park system.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-8) (Ord. 97-1, passed 2-10-1997) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.23 SMOKELESS TOBACCO.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      SMOKELESS TOBACCO. Any finely cut, ground, powdered or leaf tobacco that
is intended to be placed in the oral cavity.
   (B)   Sales of smokeless tobacco products to persons under 21. No person
shall sell any smokeless tobacco product to any person under the age of 21.
   (C)   Distribution. No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed to
any person under the age of 21, without charge or at a nominal cost, any
smokeless tobacco product.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-9) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 675/0.01 et seq.
§ 130.24 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT ON A PUBLIC WAY.
   (A)    It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk or
public way, except as near as reasonably possible to the building line or curb
line if such standing interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other
pedestrians.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to impede or interfere with another person’s use
of a public way.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or caused to be parked, a
recreational vehicle in any public way for a period not to exceed forty-eight
(48) hours.
      (1)   Upon the expiration of the maximum time designated for parking a
recreational vehicle on a public way, the owner or operator of the recreational
vehicle shall then immediately remove the recreational vehicle from the parking
space.
      (2)   No recreational vehicle, within ninety-six (96) hours of the time
of leaving a parking space on a public way, shall be again parked in any
portion of either side of the same street between the immediate intersecting
streets.
   (D)   In addition to any penalties outlined in this chapter, any person who
acts in violation of this paragraph shall be subject to penalties as outlined
in section
10.99 of this code.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-10) (Ord. 25-04, passed 1-21-2025)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.25 AID IN ESCAPE.
   It shall be unlawful to rescue or attempt to rescue or shall abet or
encourage the rescue or escape of any person from the custody of any officer or
other person legally having him or her in charge, or shall molest or interfere
with any officer or other person so legally having him or her in charge, or
shall, in any manner, aid, abet or encourage the rescue or the attempt to
escape from any person legally committed thereto, or shall supply or attempt to
supply any such person with any weapon or with any implement or means whereby
an escape might be affected, or with any intoxicating liquors, drugs or other
article(s) without the consent of the officer in charge.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-11) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/31-7
§ 130.26 ESCAPES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful
custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-12) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/31-6(c)
§ 130.27 FALSE PRETENSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares
or merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter public places and call for
refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for same, or to
depart without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he or she received
the food, goods, wares and/or merchandise.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-13) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.28 RENTING PREMISES FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used, any
building or property owned by him or her, for any purpose whereby riotous or
disorderly persons are gathered.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-14) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.29 AID TO AN OFFENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet,
counsel, advise or encourage any other person in the commission of any of the
acts mentioned herein or in any manner encourage the commission of such offense
hereby defined.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-15) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.30 POSTING BILLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement, or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree,
lamppost, utility pole, hydrant or upon any private wall, door or gate without
the consent, in writing, of the owner of the wall, door or gate; provided,
however, that this section shall not prevent posting by proper village and
county officials of election signs, polling place signs and other signs or
placards necessary under the law to the conduct of elections, except they may
not be attached to a tree.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-16) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.31 INTOXICATION IN PUBLIC.
   No person shall, in the village, be found in a state of intoxication or
drunk in any street or other public place, or shall be found drunk lying or
roving about the streets, alleys or sidewalks of this village or the private
grounds of any of the inhabitants thereof, or being drunk as aforesaid, shall
disturb the peace, order and quiet of the village, or the peace and quiet of
the citizens thereof by loud and unusual noises, disorderly conduct, indecent
language or behavior or in any other manner.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-17) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-3
§ 130.32 BEGGING.
   No person shall beg or solicit alms within the village without having
obtained permission in writing from the President.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-18) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-4
§ 130.33 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   No person shall, within the village, carry or wear under his or her clothes,
or concealed about his or her person, a sling-shot, or cross knuckles or
knuckles of lead, brass or other metal, or any switchblade knife or razor,
Bowie knife, dirk knife or dirk, dagger or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon. This section does not apply to the officers or members of the Police
Department, nor to any Sheriff or Deputy Sheriff or constable of this state,
nor to any United States Marshal.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-19) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.34 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS OR BOW AND ARROW.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm, bow and arrow, BB gun or air
gun in the village or so that the bullet, arrow, missile or projectile
therefrom enters the village without written permission from the President,
provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of
the law to discharge a firearm in the performance of his or her duty; nor to
prevent any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending his or
her person or property; nor to prevent the discharge of bow and arrow by
students upon school grounds while under the direct and immediate supervision
of teachers or other school supervisory personnel.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-20) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.35 GAMES IN STREET.
   No person shall, upon any village street, fly any kite or play any game of
ball or engage in any amusement or practice having a tendency to injure or
annoy any person passing in the streets or on the sidewalks.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-21) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.36 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Nitroglycerine; dynamite and the like. No person shall have, keep,
possess or store at or in any place within the village, any nitroglycerine,
dynamite or giant powder, or any form or combination of any of them.
   (B)   Blasting powder and the like. No person shall keep, possess or store
any gun or blasting powder or any gun or explosive cotton at or in any one
place in the village in any quantity exceeding five pounds.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-22) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-8-4
§ 130.37 THROWING ROCKS.
   No person in the village shall throw or cast any rock or stone or any other
missile upon or at any building, tree or other public or private property, or
at any person in any street, avenue, alley or public place.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-23) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.38 DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person in the village shall deface, destroy or in any way, injure any
public property, or any other apparatus of the village.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-24) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.39 FORTUNE TELLING.
   No person in the village shall pursue the calling of a fortune teller or
practice fortune telling, soothsaying or the like and receive payment in any
manner therefor.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-25) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.40 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS OR ICEBOXES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or discard in any place
accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox or ice chest, of a capacity of
one and one-half cubic feet or more, which has an attached lid or door which
may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch. The owner, lessee
or manager of such place, who knowingly permits such abandoned or discarded
refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain there in such condition, shall be
guilty of violating this section.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-26) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 505/1
§ 130.41 HALLOWEEN CURFEW.
   It shall be illegal for any person to engage in the Halloween practice,
commonly called “trick or treat”, by calling at the homes or dwelling places
within the village, either masked or unmasked, except on a day and time
designated by the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-27) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-5
§ 130.42 THEFT OF RECYCLABLES UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, obtain, possess or pickup
any recyclable item(s) from any receptacle or collection point where service is
provided by an authorized waste hauler licensed by the municipality or from any
specified recycling center within the village limits unless said person is
acting as an agent for the village or acting as an agent for a waste hauler
licensed by the village.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-28) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.43 THROWING OBJECTS FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the police powers in 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1, it shall be
unlawful for any person occupying or driving a motor vehicle, whether moving or
not, to shoot, throw, cast, launch or drop any object, liquid or substance at
any person, animal or structure, wherein the possibility of harm, injury or
damage may occur as a result of these actions.
   (B)   The driver and/or all passengers shall be, upon conviction, fined in
accordance with the provisions of the village code and shall be liable for all
damage, injury or harm caused by the activity.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-29) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Criminal damage to property, see §
131.02
§ 130.44 DEPOSITING OF SNOW AND ICE RESTRICTED.
   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow and ice on or
against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway, or loading or unloading
areas of a public transportation system, except that snow and ice may be
windrowed on curbs incident to the cleaning of sidewalks in business districts.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-30) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-13
§ 130.45 PROTECTIVE COVERING OR FENCING.
   (A)   Any person, corporation or partnership which either owns, or
maintains, or uses, or abandons any open well, cesspool, cistern, quarry,
recharging basin, catch basin, sump, excavation for the erection of any
building structure or excavation created by the razing or removal of any
building structure without covering or surrounding such installation with
protective fencing is guilty of a violation of this section. The provisions of
this section shall not apply during the course of repair, construction, removal
or filling of any of the structures or conditions herein described while any
worker is present at the location thereof either performing services thereon or
as a watchman to guard such location.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-31) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 430 ILCS 165
§ 130.46 CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CURFEW HOURS.
         (a)   11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday
until 6:00 a.m. of the following day;
         (b)   12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on Saturday; and
         (c)   12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on Sunday.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
      OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
      PARENT. A person who is:
         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another
person; or
         (b)   At least 21 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian
to have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
      REMAIN.
      (a)   To linger or stay; or
      (b)   To fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   (B)   Offenses.
      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place
or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours.
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she
knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village
during curfew hours.
      (3)   The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
   (C)   Defenses.
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) above that the
minor was:
         (a)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         (e)   Involved in an emergency;
         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
         (g)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civil
organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor,
or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official
school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the village, a civic organization or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor;
         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise or religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
         (i)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation or Mature Minors Act, as amended.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B)(3) above that the
owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police
Department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours and refused to leave.
   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
division (C) above is present.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-32) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/12C-60
§ 130.47 SANCTITY OF FUNERAL AND MEMORIAL SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to violate any of the following provisions
of this section:
   (A)   Engaging in any loud protest of signing, chanting, whistling or
yelling with, or without, noise amplification including, but not limited to,
bullhorns, auto horns and microphones within 300 feet of any entrance of a
facility being used for a funeral or memorial service at any time during the
period starting 30 minutes before any funeral or memorial service is scheduled
to begin and ending 30 minutes after the funeral or memorial service
terminates;
   (B)   Displaying any visual images that convey fighting words, actual or
veiled threats against any other person within 300 feet of any entrance of a
facility being used for a funeral or memorial service at any time during the
period starting 30 minutes before any funeral or memorial service is scheduled
to begin and ending 30 minutes after the funeral or memorial service
terminates;
   (C)   Blocking access to any facility being used for a funeral or memorial
service at any time during the period starting 30 minutes before any funeral or
memorial service is scheduled to begin and ending 30 minutes after the funeral
or memorial service terminates; or
   (D)   Ending in a directed protest march or picket at any public location
within 300 feet of any entrance of a facility being used for a funeral or
memorial service at any time during the period starting 30 minutes before any
funeral or memorial service is scheduled to begin and ending 30 minutes after
the funeral or memorial service terminates.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-33) (Ord. 06-576, passed 3-6-2006) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.48 USE OF UPHOLSTERED FURNITURE IN OUTDOOR LOCATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Upholstered or other furniture designed or manufactured primarily for
indoor use shall not be used or allowed to remain:
      (1)   On unenclosed exterior porches or balconies; or
      (2)   In an open area on private property exposed to outdoor weather
conditions.
   (B)   It shall not be a defense to said prohibition that such furniture is
covered by plastic cover, or other tarpaulin, canvas or sheeting.
   (C)   This prohibition shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Wood, metal or plastic furniture;
      (2)   Outdoor patio furniture with weather-resistant cushions;
      (3)   Upholstered furniture designated for prepaid special pickup or
delivery by public or private hauler, provided that such remain outdoors for a
period not to exceed 72 hours.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-34) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   A violation of §
130.19 will result in the following fines:
         (a)   First offense: not less than $100; and
         (b)   Subsequent offenses: not less than $250.
      (2)   A separate and distinct offense is deemed committed each day such
violation continues.
(2009 Code, § 27-2-5) (Ord. 15-01, passed 3-9-2015)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Petty theft
   
131.02   Criminal damage to property
   
131.03   Criminal damage to firefighting apparatus, hydrants or equipment
   
131.04   Injury to utility wires and poles
   
131.05   Damage or destruction of street signs prohibited
   
131.06   Tampering with public notice
   
131.07   Electronic devices to kill insects
§ 131.01 PETTY THEFT.
   A person commits a petty theft when the value of the property is under $500
and he or she knowingly:
   (A)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner;
   (B)   Obtains by deception, control over property of the owner;
   (C)   Obtains by threat, control over property of the owner; or
   (D)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him or
her to believe that the property was stolen and:
      (1)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property;
      (2)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such a manner
as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; and
      (3)   Uses, conceals or abandons the property, knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to commit a petty theft.
(2009 Code, § 27-3-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/16-1
§ 131.02 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   Any of the following acts by a person shall be a violation of this code.
   (A)   To knowingly damage any property of another without his or her
consent;
   (B)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosive, damage property of another;
   (C)   Knowingly start a fire on the land of another without his or her
consent;
   (D)   Knowingly injure a domestic animal of another without his or her
consent; or
   (E)   Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another, without
his or her consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and
thereby, intend to interfere with the use by another of the land or building.
(2009 Code, § 27-3-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/21-1
§ 131.03 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS, HYDRANTS OR EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall willfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper with
or destroy or deface any fire hydrant or any fire hose or any fire engine, or
other public or private firefighting equipment or any apparatus appertaining to
such equipment, or to intentionally open any fire hydrant without proper
authorization.
(2009 Code, § 27-3-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/21-1.01
§ 131.04 INJURY TO UTILITY WIRES AND POLES.
   It shall be unlawful to willfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface,
injure or destroy any telegraph or telephone pole, post or wire, or any
electric lightpost, pole or electric conductor, wire or lamp or any other thing
connected with the same or belonging thereto, or any water main, gas main, pipe
or hydrant or lamp or lamppost, or anything belonging to or connected therewith
or with any of them.
(2009 Code, § 27-3-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.05 DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION OF STREET SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner or form, to deface,
disfigure, damage or destroy any of the street signs or parts thereof located
in the village.
(2009 Code, § 27-3-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.06 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly and without lawful authority
alter, destroy, deface, remove or conceal any public notice, posted according
to law, during the time for which the notice was to remain posted.
(2009 Code, § 27-3-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/32-9
§ 131.07 ELECTRONIC DEVICES TO KILL INSECTS.
   No person shall operate, between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of
any day, on any property zoned for residential use, any electrical device which
emits an audible sound and is designed or used for the purpose of killing
insects out-of-doors.
(2009 Code, § 27-3-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND DECENCY
Section
   
132.01   Disorderly conduct; elements of the offense
   
132.02   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer
   
132.03   Refusing to aid an officer
   
132.04   Assembling at public places and businesses
   
132.05   Possession of cannabis
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT; ELEMENTS OF THE OFFENSE.
   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
   (A)   Does any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
   (B)   Transmits in any manner to the Fire Department of any village, town,
village or fire protection district, a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time
of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such
fire exists;
   (C)   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive device of any nature is concealed in such a place that
its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or
explosive device is concealed in such a place;
   (D)   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public
employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing
that such an offense has been committed;
   (E)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose, deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it;
   (F)   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the Collection
Agency Act or as an employee of such collection agency, and while attempting to
collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is
designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; or
   (G)   Transmits a false report to the Department of Children and Family
Services.
(2009 Code, § 27-4-1) Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/26-1
§ 132.02 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER.
   A person commits an offense when that person knowingly resists or obstructs
the performance of any authorized act of one known to the person to be a peace
officer within that peace officer’s official capacity.
(2009 Code, § 27-4-2) Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/31-1
§ 132.03 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.
   A person who refuses or knowingly fails, upon command, to reasonably aid a
person known by him or her to be a peace officer in the following commits a
misdemeanor:
   (A)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
   (B)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(2009 Code, § 27-4-3) Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 720 ILCS 5/31-8
§ 132.04 ASSEMBLING AT PUBLIC PLACES AND BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Drive-in business. A DRIVE-IN BUSINESS within the meaning of this
section shall be deemed to be any business where meals, sandwiches, cold
drinks, beverages, ice cream, food, drink or consumer services are served
directly to or are permitted to be consumed by patrons in or upon automobiles,
motorcycles or other vehicles parked on the premises.
   (B)   Declared public places. For the purpose of preserving public peace,
health and safety, the entire premises occupied by a drive-in business,
together with means of ingress or egress, are hereby declared to be a public
place.
      (1)   No person on the premises of a drive-in business shall race the
motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop, any
motor vehicle, blow any horn of any motor vehicle, or cause to be made any loud
or unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of
the premises or the neighborhood are disturbed.
      (2)   The following acts or conduct of any persons entering a drive-in
business or premises are hereby declared to be unlawful, and any person found
guilty of any such acts shall be guilty of a violation of this section:
         (a)   Entering the premises of any drive-in business with any motor
vehicle of any description and parking such vehicle and leaving the premises
(thereby leaving such vehicle parked and unoccupied), without express consent
of the owner or operator of such business, in which event, such motor vehicle
shall be subject to a parking citation or may be impounded subject to the usual
impounding charges;
         (b)   Entering the premises in or upon a motor vehicle and using said
premises for cruising, racing as a shortcut to another street or to annoy or
endanger any person or persons or other vehicle or vehicles lawfully on said
premises;
         (c)   For three or more persons to congregate on the premises and
linger or loiter at any location on the premises of any drive-in business,
other than in the building or in a legally parked motor vehicle; and
         (d)   For any person who, while on the premises of any drive-in
business, in the presence or hearing of another, to curse or abuse such person
or use any violently abusive language under circumstances reasonably calculated
to provoke a breach of the peace.
   (C)   Posting sign. It shall be the responsibility of the business operator
to post on the premises in a conspicuous location, one or more signs bearing
the following legend in letters at least two inches or more in height and
readable:
 
CRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING AND LOITERING OUTSIDE A MOTOR VEHICLE IS UNLAWFUL.
NO UNOCCUPIED MOTOR VEHICLES MAY BE LEFT ON THE PREMISES WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF
THE OWNER.
 
(2009 Code, § 27-4-4) Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2
§ 132.05 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
 
      CANNABIS. Any substance defined as cannabis in § 3 of the Illinois
Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/3.
      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. Any object or device used, designed for use or
intended for use in unlawfully ingesting, smoking, administering or storing
cannabis. For the purposes of this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA includes, but is
not limited to:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, plastic, glass, stone or ceramic pipes, with or
without screens;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips;
         (f)   Bongs; and
         (g)   One-hitters.
   (B)   Possession of cannabis prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
(s) to knowingly be in possession of any substance containing cannabis, except
as set forth in the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act
(410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
   (C)   Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person(s) to knowingly be in the possession of drug paraphernalia with the
intent to use it for the purpose of unlawfully ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body.
(2009 Code, § 27-4-5) (Ord. 18-06, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   The penalty for violating §
132.05 shall be as follows:
         (a)   Possession of cannabis. For possession of ten grams or less for
any substance containing cannabis:
            1.   First offense: $150; and
            2.   Second offense: $250.
          (b)   Possession of drug paraphernalia. For possession of drug
paraphernalia:
            1.   First offense: $150; and
            2.   Second offense: $250.
      (2)   The Police Department may in its discretion refer charges of
possession of cannabis to the State’s Attorney for charges pursuant to state
law instead of bringing charges pursuant to this chapter, but no person shall
be charged pursuant to this chapter and state law for the same offense.
Possession of cannabis in excess of ten grams is not subject to this chapter,
but rather, shall be referred to the State’s Attorney to be charged pursuant to
state law.
(2009 Code, § 27-4-5) (Ord. 18-06, passed 3-12-2018)
CHAPTER 133: LITTER
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Littering prohibited
   
133.03   Prevention of scattering
   
133.04   Receptacles; upsetting or tampering
   
133.05   Sidewalks and alleys free from litter
   
133.06   Owner to maintain private premises
   
133.07   Littering from vehicles
   
133.08   Littering from aircraft
   
133.09   Litter in parks
   
133.10   Handbills
   
133.11   Posting notices prohibited
   
133.12   Construction sites
   
133.13   Loading and unloading docks
   
133.14   Parking lots
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1 and 415 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used, or designed
for navigation or for flight in the air. The word AIRCRAFT shall include
helicopters and lighter-than-air powered craft and balloons.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A container of water-tight construction with
a tight- fitting lid or cover capable of preventing the escape of contents
within. Such receptacles shall have handles or other means for safe and
convenient handling and be of such size or sufficient capacity to hold all
litter generated between collection periods and shall be in compliance with the
regulations promulgated.
   CONSTRUCTION SITES. Any private or public property upon which repairs to
existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing
structures is taking place.
   HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed matter of
literature which is not delivered by the United States mail service, including,
but not limited to, those which:
      (1)   Advertise for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
      (2)   Direct attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
      (3)   Direct attention to or advertise any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit.
   LITTER. Garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other waste material which, if
thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public
health, safety and welfare.
   LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCK. Any dock space or area used by any moving
vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares,
commodities and persons located on or adjacent to any stream, river or land.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. All property including, but not limited to, vacant land or
any land, building or other structure designed or used for residential,
commercial, business, industrial, institutional or religious purposes, together
with any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps, vestibule, mailbox
and other structure(s) appurtenant thereto.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, lakes, rivers, watercourses or fountains and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
   PUBLIC RECEPTACLES. Any receptacles provided by or authorized by the
village.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon land or water, including devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-1)
§ 133.02 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deposit any litter within the village except in public
receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in any duly
licensed disposal facility.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.03 PREVENTION OF SCATTERING.
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent litter from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.04 RECEPTACLES; UPSETTING OR TAMPERING.
   No person shall upset or tamper with a public or private receptacle designed
or used for the deposit of litter or cause or permit its contents to be
deposited or strewn in or upon any public place or private premises.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.05 SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS FREE FROM LITTER.
   Persons owning, occupying or in control of any public place or private
premises shall keep the sidewalks and alleys adjacent thereto free of litter.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.06 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PRIVATE PREMISES.
   (A)   The owner or person in control of any private premises shall, at all
times, maintain the premises free of litter.
   (B)   The owner or person in control of private premises shall, if public
receptacles are unavailable, maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.07 LITTERING FROM VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person, while the operator of or passenger in a vehicle, shall
deposit litter upon any public place or private premises.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive or move any loaded or partly loaded truck
or other vehicle within the village unless such vehicle is so constructed or so
loaded as to prevent any part of its load, contents or litter from being blown
or deposited upon any public place or private premises.
      (2)   Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the
village, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any public place
or private premises, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of
any kind.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.08 LITTERING FROM AIRCRAFT.
   No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit any litter within
the village.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.09 LITTER IN PARKS.
   No person shall deposit litter in any park within the village except in
receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any
other public place or private premises. Where receptacles are not provided, all
such litter shall be removed from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere in a lawful manner.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.10 HANDBILLS.
   (A)   Public places. No person shall deposit or sell any handbill in or upon
any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any
public place for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the
receiver, any handbill to any person willing to accept it.
   (B)   Private premises. No person shall deposit or unlawfully distribute any
handbill in or upon private premises or vehicles, except by handing or
transmitting any such handbill directly to the occupant of such private
premises; provided, however, that in case of private premises or vehicles which
are not posted against the receiving of handbills or similar material, such
person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may
securely place any such handbill in such a manner as to prevent such handbill
from being deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private
premises, except mailboxes, may not be so used when prohibited by federal
postal law or regulations.
   (C)   Exemptions for newspapers and political literature. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to the distribution upon private premises only of
newspapers or political literature; except that newspapers and political
literature shall be placed in such a manner as to prevent their being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private premises.
   (D)   Placing handbills on vehicles. No person shall deposit any handbill in
or upon any vehicle unless the occupant of the vehicle is willing to accept it.
   (E)   Cleanup. It shall be the responsibility of any person distributing
handbills to maintain the area which they are utilizing free of any litter
caused by or related to said handbill distribution.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.11 POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public upon any public place, except
as may be authorized or required by law. No person, except the owner or tenant
shall post any such notice on private property without the permission of the
owner or tenant.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.12 CONSTRUCTION SITES.
   (A)   Each contractor shall be responsible for the job site so that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
public place or other private premises.
   (B)   Litter or other debris, including dirt and mud, deposited as the
result of normal construction process upon any public place or private
premises, shall be removed by the contractor.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.13 LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCKS.
   The person owning, operating or in control of a loading or unloading dock
shall maintain private receptacles for collection of litter, and shall, at all
times, maintain the dock area free of litter in such a manner that litter will
be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public
place or other private premises.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.14 PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Litter receptacles required. Any public place or private premises
containing any provision for parking vehicles shall be equipped with litter
receptacles in compliance with this section. Such premises shall include, but
not be limited to such places as shopping centers, outdoor theaters, drive-in
restaurants, gasoline service stations, apartment developments, parking lots
and any other place where provision is made for vehicles to stop or park in a
designated area for any purpose.
   (B)   Number of receptacles. All premises having parking lots shall provide
in an easily accessible location a minimum of one refuse container for every 50
parking spaces.
   (C)   Specifications. Litter receptacles shall have tight-fitting lids or
tops and shall be weighted or attached to the ground or other fixed structures
as necessary to prevent spillage. A minimum container size of 20 gallons or
75.7 liters shall be used.
   (D)   Cleanliness. Premises used for the purpose designated herein shall be
kept in a litter-free condition and all litter shall be removed periodically
from the receptacles.
   (E)   Obligation to use receptacles. It shall be the duty and obligation of
all persons using parking areas to use such litter receptacles as hereinabove
provided for the purposes intended and it shall be unlawful for any person or
persons to deposit any litter upon any such parking lot.
(2009 Code, § 27-5-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 134: TRESPASS
Section
   
134.01   Trespasses prohibited
   
134.02   Specifically enumerated trespasses; suppression
§ 134.01 TRESPASSES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit a
trespass within this municipality upon either public or private property.
(2009 Code, § 27-6-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.02 SPECIFICALLY ENUMERATED TRESPASSES; SUPPRESSION.
   Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of §
134.01, any of the following acts by any person, firm or corporation shall be
deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the
provisions of §
134.01, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time
to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or violations of this chapter;
the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as follows, to-wit:
   (A)   An entry upon the premises of another, or any part thereof, including
any public property, in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to the premises, or at any point of approach or entry or in violation
of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing, by any owner or
occupant thereof;
   (B)   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making
of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or
entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing by any owner or occupant thereof;
   (C)   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of
being requested, either orally or in writing to leave by any owner or occupant
thereof; or
   (D)   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without
the consent of the person having the right to leave any such vehicle, aircraft
or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right.
(2009 Code, § 27-6-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2
CHAPTER 135: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Parents and guardians responsible for acts
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTS OF VANDALISM AND SIMILAR OFFENSES. Include any of the following acts:
      (1)   Maliciously, recklessly, negligently or knowingly damaging or
destroying or defacing any property within the village, whether such property
is owned by the state, county or governmental body or owned by any private
person, firm, partnership or association;
      (2)   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly, by means of fire or
explosive device, damaging, debasing or destroying any property of another
person;
      (3)   Maliciously, recklessly, negligently or knowingly starting a fire
on land of another person without his or her consent;
      (4)   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly depositing on land or in the
building of another person, without his or her consent, any stink bomb or any
offensive smelling compound and thereby interfering with the use and occupancy
by another of the land or building; or
      (5)   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly, and without authority,
entering into or obtaining control over any building, house trailer, motor
vehicle, aircraft or watercraft or any part thereof of another person without
his or her consent.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN. Includes a foster parent, a person appointed guardian of a
person or given custody of a minor by a Circuit Court of this state, but does
not include a person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor, or
appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile
Court Act.
   MINOR. Includes a person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 18
years of age.
   PARENT. Includes the lawful father and mother of a minor child whether by
birth or adoption.
   PROPERTY. Includes any real estate including improvements thereon and
tangible personal property.
(2009 Code, § 27-7-1)
§ 135.02 PARENTS AND GUARDIANS RESPONSIBLE FOR ACTS.
   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such
parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and said
minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described herein with the
knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian in violation of this section
upon the occurrence of the events described in divisions (A), (B) and (C)
below:
   (A)   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property,
or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt of a violation of any ordinance, law or
statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property;
   (B)   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
service, with a certificate of personal service returned from the village,
following said adjudication or non-judicial sanctions; and
   (C)   If, at any time within one year following receipt of notice set forth
in division (B) above, said minor is either adjudicated to be in violation of
any ordinance, law or statute as described in division (A) above, or shall have
incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from an
admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described
in division (A) above.
(2009 Code, § 27-7-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 740 ILCS 115/1 et seq., 740 ILCS 115/4 and 740 ILCS
5/21-1.2 et seq.
CHAPTER 136: TRUANCY AND CURFEW
Section
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Curfew restrictions
   
136.03   Truancy restrictions
   
136.04   Establishment restrictions
   
136.05   Enforcement restrictions
   
136.06   Civil liability
 
   
136.99   Penalty
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COURT. The Seventh Circuit Court, Sangamon County, Illinois.
   CUSTODIAN.
      (1)   A person who under court order is the custodian of the person of a
minor;
      (2)   A public or private agency with which the court has placed a minor;
or
      (3)   A person acting in the role of a parent by reason of a private
agreement, arrangement, custom or habit.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to,
fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, medical emergency or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business to which the public is
invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   Parent;
      (2)   A person who under court order is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      (3)   A public or private agency with which the court has placed a minor.
   MINOR. A person under 18 years of age.
   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of
another person.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
public ways, sidewalks and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT. A person at least 18 years of age, authorized by a
parent, guardian or custodian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   TRUANCY CURFEW HOURS. The period of the day when the school the minor would
normally attend is in session, on days when the school the minor would normally
attend is in session.
   TRUANT OFFICER. Any officer, appointee, employee or other agency of any
school district or any federal, state or local government, entity or any agency
thereof performing the duties of a truant officer under the Illinois Compulsory
Attendance Statute (105 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.).
   TRUANCY REVIEW BOARD. Any agency or entity established by any school
district or any federal, state or local governmental entity or any counseling
or social agency or any combination thereof recognized by the village and/or
the court as an agency which provides service to improve education performance
and/or attendance.
   VILLAGE CURFEW HOURS. The period of time specified in §
130.46 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 27-8-1)
§ 136.02 CURFEW RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours as
prescribed in §
130.46 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 27-8-2) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.03 TRUANCY RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory education or
to compulsory continuation education by statute or court order to be present in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village
during truancy curfew hours.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent, custodian or guardian of a minor to
knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present
in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village
during truancy curfew hours.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section or §
136.04 that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or responsible adult
if engaged in an activity which would constitute an excused absence from the
school from which the minor would normally attend;
      (2)   Involved in an emergency;
      (3)   Going to or returning from a medical appointment without any detour
or stop;
      (4)   Engaged in, going to or returning home from an employment activity
pursuant to a cooperative school vocation program without any detour or stop;
      (5)   In possession of valid proof that the minor is a student who has
permission to leave the school campus;
      (6)   A bona fide participant in an alternative education or home
schooling program; and
      (7)   Engaged in or subject to an authorized or excused absence from the
school which the minor attends, including, but not limited to, lunch periods.
(2009 Code, § 27-8-3) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.04 ESTABLISHMENT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner, operator or any employee of an
establishment to allow a minor to be present or to remain upon the premises of
the establishment in violation of §§
136.02 or
136.03 during curfew or truancy hours.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution, under this division (B) if the owner,
operator or employee of the establishment immediately upon discovery of a minor
reasonably believed to be in violation of §§
136.02 or
136.03 notified a law enforcement agency that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew or truancy hours and refused to
leave the establishment after being advised to do so by the owner, operator or
employee.
(2009 Code, § 27-8-4) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.05 ENFORCEMENT RESTRICTIONS.
   Every member of the Police Department while on duty is hereby authorized as
follows:
   (A)   For the first offense of any minor violating the provisions of this
chapter, to issue to the minor a citation, in writing, in the same form as
described in division (C) below. For a second offense, the law enforcement
officer is authorized to temporarily detain any minor violating the provisions
of this chapter (regardless of whether a citation is immediately issued) until
the parent, custodian or guardian of the minor shall take him or her into
custody, but such officer shall immediately upon taking custody of the minor
reasonably attempt to communicate with the parent, custodian or guardian of the
minor unless division (E) below is applicable. A parent, custodian or guardian
must take custody of the minor within one hour of the time of notice or be
subject to a charge of $25 per hour as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer or truant officer witnesses or has knowledge
based on reasonable grounds of a violation of this code by any person, such
person may be issued a citation. A citation or complaint may be made to a
police officer or truant officer by any person.
   (C)   (1)   A citation issued hereunder this shall be in writing and shall:
         (a)   State the name of the person being cited and the person’s
address if known;
         (b)   Set forth the specific section of this chapter that was
violated, the date of the violation and a brief description of the violation;
and
         (c)   Be signed by the issuing police officer, truant officer or
complaining party.
      (2)   In each instance where a citation is issued to a minor for
violation of this chapter, a minor’s parent, custodian or guardian shall be
provided a copy of the citation notifying the parent, custodian or guardian of
the charge made against the minor.
   (D)   A minor cited for a citation under this chapter must attend a court
hearing or truancy review board hearing on the citation and must be accompanied
at the hearing by his or her parent, custodian, guardian or other adult person
having the legal care and custody of the minor. If any such person fails to
attend any court hearing with the minor, and unless the interest of justice
would otherwise be served, the court may continue the hearing and shall issue a
notice or a rule to show cause to the person directing that said person to
appear at the continued hearing with the minor. Failure of the person to
thereafter appear shall subject said person to sanctions for contempt of court
as determined by the court.
   (E)   Every member of the Police Department while on duty is hereby
authorized to temporarily detain any minor violating the provisions of §
136.03, regardless of whether a citation is issued, and to deliver and
surrender the minor to the lawful authorities of the school that the minor
would normally attend.
(2009 Code, § 27-8-5)
§ 136.06 CIVIL LIABILITY.
   If a minor is detained for a period of time in excess of one hour which
requires the supervision of the minor by personnel of the Police Department,
the parent, custodian, guardian or other adult having legal care or custody of
the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs therefor. The
parent, custodian, guardian or other adult having legal care or custody of the
minor who has committed any offense of this chapter shall be assessed and
billed for the costs; the costs shall be recoverable in any action enforcing
any provision of this chapter or in a separate civil action. In addition, the
failure to pay the costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter and
subject the violator to the penalties described within §
136.99. In the event any action is filed, the liable party shall be responsible
for all court costs and any reasonable attorney fees incurred by the village in
collecting.
(2009 Code, § 27-8-7)
§ 136.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   In lieu of or in addition to a fine, a minor may be ordered to attend
counseling or to perform ten hours of court approved community service during
times other than the minor’s hours of school attendance and/or the minor’s
parent, custodian, guardian or other adult having legal care or custody of the
minor may be ordered to attend a parenting class or series of parenting classes
or other counseling approved by the court or recommended by the Truancy Review
Board or to attend any program directly related to improving school attendance
and/or performance.
   (C)   In addition to any penalty imposed pursuant to divisions (A) or (B)
above, the minor’s parents, custodian, guardian or other adult having legal
care or custody of the minor may be ordered to pay all amounts imposed as civil
liability under §
136.06.
(2009 Code, § 27-8-6)
CHAPTER 137: CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Section
   
137.01   Definitions
   
137.02   Possession of cannabis
   
137.03   Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited
   
137.04   Possession of cannabis paraphernalia by minors prohibited
 
   
137.99   Penalty
§ 137.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS. Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant cannabis sativa, whether growing
or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and
any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant,
fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufactured salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of
such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake,
or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA. Equipment, products or materials intended to be used
for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, ingesting or otherwise introducing cannabis
into the human body.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any substance as defined in Article II of the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/201 et seq.
   DELIVER or DELIVERY. Actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession of cannabis, with or without consideration, whether or not there is
an agency relationship.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
      (1)   All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than
methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in § 10 of the
Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act and cannabis paraphernalia
as defined in § 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, which are intended
to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, or the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act or
a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in violation of the Illinois Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act.
      (2)   It includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled
substance;
         (b)   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
         (c)   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private
home for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
         (d)   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for
cutting a controlled substance by private persons;
         (e)   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing cocaine or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in
violation of the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act into the human body
including, where applicable, the following items:
            1.   Water pipes;
            2.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            3.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            4.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
            5.   Carburetor pipes;
            6.   Electric pipes;
            7.   Air-driven pipes;
            8.   Chillums;
            9.   Bongs; and
            10.   Ice pipes or chillers;
         (f)   Any items whose purpose, as announced or described by the
seller, is for use in violation of this Act.
   KNOWLEDGE. Knows, acts knowingly or with knowledge:
      (1)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her conduct,
described by the section defining the offense, when he or she is consciously
aware that his or her conduct is of such nature or that such circumstances
exist. KNOWLEDGE of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial
probability that such fact exists;
      (2)   The result of his or her conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that such result is likely to
be caused by his or her conduct; and
      (3)   KNOWLEDGE may be inferred from the surrounding circumstances.
   MANUFACTURE. The production, preparation, propagation, compounding,
conversion or processing of cannabis, either directly or indirectly, by
extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of
chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging or repackaging of cannabis or
labeling of its container, except that this term does not include the
preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of cannabis as an incident to
lawful research, teaching, chemical analysis, or sold and possessed as provided
in the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, as amended, and
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
   NITROUS OXIDE (N2O). A colorless flammable gas used as an anesthetic and in
aerosols.
   NITROUS OXIDE CARTRIDGE. Any cartridge containing less than 20 ounces of
compressed nitrous oxide (N2O).
   ORDINARY PUBLIC VIEW. Within the sight line with normal visual range of a
person, unassisted by visual aids, from a public street or sidewalk adjacent to
real property, or from within an adjacent property.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership or association or any other entity.
   POSSESSION. May be either actual or constructive.
      (1)   ACTUAL POSSESSION means exercising physical dominion.
      (2)   CONSTRUCTIVE POSSESSION may be inferred if the defendant has intent
and capacity to maintain control and dominion over the cannabis or drug
paraphernalia.
   PRODUCE or PRODUCTION. Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting.
(Ord. 19-29, passed 12-9-2019)
§ 137.02 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   Possession, exceeding state limits. It shall be unlawful for and no
person shall possess more than 30 grams of raw cannabis, cannabis-infused
products containing more than 500 milligrams of THC, or five grams of cannabis
product in concentrated form.
   (B)   Possession, sale or providing to minors prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for and no person under the age of 21 shall
possess, consume or use any substance containing cannabis or THC, except as
allowed by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as amended.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for and no person, after purchasing or
otherwise obtaining any substance containing cannabis or THC shall sell, give
or deliver such substance to a person under the age of 21, except as allowed by
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as amended.
   (C)   Possession, outside of sealed and labeled container. Except as may be
lawfully used within a private residence or other location where on-site
consumption is lawfully permitted, it shall be unlawful for any person to
possess cannabis outside of a sealed and properly labeled container as required
under Article 55 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
   (D)   Unlawful consumption of cannabis. It shall be unlawful for and no
person shall use cannabis or cannabis-infused products in public, in ordinary
public view or within the presence of a person under the age of 21, except as
allowed by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as amended,
and as otherwise provided by this chapter. For purposes of this division (D),
the term IN PUBLIC includes, but is not limited to, any street, sidewalk, park,
playground, school, commercial or business establishment, government facility,
office facility, health care facility, in a vehicle, parking lot or garage, or
other place in ordinary public view, but does not include a residential
property when the person is within their residential structure or is not
visible from the public right-of-way and when the residence is not used to
provide licensed child care or other similar social service care and the use is
not done in the presence of a person under the age of 21.
   (E)   Unlawful possession of cannabis sativa plant. It shall be unlawful for
any person to possess a cannabis sativa plant, except as provided by the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as may be amended.
   (F)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Any person who manufactures, distributes, dispenses or is in
possession of any controlled substance for research purposes, pursuant to 720
ILCS 550/11, as hereafter amended, shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section;
      (2)   Any person in possession of a compassionate use of medical cannabis
card, as provided by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as
amended, may grow up to five cannabis plants within a secured enclosed
facility;
      (3)   Possession and/or consumption by any person in possession of a
compassionate use of medical cannabis card, as provided by the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as may be amended, where said possession
and/or consumption is authorized by and in accordance with said Act; and
      (4)   Any person who is licensed and authorized by the state to dispense,
cultivate, grow, infuse or deliver cannabis or substances containing THC to the
extent it is permitted and authorized by state law.
   (G)   Admissibility of cannabis. In a prosecution for a violation of this
section, evidence of cannabis shall only be admitted into evidence based upon:
      (1)   A properly administered field test; or
      (2)   Opinion testimony of a peace officer based on the officer’s
training and experience as qualified by the court.
   (H)   Relationship to state laws. Except as provided herein, violations of
this section shall be considered civil in nature and prosecuted as local
ordinance violations. The village may however, in its discretion, refer
violations involving the possession or consumption of cannabis under the
Cannabis Control Act, or other applicable law, to the State’s Attorney for
charges pursuant to state law instead of bringing charges pursuant to this
section, but no person shall be charged both pursuant to this chapter and state
law for the same offense. If the law requires a charge involving the possession
or consumption of cannabis to be referred to the State’s Attorney to be charged
criminally pursuant to state law, the village shall make such a referral and
shall not prosecute the violation as a local ordinance violation.
(Ord. 19-29, passed 12-9-2019) Penalty, see §
137.99
§ 137.03 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Violation for possession of drug paraphernalia. No person shall
knowingly possess any item of drug paraphernalia, as defined in §
137.01, where it is evident the purpose is for unlawfully ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing a controlled substance into the human body, or in
preparing a controlled substance for that use within the corporate limits of
the village. In determining evidence of an unlawful purpose, the trier of fact
may take into consideration the proximity of the controlled substances to the
drug paraphernalia or the presence of a controlled substance on the drug
paraphernalia.
   (B)   Forfeiture. Drug paraphernalia, as defined in §
137.01, seized by police officers pursuant to an arrest or issuance of a notice
to appear for a violation of this section, shall be forfeited to the village
upon a plea of guilty or liability, a finding of guilt or liable and/or a
disposition of court supervision or probation by a court of law or upon the
individual utilizing any administrative remedy allowed by the village without
further order of the court. Any other items which may be seized or forfeited
pursuant to 720 ILCS 600/5, may be forfeited in the same manner as described
therein for a violation of this section.
   (C)   Exemptions. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling or
other use of a controlled substance as an incident to lawful sale, use,
research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale;
      (2)   Items historically and customarily used in connection with the
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting
or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance unless such item has the
presence of a controlled substance. Items exempt under this division (C)
include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco
pipes and cigarette rolling papers;
      (3)   Items listed in the definition of drug paraphernalia in §
137.01 if said items are used solely for decorative purposes, when such items
have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any
illicit purposes prohibited by this chapter; and
      (4)   A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes
or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act, 720 ILCS 635/0.01 et
seq.
   (D)   Relationship to state laws. Except as provided herein, violations of
this section shall be considered civil in nature and prosecuted as local
ordinance violations. The village may however, in its discretion, refer
violations involving the possession or use of drug paraphernalia under the Drug
Paraphernalia Control Act, or other applicable law, to the State’s Attorney for
charges instead of bringing charges pursuant to this section, but no person
shall be charged both pursuant to this chapter and state law for the same
offense. If the law requires a charge involving drug paraphernalia to be
referred to the State’s Attorney to be charged criminally pursuant to state
law, the village shall make such a referral and shall not prosecute the
violation as a local ordinance violation.
(Ord. 19-29, passed 12-9-2019) Penalty, see §
137.99
§ 137.04 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Violation for possession of cannabis paraphernalia by minors. No
person under the age of 21 shall knowingly possess any item of cannabis
paraphernalia where it is evident the purpose is for unlawfully ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis into the human body, or in preparing
cannabis for that use within the corporate limits of the village. In
determining evidence of an unlawful purpose, the trier of fact may take into
consideration the proximity of the controlled substances to the cannabis
paraphernalia or the presence of a controlled substance on the cannabis
paraphernalia.
   (B)   Forfeiture. Cannabis paraphernalia as defined in §
137.01, seized by police officers pursuant to an arrest or issuance of a notice
to appear for a violation of this section, shall be forfeited to the village
upon a plea of guilty or liability, a finding of guilt or liable and/or a
disposition of court supervision or probation by a court of law or upon the
individual utilizing any administrative remedy allowed by the village without
further order of the court. Any other items which may be seized or forfeited
pursuant to 720 ILCS 600/5, may be forfeited in the same manner as described
therein for a violation of this section.
(Ord. 19-29, passed 12-9-2019) Penalty, see §
137.99
§ 137.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who pleads guilty or liable or is found guilty or liable by
a court of law or administrative tribunal for a violation of §
137.02 shall be fined as follows:
      (1)   Section 137.02(A) shall be punished by a fine of $250;
      (2)   Section 137.02(B) shall be punished by a fine of $250;
      (3)   Section 137.02(C) shall be punished by a fine of $250;
      (4)   Section 137.02(D) shall be punished by a fine of $250; and
      (5)   Section 137.02(E) shall be punished by a fine of $250 per cannabis
sativa plant.
   (B)   Any person who pleads guilty or liable or is found guilty or liable by
a court of law or administrative tribunal of violating §
137.03 shall be punished by a fine of $250.
   (C)   Any person who pleads guilty or liable or is found guilty or liable by
a court of law or administrative tribunal of violating §
137.04 shall be punished by a fine of $250.
(Ord. 19-29, passed 12-9-2019)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
152.   FLOOD PLAINS
      
153.   STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
      
154.   BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL CODE
      
155.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Codes
   
150.001   Adoption by reference
   
150.002   Unconstitutional
   
150.003   Existing suits
Residential Building Code
   
150.015   Residential Building Code adopted
   
150.016   2018 Edition
Illinois Plumbing Code
   
150.030   Adoption of Illinois Plumbing Code
   
150.031   2004 Edition
Electrical Code
   
150.045   Adoption of the National Electrical Code
   
150.046   2005 Edition
Mechanical Code
   
150.060   Adoption of International Mechanical Code
   
150.061   1996 Edition adopted
Life Safety Code
   
150.075   Adoption of NFPA Life Safety Code
   
150.076   Life Safety Code Edition
International Energy Conservation Code
   
150.090   Code adopted
   
150.091   Revised sections
   
150.092   Repealing ordinance
   
150.093   Sections unconstitutional
   
150.094   Impending lawsuits
ADA Code
   
150.105   Code adopted
   
150.106   Revised sections
   
150.107   Unconstitutional provisions
   
150.108   Impending lawsuits
   
Appendix A: Fee schedule
BUILDING CODES
§ 150.001 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Building Code,
2018 Edition, including Appendix B but excluding all other appendixes as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Building Code of the village for regulating and governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings, structures unfit for
human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of the Village
Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this subchapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any.
   (B)   All permits issued for this Code and the subsequent codes in this
chapter shall be signed by the Village President or his or her designated
representative.
(2009 Code, § 6-1-1) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006; Ord. 20-12, passed 6-8-
2020; Ord. 22-23, passed 10-11-2022)
§ 150.002 UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this subchapter, for
any reason, is held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this subchapter. The village hereby
declares that it would have passed this subchapter, and each section, division,
clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, divisions, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
(2009 Code, § 6-1-3) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.003 EXISTING SUITS.
   Nothing in this subchapter or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquires or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited as §
150.002; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 6-1-4) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
Editor’s note:
   Once a building permit is issued, the applicable building codes of any unit
of local government that are in effect at the time of the issuance of the
permit shall be the only building codes that apply for the duration of the
building permit (65 ILCS 5/11-39-4).
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
§ 150.015 RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   The International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendixes A, B,
C, G, J, Q, R & S but excluding all other appendixes as published by the
International Code Council, and referred to and incorporated in IBC (RBC) be
and is hereby adopted as part of the Building Code of the village for the
control of one- and two-family dwelling units as herein provided; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said RBC
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this subchapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in this subchapter; provided, however, that in the event any of the
provisions of the said RBC are in conflict with the Illinois Municipal Code or
any other ordinance of the village, the more restrictive regulation shall
prevail.
(2009 Code, § 6-2-1) (Ord. 20-12, passed 6-8-2020; Ord. 22-23, passed 10-11-
2022)
§ 150.016 2018 EDITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, any reference to IBC will mean
International Building Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix B but excluding
all other appendixes; any reference to RBC will mean the International
Residential Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendixes A, B, C, G, J, Q, R & S
but excluding all other appendixes; any reference in IBC, RBC and this
subchapter to the governing body or the appointing authority shall be read as
meaning the President and Board of Trustees; any reference to the village will
mean the Village of Rochester, Illinois; and any reference to the Trustee will
mean the Trustee of Public Health and Safety of the village. Any reference to
the Code Official shall mean a person appointed from time to time by the
President and the Board of Trustees of the village to oversee and/or
participate in the plan, check and inspections of the building activity within
the village. Any reference to the Building Inspector will mean the person or
persons duly appointed from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees
of the village to administer the Building Code.
(2009 Code, § 6-2-2) (Ord. 20-12, passed 6-8-2020; Ord. 22-23, passed 10-11-
2022)
ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE
§ 150.030 ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE.
   The Illinois State Plumbing Code, 2004 Edition (“ISPC”), promulgated
pursuant to authority granted by the Illinois Plumbing License Law is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference pursuant to the authority of the
Illinois Municipal Code; provided that in the event any of the provisions of
the said ISPC are in conflict with any other ordinance of the village, said
ordinance shall prevail.
(2009 Code, § 6-3-1) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.031 2004 EDITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter any reference to the ISPC will mean the
2004 edition of the Illinois State Plumbing Code; any reference in the ISPC and
this subchapter to the governing body or the appointing authority shall be read
as meaning the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Rochester,
Illinois; any reference to the village will mean the Village of Rochester,
Illinois; and any further reference to the Trustee will mean the Trustee of
Public Health and Safety of the village. Any reference to the Code Official
and/or Plumbing Inspector will mean the person or persons appointed from time
to time by the President and Board of Trustees of the village to administer the
Plumbing Code.
(2009 Code, § 6-3-2) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 150.045 ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition (“NEC”), as published by the
National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein
by reference pursuant to the authority of the Illinois Municipal Code; provided
that in the event any of the provisions of the said NEC are in conflict with
the Illinois Municipal Code or any other ordinance of the village, the more
restrictive regulation shall prevail.
(2009 Code, § 6-4-1) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.046 2005 EDITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter any reference to the NEC will mean the
2005 edition of the National Electrical Code; any reference in the NEC and this
subchapter to the governing body or the appointing authority shall be read as
meaning the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Rochester,
Illinois; any reference to the village will mean the Village of Rochester,
Illinois; and any further reference to the Trustee will mean the Trustee of
Public Health and Safety of the village. Any reference to the Code Official
and/or Electrical Inspector will mean the person or persons appointed from time
to time by the President and Board of Trustees of the village to administer the
Electrical Code.
(2009 Code, § 6-4-2) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
MECHANICAL CODE
§ 150.060 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
   The International Mechanical Code, (“IMC”), as published by the
International Code Administrators, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference pursuant to the authority of the Illinois Municipal Code; provided
that in the event any of the provisions of the said IMC are in conflict with
the Illinois Municipal Code or any other ordinance of the village, the more
restrictive regulation shall prevail.
(2009 Code, § 6-5-1) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.061 1996 EDITION ADOPTED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter any reference to the IMC will mean the
1996 edition of the International Mechanical Code; any reference in the IMC and
this subchapter to the governing body or the appointing authority shall be read
as meaning the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Rochester,
Illinois; any reference to the village will mean the Village of Rochester,
Illinois; and any further reference to the Trustee will mean the Trustee of
Public Health and Safety of the village. Any reference to the Code Official
and/or Mechanical Inspector will mean the person or persons appointed from time
to time by the President and Board of Trustees of the village to administer the
Mechanical Code.
(2009 Code, § 6-5-2) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
LIFE SAFETY CODE
§ 150.075 ADOPTION OF NFPA LIFE SAFETY CODE.
   The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, the most recently published edition by the
National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein
by reference pursuant to the authority of the Illinois Municipal Code; provided
that in the event any of the provisions of the said NFPA are in conflict with
the Illinois Municipal Code or any other ordinance of the village, the more
restrictive regulation shall prevail.
(2009 Code, § 6-6-1) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.076 LIFE SAFETY CODE EDITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, any reference to the NFPA will mean the
most recently published edition of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code; any reference
in the NFPA and this subchapter to the governing body or the appointing
authority shall be read as meaning the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Rochester, Illinois; any reference to the village will mean the
Village of Rochester, Illinois; and any further reference to the Trustee will
mean the Trustee of Public Health and Safety of the village. Any reference to
the Code Official and/or Life Safety Code Inspector will mean the person or
persons appointed from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees of
the village to administer NFPA.
(2009 Code, § 6-6-2) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
§ 150.090 CODE ADOPTED.
   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Village Manager, being marked and designated as the International Energy
Conservation Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the
village for regulating and governing energy efficient building envelopes and
installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code on file in office of the
Village Manager are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this subchapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.091.
(2009 Code, § 6-7-1) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.091 REVISED SECTIONS.
   The following sections are hereby revised: Section 101.1. Insert: Village of
Rochester.
(2009 Code, § 6-7-2) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.092 REPEALING ORDINANCE.
   Ord. 06-07 and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.
(2009 Code, § 6-7-3) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.093 SECTIONS UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this subchapter is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this subchapter. The village hereby
declares that it would have passed this subchapter, and each section, division,
clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, divisions, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
(2009 Code, § 6-7-4) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.094 IMPENDING LAWSUITS.
   Nothing in this subchapter or in the Energy Conservation Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in §
150.092; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 6-7-5) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
ADA CODE
§ 150.105 CODE ADOPTED.
   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Village Manager, being marked and designated as the ADA Code, the most recent
federal and state codes and statutes, be and is hereby adopted as the ADA Code
of the village for regulating and governing accessibility; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said ADA Code on
file in office of the Village Manager are hereby referred to, adopted and made
a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subchapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.106.
(2009 Code, § 6-8-1) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.106 REVISED SECTIONS.
   The following sections are hereby revised: Section 101.1. Insert: Village of
Rochester.
(2009 Code, § 6-8-2) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.107 UNCONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this subchapter is
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this subchapter. The village hereby
declares that it would have passed this subchapter, and each section, division,
clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, divisions, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
(2009 Code, § 6-8-3) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
§ 150.108 IMPENDING LAWSUITS.
   Nothing in this subchapter or in the ADA Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in §
150.092 of this subchapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 6-8-4) (Ord. 06-07, passed 7-12-2006)
APPENDIX A: FEE SCHEDULE
   (A)   No building or structure shall be constructed, installed, repaired,
remodeled or demolished in the village which is under the jurisdiction of the
village without prior application for a permit to the village and receipt from
the village of the appropriate permit for such construction, installation,
repair, remodel or demolition. In addition a permit shall be required for any
structure including a portable or moveable building.
   (B)   The valuation to be used in computing the permit fees shall be as set
forth in the Schedule of Building Valuations.
   (C)   The fee for each permit shall be as follows and shall be paid when the
application is filed or upon receipt of a statement from the village prior to
the issuance of a permit.
      (1)   The issuance of every permit.
 
New building                                   $50
Addition to or remodeling of existing building $30
 
      (2)   Inspection fee schedule. In addition to the fee provided in
division (C)(1) above, the following fees shall be assessed:
 Plan Review
                            Plan Review
Minimum plan check fee       $25
Commercial building           
   Up to 1,500 sq. ft.    $100 per floor
   1,500 sq. ft. or more  $250 for one floor
                            $100 for each additional floor
Residential building          
   1—2 dwelling units   $25
   3—12 dwelling units  $25 + $10 for each dwelling unit over 2
   13 or more dwelling uni$125 + $5 for each dwelling unit over 12
Note: Basement same as story when used for other than storage or mechanical
rooms
 
      (3)   Site inspections.
Construction and remodel commercial  
building
   Up to 1,500 sq. ft.           $25 for each floor
   1,500—3,000 sq. ft.         $30 for each floor
   Over 3,000 sq. ft.            $40 for each floor
   Special or reinspection       $25
Construction residential building
   1—2 dwelling units          $25
   3—12 dwelling units         $25 + $5 for each dwelling unit over 2
   13 or more dwelling units     $75 + $3 for each dwelling unit over 12
   Remodel residential building  $25
 
      (4)   Fees for site inspections. Fees for site inspections are for
individual inspections. Each type of inspection (building, electrical,
mechanical and plumbing) is a separate inspection.
      (5)   Preliminary plan check fee. Preliminary plan check fee will be a
minimum of $50 or 15% of the permit fee whichever is larger. If a permit is
eventually issued, the amount shall be deducted from the final permit fee.
      (6)   Transfer. Should any building contract be taken from the original
contractor before completion thereof and/or transferred to another contractor
or owner, the person, firm, corporation to whom the transfer has been made
shall obtain a new permit. The fee will be $20 if no changes have been made
from the original permit.
      (7)   Issuance. The issuance of every permit (in addition to the other
fees set forth in this
Appendix A):
Addition to or remodeling of existing building $30
Demolition                                     $50
Inspecting fence installation                  $25
New building                                   $50
New siding or roof                             $30
Signs pursuant to §                           $30
156.167 1
Swimming pool in excess of 8,000 gallons2      $10
1 Fee includes fee for application for zoning certificate in §
156.209
2 Permit fee is in addition to the required structural, plumbing, electric or
other inspection fees
 
      (8)   Public health and safety fee. $600 per premises.
(Ord. 99-13, passed 12-13-1999; Ord. 11-10, passed 9-12-2011)
CHAPTER 151: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Title
   
151.002   Scope
   
151.003   Intent
   
151.004   Severability
Applicability
   
151.015   General
   
151.016   Maintenance
   
151.017   Application of other Codes
   
151.018   Existing remedies
   
151.019   Workmanship
   
151.020   Historic buildings
   
151.021   Referenced Codes and standards
   
151.022   Requirements not covered by Code
Property Maintenance Inspection
   
151.035   General
   
151.036   Appointment
   
151.037   Deputies
   
151.038   Liability
   
151.039   Fees
Duties and Powers of the Code Official
   
151.050   General
   
151.051   Rule-making authority
   
151.052   Inspections
   
151.053   Right of entry
   
151.054   Identification
   
151.055   Notices and orders
   
151.056   Department records
   
151.057   Coordination of inspections
Approval
   
151.070   Modifications
   
151.071   Alternative materials, methods and equipment
   
151.072   Required testing
   
151.073   Material and equipment reuse
Violations
   
151.085   Unlawful acts
   
151.086   Notice of violation
   
151.087   Prosecution of violation
   
151.088   Violation penalties
   
151.089   Abatement of violation
Notices and Orders
   
151.100   Notice to person responsible
   
151.101   Form
   
151.102   Method of service
   
151.103   Penalties
   
151.104   Transfer of ownership
Unsafe Structures and Equipment
   
151.115   General
   
151.116   Closing of vacant structures
   
151.117   Notice
   
151.118   Placarding
   
151.119   Prohibited occupancy
Emergency Measures
   
151.130   Imminent danger
   
151.131   Temporary safeguards
   
151.132   Closing streets
   
151.133   Emergency repairs
   
151.134   Costs of emergency repairs
   
151.135   Hearing
Demolition
   
151.150   General
   
151.151   Notices and orders
   
151.152   Failure to comply
   
151.153   Salvage materials
Means of Appeal
   
151.165   Application for appeal
   
151.166   Membership of the Board
   
151.167   Notice of meeting
   
151.168   Open hearing
   
151.169   Postponed hearing
   
151.170   Board decision
   
151.171   Court review
   
151.172   Stays of enforcement
Definitions
   
151.185   Scope
   
151.186   Interchangeability
   
151.187   Terms defined in other Codes
   
151.188   Terms not defined
   
151.189   Parts
   
151.190   Definitions
General Requirements
   
151.205   Scope
   
151.206   Responsibility
   
151.207   Vacant structures and land
General Requirements; Exterior Property Areas
   
151.220   Sanitation
   
151.221   Grading and drainage
   
151.222   Sidewalks and driveways
   
151.223   Weeds
   
151.224   Rodent harborage
   
151.225   Exhaust vents
   
151.226   Accessory structures
   
151.227   Motor vehicles
   
151.228   Defacement of property
General Requirements; Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs
   
151.240   Swimming pools
   
151.241   Enclosures
General Requirements; Exterior Structure
   
151.255   General
   
151.256   Protective treatment
   
151.257   Premises identification
   
151.258   Structural members
   
151.259   Foundation walls
   
151.260   Exterior walls
   
151.261   Roofs and drainage
   
151.262   Decorative features
   
151.263   Overhang extensions
   
151.264   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies
   
151.265   Chimneys and towers
   
151.266   Handrails and guards
   
151.267   Window, skylight and door frames
   
151.268   Insect screens
   
151.269   Doors
   
151.270   Basement hatchways
   
151.271   Guards for basement windows
   
151.272   Building security
General Requirements; Interior Structure
   
151.285   General
   
151.286   Structural members
   
151.287   Interior surfaces
   
151.288   Stairs and walking surfaces
   
151.289   Handrails and guards
   
151.290   Interior doors
General Requirements; Handrails and Guardrails
   
151.305   General
General Requirements; Rubbish and Garbage
   
151.320   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage
   
151.321   Disposal of rubbish
   
151.322   Disposal of garbage
General Requirements; Extermination
   
151.335   Infestation
   
151.336   Owner
   
151.337   Single occupant
   
151.338   Multiple occupancy
   
151.339   Occupant
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations; Generally
   
151.350   Scope
   
151.351   Responsibility
   
151.352   Alternative devices
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations; Light
   
151.365   Habitable spaces
   
151.366   Common halls and stairways
   
151.367   Other spaces
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations; Ventilation
   
151.380   Habitable spaces
   
151.381   Bathrooms and toilet rooms
   
151.382   Cooking facilities
   
151.383   Process ventilation
   
151.384   Clothes dryer exhaust
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations; Occupancy Limitations
   
151.395   Privacy
   
151.396   Minimum room widths
   
151.397   Minimum ceiling heights
   
151.398   Bedroom requirements
   
151.399   Overcrowding
   
151.400   Efficiency unit
   
151.401   Food preparation
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements; Generally
   
151.415   Scope
   
151.416   Responsibility
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements; Required Facilities
   
151.430   Dwelling units
   
151.431   Rooming houses
   
151.432   Hotels
   
151.433   Employees’ facilities
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements; Toilet Rooms
   
151.455   Privacy
   
151.456   Location
   
151.457   Location of employee toilet facilities
   
151.458   Floor surface
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements; Plumbing Systems and Fixtures
   
151.470   General
   
151.471   Fixture clearances
   
151.472   Plumbing system hazards
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements; Water System
   
151.485   General
   
151.486   Contamination
   
151.487   Supply
   
151.488   Water heating facilities
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements; Sanitary Drainage System
   
151.500   General
   
151.501   Maintenance
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements; Storm Drainage
   
151.515   General
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements; Generally
   
151.530   Scope
   
151.531   Responsibility
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements; Heating Facilities
   
151.545   Facilities required
   
151.546   Residential occupancies
   
151.547   Heat supply
   
151.548   Occupiable work spaces
   
151.549   Room temperature measurement
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements; Mechanical Equipment
   
151.560   Mechanical appliances
   
151.561   Removal of combustion products
   
151.562   Clearances
   
151.563   Safety controls
   
151.564   Combustion air
   
151.565   Energy conservation devices
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements; Electrical Facilities
   
151.580   Facilities required
   
151.581   Service
   
151.582   Electrical system hazards
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements; Electrical Equipment
   
151.595   Installation
   
151.596   Receptacles
   
151.597   Lighting fixtures
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements; Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters
   
151.610   General
   
151.611   Elevators
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements; Duct Systems
   
151.625   General
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the “Property Maintenance Code of the
Village of Rochester”, hereinafter referred to as “this Code”.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-1)
§ 151.002 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this Code shall apply to all existing residential and
nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum
requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities
for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the
elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and
sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants;
the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration,
enforcement and penalties.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-2)
Editor’s note:
   (A)   This section establishes the broad purpose of the Code—to protect the
pubic health, safety and welfare in both existing residential and
nonresidential structures and on all existing premises.
   (B)   Four specific areas are addressed in greater detail in subsequent
sections:
      (1)   Establishing minimum maintenance standards for such elements as
basic equipment, light, ventilation, heating, sanitation and fire safety;
      (2)   Fixing responsibility among owners, operators and occupants for
following the Code;
      (3)   Regulating the use of existing structures and premises; and
      (4)   Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
   (C)   These four categories provide communities with the tools to reduce
risks created by deteriorated or unsafe buildings and help communities upgrade
and maintain other existing structures.
§ 151.003 INTENT.
   This Code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to
ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the
continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing
structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be
altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required
herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of occupancy in existing
buildings shall comply with the International Existing Building Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-3)
Editor’s note:
   This Code is intended to provide requirements addressing the public health,
safety and welfare as they relate to the use and maintenance of existing
structures and premises. The Code requires existing structures and premises
that are not in compliance with the Code to be altered or repaired to meet the
Code. The Code requirements are intended to represent the minimum acceptable
level of public health and safety. The International Existing Building Code®
(IEBC®) is listed as the required Code for all repairs, alterations, additions
and change of occupancies to existing structures.
§ 151.004 SEVERABILITY.
   If a section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is, for any
reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-4)
Editor’s note:
   Only invalid sections of the Code (as established by the court of
jurisdiction) can be set aside. This is essential to safeguard the application
of the Code text to situations whereby a provision of the Code is declared
illegal or unconstitutional. This section would preserve the legislative action
that put the legal provisions in place.
APPLICABILITY
§ 151.015 GENERAL.
   The provisions of this Code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating
to structures and premises, as set forth in §§
151.001 through
151.004. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this Code specify
different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-5)
§ 151.016 MAINTENANCE.
   Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this Code or a
previous regulation or Code under which the structure or premises was
constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No
owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or
utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off
from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary
interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The
requirements of this Code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or
abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing
structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner’s
designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings,
structures and premises.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-6)
Editor’s note:
   This section contains general maintenance requirements. The Code
specifically prohibits the disconnection of any required utilities for an
occupied dwelling. This helps to safeguard persons who have a physical
condition and are dependent on these systems. Some examples of this include:
    a person who has to have electricity to power a kidney dialysis machine; a
patient who is on an oxygen system full time; or someone with particularly bad
allergies who needs to have an air conditioning system to help filter the air.
Any safety system that exists in a building must be maintained. A fire
protection or safety system is not to be removed from a building if it is
required by the Code or a previous regulation or code that was in effect when
the building was built. This section also specifies that the owner or the
owner’s agent is responsible for maintenance, not the tenants of rental
property.
§ 151.017 APPLICATION OF OTHER CODES.
   Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy,
shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the
International Existing Building Code. Nothing in this Code shall be construed
to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the village zoning regulations
as codified in
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-7)
§ 151.018 EXISTING REMEDIES.
   The provision in this Code shall not be construed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to
the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and
unsanitary.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-8)
§ 151.019 WORKMANSHIP.
   Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused
directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this Code shall be executed and
installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s installation instructions.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-9)
§ 151.020 HISTORIC BUILDINGS.
   The provisions of this Code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or
structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures
are judged by the Code Official to be safe and in the public interest of
health, safety and welfare.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-10)
§ 151.021 REFERENCED CODES AND STANDARDS.
   The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be those that are
listed in §
94.075 of this code of ordinances and considered part of the requirements of
this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences
occur between provisions of this Code and the referenced standards, the
provisions of this Code shall apply.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-11)
§ 151.022 REQUIREMENTS NOT COVERED BY CODE.
   Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an
existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and
general welfare not specifically covered by this Code shall be determined by
the Code Official.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-12)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION
§ 151.035 GENERAL.
   The Department of Property Maintenance Inspection is hereby created and the
executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code Official.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-14)
§ 151.036 APPOINTMENT.
   The Code Official shall be appointed by the President with the advice and
consent of the Village Board; and the Code Official shall not be removed from
office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on specific and
relevant charges by and before the appointing authority.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-15)
§ 151.037 DEPUTIES.
   In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with
the concurrence of the appointing authority, the Code Official shall have the
authority to appoint a Deputy Code Official, other related technical officers,
inspectors and other employees.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-16)
§ 151.038 LIABILITY.
   (A)   The Code Official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of
this Code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered
liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any
damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or
permitted in the discharge of official duties.
   (B)   Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act
performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and
under the provisions of this Code shall be defended by the legal representative
of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The Code
Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or
proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Code; and
any officer of the department of property maintenance inspection, acting in
good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed
under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the
performance of official duties in connection therewith.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-17)
§ 151.039 FEES.
   The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying
out its responsibilities under this Code shall be set by the village and made
available to the public.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-18)
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL
§ 151.050 GENERAL.
   The Code Official shall enforce the provisions of this Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-21)
§ 151.051 RULE-MAKING AUTHORITY.
   The Code Official shall have authority as necessary in the interest of
public health, safety and general welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and
procedures; to interpret and implement the provisions of this Code; to secure
the intent thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of local
climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving
structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this
Code, or of violating accepted engineering methods involving public safety.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-22)
§ 151.052 INSPECTIONS.
   The Code Official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall
accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports
of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible
officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The Code
Official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to
report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the
appointing authority.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-23)
§ 151.053 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Code Official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at
reasonable times to inspect, subject to constitutional restrictions on
unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the
Code Official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-24)
Editor’s note:
   This section establishes the right of the Code Official to enter the
premises in order to make the inspections required by §
151.052. The right to enter structures or premises is limited. First, to
protect the right of privacy, the owner or occupant must grant the Code
Official permission before an interior inspection of the property can be
conducted. Permission is not required for inspections that can be accomplished
from within the public right-of-way. Second, such access may be denied     by
the owner or occupant. Unless the inspector has reasonable cause to believe
that a violation     of the Code exists, access may be unattainable. Third,
Code Officials must present proper     identification and request admittance
during reasonable hours, usually the normal business hours of the
establishment, to be admitted. Fourth, inspections must be aimed at securing or
determining compliance with the provisions and intent of the regulations that
are specifically within the established scope of the Code Official’s authority.
   Searches of a private residence to gather information for the purpose of
enforcing codes, ordinances or regulations are considered unreasonable and are
prohibited by the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. “Reasonable cause”
in the context of this section must be distinguished from “probable cause”,
which is required to gain access to property in criminal cases. The burden of
proof establishing reasonable cause may vary among jurisdictions. Usually, an
inspector must show that the property is subject to inspection under the
provisions of the Code; that the interests of the public health, safety and
welfare outweigh the individual’s right to maintain privacy; and that such an
inspection is required solely to determine compliance with the provisions of
the Code.
   Many jurisdictions do not recognize the concept of an administrative warrant
and may require the Code Official to prove probable or reasonable cause in
order to gain access upon refusal. This burden of proof is usually more
substantial, often requiring the Code Official to stipulate in advance why
access is needed (usually access is restricted to gathering evidence for
seeking an indictment or making an arrest), what specific items or information
is sought, its relevance to the case against the individual subject, how
knowledge of the relevance of the information or items sought was obtained and
how the evidence sought will be used. In all such cases, the right to privacy
must always be weighed against the right of the Code Official to conduct an
inspection to verify that the public health, safety and welfare are not in
jeopardy. Such important and complex constitutional issues should be discussed
with the jurisdiction’s legal counsel. Jurisdictions should establish
procedures for securing the necessary court orders when an inspection is deemed
necessary following a refusal.
§ 151.054 IDENTIFICATION.
   The Code Official shall carry proper identification when inspecting
structures or premises in the performance of duties under this Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-25)
§ 151.055 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   The Code Official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure
compliance with this Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-26)
§ 151.056 DEPARTMENT RECORDS.
   The Code Official shall keep official records of all business and activities
of the department specified in the provisions of this Code. Such records shall
be retained in the official records as long as the building or structure to
which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for
by other regulations.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-27)
§ 151.057 COORDINATION OF INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever in the enforcement of this Code or another code or ordinance,
the responsibility of more than one Code Official of the jurisdiction is
involved, it shall be the duty of the Code Officials involved to coordinate
their inspections and administrative orders as fully as practicable so that the
owners and occupants of the structure shall not be subjected to visits by
numerous inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders.
   (B)   Whenever an inspector from any agency or department observes an
apparent or actual violation of some provision of some law, ordinance or code
not within the inspector’s authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the
findings to the Code Official having jurisdiction.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-28)
APPROVAL
§ 151.070 MODIFICATIONS.
   Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this Code, the Code Official shall have the authority to grant
modifications for individual cases, provided the Code Official shall first find
that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this Code impractical
and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Code
and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety
requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded
and entered in the department files.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-30)
§ 151.071 ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS, METHODS AND EQUIPMENT.
   The provisions of this Code are not intended to prevent the installation of
any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically
prescribed by this Code, provided that any such alternative has been approved.
An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the
Code Official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with
the intent of the provisions of this Code, and that the material, method or
work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that
prescribed in this Code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability and safety.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-31)
§ 151.072 REQUIRED TESTING.
   (A)   General. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with
the provisions of this Code, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this Code, or in order to substantiate claims
for alternative materials or methods, the Code Official shall have the
authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense
to the jurisdiction.
   (B)   Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this Code or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Code Official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing
procedures performed by an approved agency.
   (C)   Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the Code Official
for the period required for retention of public records.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-32)
§ 151.073 MATERIAL AND EQUIPMENT REUSE.
   Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements
are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed
in good and proper working condition and approved.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-33)
VIOLATIONS
§ 151.085 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict
with or in violation of any of the provisions of this ode.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-35) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.086 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   The Code Official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance
with §§
151.100 through
151.104.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-36)
§ 151.087 PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION.
   Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in
accordance with §§
151.100 through
151.104 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be
deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied
with, the Code Official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any
action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall
be a lien upon such real estate.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-37)
§ 151.088 VIOLATION PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted
within the limits provided by §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-38) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.089 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION.
   The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to
restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business
or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-39)
Editor’s note:
   Despite the assessment of a penalty in the form of a fine against a
violator, the violation itself must still be corrected. Failure to make the
necessary corrections will result in the violator being subject to additional
penalties as described in the proceeding section.
NOTICES AND ORDERS
§ 151.100 NOTICE TO PERSON RESPONSIBLE.
   Whenever the Code Official determines that there has been a violation of
this Code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall
be given in the manner prescribed in §§
151.101 and
151.102 to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this Code.
Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with §
151.117.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-41)
§ 151.101 FORM.
   Such notice prescribed in §
151.100 shall be in accordance with all of the following:
   (A)   Be in writing;
   (B)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
   (C)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice
is being issued;
   (D)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into
compliance with the provisions of this Code;
   (E)   Inform the property owner of the right to appeal; and
   (F)   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with §
151.087.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-42)
§ 151.102 METHOD OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof
is:
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address; or
      (3)   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the structure affected by such notice.
   (B)   All of the services noted above may be expensive and time consuming.
In some communities, the courts may consider service to be valid if the notice
was sent to the last known address of the owner or owner’s agent by regular
postage and the notice was not returned by the post office. This method of
service is obviously much cheaper and usually faster than waiting for the
return of a certified letter. It must, however, be acceptable to the court
system. The jurisdiction’s attorney should be consulted to determine that the
type of service is legally acceptable, reasonably cost effective and timely.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-43)
§ 151.103 PENALTIES.
   Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in
§
151.088.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-44) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.104 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has
received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served
to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit
or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice
of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish
the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance
order or notice of violation issued by the Code Official and shall furnish to
the Code Official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance
order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without
condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance
order or notice of violation.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-45)
Editor’s note:
   When a property has a pending violation order, it is unlawful for an owner
to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of the property without
either following the order or advising the buyer, mortgagee and the like of the
pending violation. The owner must prove that the buyer has received notice of
pending violations by providing the Code Official with a signed, notarized
receipt from the new transferee.
   Determining who is the current owner of a building is a frustrating and
difficult activity. To evade code enforcement action, owners will frequently
transfer ownership of their property. This provision of the Code permits the
Code Official to cite the seller if he or she did not provide the Code Official
with the required notification when the property was transferred; thus, even
though the seller may avoid complying with the outstanding violation orders, he
or she can still be charged with a violation for failing to provide proof that
the transferee was aware of the pending orders.
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
§ 151.115 GENERAL.
   When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Official to be unsafe, or
when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such
structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
   (A)   Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be
dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of
such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete
collapse is possible.
   (B)   Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable
liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to
life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or
structure.
   (C)   Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human
occupancy whenever the Code Official finds that such structure is unsafe,
unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or
lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating
facilities or other essential equipment required by this Code, or because the
location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the
structure or to the public.
   (D)   Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in
part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this Code, or was
erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-47)
Editor’s note:
   This section provides a brief description of conditions where the Code
Official is given the authority to condemn an existing structure or equipment.
Where a structure or equipment is “unlawful”, as described in the text of this
section, that structure or equipment does not comply with the requirements of
the Code. The deficiencies are such that an unsafe condition or a condition
that is unfit for human occupancy exists.
   An unlawful structure is one that has serious deficiencies such that an
unsafe condition or a condition that is unfit for human occupancy exists. An
unlawful structure does not mean one where there are criminal activities.
§ 151.116 CLOSING OF VACANT STRUCTURES.
   If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and
is not in danger of structural collapse, the Code Official is authorized to
post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed
up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close
up the premises within the time specified in the order, the Code Official shall
cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency
or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall
be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal
resource.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-48)
§ 151.117 NOTICE.
   Whenever the Code Official has condemned a structure or equipment under the
provisions of this subchapter, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the
person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with
§
151.102. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the
condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in §
151.101.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-49)
§ 151.118 PLACARDING.
   (A)   General. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply
with the notice provisions within the time given, the Code Official shall post
on the premises or on defective equipment, a placard bearing the word
“Condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
   (B)   Placard removal. The Code Official shall remove the condemnation
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and
placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or
removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the Code Official shall
be subject to the penalties provided by this Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-50)
Editor’s note:
   Only the Code Official is authorized to remove a condemnation placard. The
Code Official is to remove the placard only when the defect or defects have
been corrected as required by the Code.
    Any other person who removes or defaces a placard is in violation of the
Code and subject to its penalties.
§ 151.119 PROHIBITED OCCUPANCY.
   Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the Code Official shall be
vacated as ordered by the Code Official. Any person who shall occupy a
placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any
person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded
premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties
provided by this Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-51)
EMERGENCY MEASURES
§ 151.130 IMMINENT DANGER.
   (A)   When, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is imminent damage of
failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when
any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the
occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the
building, occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or
materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the Code Official
is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate
the premises forthwith.
   (B)   The Code Official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure is Unsafe and its
Occupancy has been Prohibited by the Code Official.”
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for
the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing
the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-60) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.131 TEMPORARY SAFEGUARDS.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, whenever, in the opinion of
the Code Official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the
Code Official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the
boarding-up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or
not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause
such other action to be taken as the Code Official deems necessary to meet such
emergency.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-61)
§ 151.132 CLOSING STREETS.
   When necessary for public safety, the Code Official shall temporarily close
structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close,
sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and
prohibit the same from being utilized.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-62)
§ 151.133 EMERGENCY REPAIRS.
   For the purposes of this section, the Code Official shall employ the
necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as
possible.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-63)
§ 151.134 COSTS OF EMERGENCY REPAIRS.
   Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the
jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate
action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was
located for the recovery of such costs.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-64)
§ 151.135 HEARING.
   Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order
forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the
appeals boards, be afforded a hearing as described in this Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-65)
DEMOLITION
§ 151.150 GENERAL.
   The Code Official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is
located any structure, which in the Code Official’s judgement is so old,
dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that
it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such
structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to
repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner’s
option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any
structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such
structure.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-67)
§ 151.151 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   All notices and orders shall comply with §§
151.100 through
151.104.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-68)
Editor’s note:
   Before the Code Official can pursue action to demolish a building in
accordance with §§
151.150 or
151.152, it is imperative that all owners and any other persons with a recorded
encumbrance on the property be given proper notice of the demolition plans (see
§§
151.100 through
151.104 for notice and order requirements.)
§ 151.152 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within
the time prescribed, the Code Official shall cause the structure to be
demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by
contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition
and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure
is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-69)
§ 151.153 SALVAGE MATERIALS.
   When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing
body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid
shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest
price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses
of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of
such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and amounts deducted,
for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If
such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-70)
MEANS OF APPEAL
§ 151.165 APPLICATION FOR APPEAL.
   Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice
or order issued under this Code shall have the right to appeal to the Board of
Appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days
after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for
appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this Code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this Code are adequately
satisfied by other means.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-72)
§ 151.166 MEMBERSHIP OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   General. The Board of Appeals shall consist of a minimum of three
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees of the
jurisdiction. The Code Official shall be an ex officio member but shall have no
vote on any matter before the Board. The Board shall be appointed by the chief
appointing authority, and shall serve staggered and overlapping terms.
   (B)   Alternate members. The chief appointing authority shall appoint two or
more alternate members who shall be called by the Board Chairperson to hear
appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members
shall possess the qualifications required for Board membership.
   (C)   Chairperson. The Board shall annually select one of its members to
serve as Chairperson.
   (D)   Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which
that member has any personal, professional or financial interest.
   (E)   Secretary. The Chief Administrative Officer shall designate a
qualified person to serve as Secretary to the Board. The Secretary shall file a
detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the Chief Administrative
Officer.
   (F)   Compensation of members. Compensation of members shall be determined
by law.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-73)
Editor’s note:
   This section authorizes the chief appointing authority to appoint two
alternate members who are to be available if the principal members of the Board
are absent or disqualified. Alternate members must possess the same
qualifications as the principal members.
   It is customary to determine Chairpersonship annually so that a regular
opportunity is available to evaluate and either reappoint the current
Chairperson or appoint a new one.
   All members must disqualify themselves regarding any appeal in which they
have a personal, professional or financial interest.
   The Chief Administrative Officer is to designate a qualified clerk to serve
as Secretary to the Board.
    The Secretary is required to file a detailed record of all proceedings in
the office of the chief administrative officer.
   Members of the Board of Appeals are not required to be compensated unless
required by the local municipality or jurisdiction.
§ 151.167 NOTICE OF MEETING.
   The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairperson, within 20 days of the
filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-74)
§ 151.168 OPEN HEARING.
   (A)   General. All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public.
The appellant, that appellant’s representative, the Code Official and any
person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
A quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds of the Board membership.
   (B)   Procedure. The Board shall adopt and make available to the public
through the Secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The
procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but
shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-75)
§ 151.169 POSTPONED HEARING.
   When the full Board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant
or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a
postponement of the hearing.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-76)
§ 151.170 BOARD DECISION.
   (A)   General. The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the Code
Official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of
appointed Board members.
   (B)   Records and copies. The decision of the Board shall be recorded.
Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Code Official.
   (C)   Administration. The Code Official shall take immediate action in
accordance with the decision of the Board.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-77)
Editor’s note:
   To avoid any undue hindrance in the progress of construction, the Code
Official is required to act without delay based on the Board’s decision. This
action may be to enforce the decision or to seek judicial relief if the Board’s
action can be demonstrated to be inappropriate.
§ 151.171 COURT REVIEW.
   Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the
right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct
errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time
required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the Chief
Administrative Officer.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-78)
§ 151.172 STAYS OF ENFORCEMENT.
   Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay
the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the
appeals board.
(2009 Code, § 29-1-79)
DEFINITIONS
§ 151.185 SCOPE.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms in §
151.190 shall, for the purposes of this Code, have the meanings shown in this
subchapter.
(2009 Code, § 29-2-1)
§ 151.186 INTERCHANGEABILITY.
   Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes
the plural and the plural the singular.
(2009 Code, § 29-2-2)
§ 151.187 TERMS DEFINED IN OTHER CODES.
   Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in the
International Building Code, International Fire Code, village zoning
regulations (as codified in
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances), Illinois Plumbing Code, International
Mechanical Code, International Existing Building Code or the ICC Electrical
Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
(2009 Code, § 29-2-3)
§ 151.188 TERMS NOT DEFINED.
   Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this
subchapter, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the
context implies.
(2009 Code, § 29-2-4)
§ 151.189 PARTS.
   Whenever the words “dwelling unit”, “dwelling”, “premises”, “building”,
“rooming house”, “rooming unit”, “housekeeping unit” or “story” are stated in
this Code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof”.
(2009 Code, § 29-2-5)
§ 151.190 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Approved by the Code Official.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
   BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
   BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized representative.
   CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   EASEMENT. The portion of land or property reserved for present or future use
by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The
easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or
lots.
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property
under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or
by any other approved pest elimination methods.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or
near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility
of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
   HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered HABITABLE SPACES.
   HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space
equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which
does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises
of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public
streets for reasons including, but not limited to, being unlicensed, wrecked,
abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own
power.
   LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances or materials to which has been
affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
   LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to
a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized
or occupied.
   OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
   OPENABLE AREA. The part of a window, skylight or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as
a unit.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including
any structures thereon.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking
purposes.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited,
or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
   TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or
shower.
   VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
   WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner, e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
(2009 Code, § 29-2-6)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.205 SCOPE.
   The provisions of §§
151.205 through
151.207,
151.220 through
151.228,
151.240,
151.241,
151.255 through
151.272,
151.285 through
151.290,
151.305,
151.320 through
151.322 and
151.335 through
151.339 shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons
for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-1)
§ 151.206 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior
property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided
for in this Code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and
which do not comply with the requirements of §§
151.205 through
151.207,
151.220 through
151.228,
151.240,
151.241,
151.255 through
151.272,
151.285 through
151.290,
151.305,
151.320 through
151.322 and
151.335 through
151.339. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are
responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of
the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they
occupy and control.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-2)
§ 151.207 VACANT STRUCTURES AND LAND.
   All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein
so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or
safety.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-3)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
§ 151.220 SANITATION.
   All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property
which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-5)
§ 151.221 GRADING AND DRAINAGE.
   (A)   General. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the
erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or
within any structure located thereon.
   (B)   Exception. Approved retention areas and reservoirs.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-6)
§ 151.222 SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas
shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous
conditions.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-7)
§ 151.223 WEEDS.
   (A)   All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds
or plant growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
   (B)   Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut
and destroy weeds after service of a notice violation, they shall be subject to
prosecution in accordance with §
151.086 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to
comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the
jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to
enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing
thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent
responsible for the property.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-8)
§ 151.224 RODENT HARBORAGE.
   All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent
harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health.
After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent
harborage and prevent reinfestation.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-9)
§ 151.225 EXHAUST VENTS.
   Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam,
vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate waste
directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of
another tenant.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-10)
§ 151.226 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   All accessory structures, including detached garages, fence and walls, shall
be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-11)
§ 151.227 MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   General. Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative
or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises,
and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair,
or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is
prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
   (B)   Exception. A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a
structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-12)
§ 151.228 DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any
exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property
by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to
an approved state of maintenance and repair.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
§ 151.240 SWIMMING POOLS.
   Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in
good repair.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-15)
§ 151.241 ENCLOSURES.
   Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24
inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence constructed
in accordance with §
156.038 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-16) (Ord. 17-24, passed 6-12-2017)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
§ 151.255 GENERAL.
   The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally
sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or
welfare.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-18)
§ 151.256 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT.
   All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors, door and window
frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be
maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-
resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or
other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint
shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as
well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows,
doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather-resistant and water-tight. All
metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such
rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized
and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be
removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by
oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-19) (Ord. 17-24, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 151.257 PREMISES IDENTIFICATION.
   Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches
(102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (12.7 mm).
(2009 Code, § 29-3-20)
§ 151.258 STRUCTURAL MEMBERS.
   All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and
shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-21)
§ 151.259 FOUNDATION WALLS.
   All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and
breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of
rodents and other pests.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-22)
§ 151.260 EXTERIOR WALLS.
   All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting
materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where
required to prevent deterioration.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-23)
§ 151.261 ROOFS AND DRAINAGE.
   The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit
rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampers or deterioration in
the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and
downspout shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof
water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-24)
§ 151.262 DECORATIVE FEATURES.
   All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and
similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper
anchorage and in a safe condition.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-25)
§ 151.263 OVERHANG EXTENSIONS.
   All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees,
signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts shall be
maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound
condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application
of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-26)
§ 151.264 STAIRWAYS, DECKS, PORCHES AND BALCONIES.
   Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances
attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with
proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-27)
§ 151.265 CHIMNEYS AND TOWERS.
   All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and similar appurtenances shall
be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed
surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against
decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as
paint or similar surface treatment.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-28)
§ 151.266 HANDRAILS AND GUARDS.
   Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-29)
§ 151.267 WINDOW, SKYLIGHT AND DOOR FRAMES.
   Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition,
good repair and weather-tight.
   (A)   Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks
and holes.
   (B)   Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-30)
§ 151.268 INSECT SCREENS.
   (A)   General. During the period from April to October, every door, window
and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food
preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured,
packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of
not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door
shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
   (B)   Exception. Screens shall not be required where other approved means,
such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-31)
§ 151.269 DOORS.
   (A)   All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained
in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and
guestrooms shall tightly secure the door.
   (B)   Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with §
94.032 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-32)
§ 151.270 BASEMENT HATCHWAYS.
   Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of
rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-33)
§ 151.271 GUARDS FOR BASEMENT WINDOWS.
   Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent
shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of
rodents.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-34)
§ 151.272 BUILDING SECURITY.
   (A)   General. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or
housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security
for the occupants and property within.
   (B)   Doors.
      (1)   Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a
deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein.
      (2)   Such deadbolt locks shall be operated only by the turning of a knob
or a key and shall have a lock throw of not less than one inch.
      (3)   For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be
considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.
      (4)   Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to manufacturer’s
specifications and maintained in good working order. All deadbolt locks
required by this section shall be designed and installed in such a manner so as
to be operable inside of the dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
without the use of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other special
knowledge or effort.
   (C)   Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six feet
(1,828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to
a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or
let shall be equipped with a window sash locking devices.
   (D)   Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let
shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-35)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; INTERIOR STRUCTURE
§ 151.285 GENERAL.
   The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in
good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall
keep that part of the structure which they occupy control in a clean and
sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house,
housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or
more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary
condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-37)
§ 151.286 STRUCTURAL MEMBERS.
   All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-38)
§ 151.287 INTERIOR SURFACES.
   All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in
good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint
shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood
and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-39)
§ 151.288 STAIRS AND WALKING SURFACES.
   Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface
shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-40)
§ 151.289 HANDRAILS AND GUARDS.
   Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-41)
§ 151.290 INTERIOR DOORS.
   Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be
capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to
jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment
hardware.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-42)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS
§ 151.305 GENERAL.
   (A)   General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than
four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open
portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking
surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below
shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high or
more than 42 inches (1,067 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the
tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards
shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing,
balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
   (B)   Exception. Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted
Building Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-44)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; RUBBISH AND GARBAGE
§ 151.320 ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH OR GARBAGE.
   All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure,
shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-46)
§ 151.321 DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH.
   (A)   General. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in
a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.
   (B)   Rubbish storage facilities. The occupant of every occupied premises
shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
   (C)   Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation
shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing
the doors.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-47)
§ 151.322 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
   Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal
facility or approved garbage containers.
   (A)   Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of
the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit;
an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in
each dwelling unit; or an approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage
container.
   (B)   Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage
shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof
containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials
until removed from the premises for disposal.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-48)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; EXTERMINATION
§ 151.335 INFESTATION.
   All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All
structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated
by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-50)
§ 151.336 OWNER.
   The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the
structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-51)
§ 151.337 SINGLE OCCUPANT.
   The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-52)
§ 151.338 MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY.
   The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple
occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible
for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior
property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such
infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for
extermination.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-53)
§ 151.339 OCCUPANT.
   (A)   General. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the
continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure.
   (B)   Exception. Where rat infestations are caused by defects in the
structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination.
(2009 Code, § 29-3-54)
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS; GENERALLY
§ 151.350 SCOPE.
   The provisions of §§
151.350 through
151.352,
151.365 through
151.367,
151.380 through
151.384 and
151.395 through
151.401 shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light,
ventilation and space for occupying a structure.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-1)
§ 151.351 RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light,
ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements.
   (B)   A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person
to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of §§
151.350 through
151.352,
151.365 through
151.367,
151.380 through
151.384 and
151.395 through
151.401.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-2)
§ 151.352 ALTERNATIVE DEVICES.
   In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed,
artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the International
Building Code shall be permitted.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-3)
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS; LIGHT
§ 151.365 HABITABLE SPACES.
   (A)   General. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of
approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total
glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8% of the floor area of such
room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room
and such obstructions are located less than three feet (914 mm) from the window
and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall
not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the
room.
   (B)   Exception. Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior
glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening
to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior
room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing
area shall be based on the total floor area being served.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-5)
§ 151.366 COMMON HALLS AND STAIRWAYS.
   (A)   Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than
in one-and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a
60 watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of
floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights
shall not be greater than 30 feet (9,144 mm).
   (B)   In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including
exterior means of egress stairways shall be illuminated at all times the
building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one
footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-6)
§ 151.367 OTHER SPACES.
   All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light
sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe
occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliance, equipment and
fixtures.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-7)
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS; VENTILATION
§ 151.380 HABITABLE SPACES.
   (A)   General. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable
window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to
at least 45% of the minimum glazed area required in §
151.365.
   (B)   Exception. Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are
ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining
room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior room or space, but
not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation openings to the
outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-9)
§ 151.381 BATHROOMS AND TOILET ROOMS.
   Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation
requirements for habitable spaces as required by §
151.380, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped
with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation
system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall
not be recirculated.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-10)
§ 151.382 COOKING FACILITIES.
   (A)   General. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking
shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking
facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in a rooming unit or
dormitory unit.
   (B)   Exception. Where specifically approved in writing by the Code
Official.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-11)
§ 151.383 PROCESS VENTILATION.
   Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists
are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove
the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior
and not be recirculated to any space.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-12)
§ 151.384 CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST.
   Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and
shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-13)
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS; OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
§ 151.395 PRIVACY.
   Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory
units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining
spaces.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-15)
§ 151.396 MINIMUM ROOM WIDTHS.
   A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven feet
(2,134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not
less than three feet (914 mm) between counterfronts and appliances or
counterfronts and walls.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-16)
§ 151.397 MINIMUM CEILING HEIGHTS.
   (A)   General. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas,
bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling
height of not less than seven feet (2,134 mm).
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less
than four feet (1,219 mm) on center and projecting not more than six inches
(152 mm) below the required ceiling height.
      (2)   Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height
of not less than six feet, eight inches (2,033 mm) with not less than six feet,
four inches (1,932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar
obstructions; and
      (3)   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes
and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling
height of at least seven feet (2,134 mm) over not less than one-third of the
required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only
those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet
(1,524 mm) or more shall be included.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-17)
§ 151.398 BEDROOM REQUIREMENTS.
   Every bedroom shall comply with the requirements of divisions (A) through
(E) below.
   (A)   Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one person shall
contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m2) of floor area, and every bedroom
occupied by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 m2)
of floor area for each occupant thereof.
   (B)   Access from bedrooms.
      (1)   General. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to
other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of
egress from other habitable spaces.
      (2)   Exception. Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
   (C)   Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at
least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one
water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an
adjacent story.
   (D)   Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be
used for sleeping purposes.
   (E)   Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable
provisions of this Code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation,
room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this §§
151.350 through
151.352,
151.365 through
151.367,
151.380 through
151.384 and
151.395 through
151.401; the plumbing facilities and water heating facilities requirements of
§§
151.430 through
151.433,
151.455 through
151.458,
151.470 through
151.472,
151.485 through
151.488,
151.500,
151.501 and
151.515; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of §§
151.530,
151.531,
151.545 through
151.549,
151.560 through
151.565,
151.580 through
151.582,
151.595 through
151.597,
151.610,
151.611 and
151.625; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of §§
94.060 through
94.063 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-18)
§ 151.399 OVERCROWDING.
   (A)   General. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than
permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table A below.
Table A
Space Minimum area in square feet
      1—2 occupant3—5 occupant6 or more
Table A
Space              Minimum area in square feet
                   1—2 occupants 3—5 occupant6 or more
Living room (a, b) No requirements 120           150
Dining room (a, b) No requirements 80            100
Bedrooms           Shall comply with §
                   151.398
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2
Note a: See division (C) below for combined living room/dining room spaces
Note b: See division (B) below for limitations on determining the minimum
 
   (B)   Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by Table A above
shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy
area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with §
151.398.
   (C)   Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall
comply with the requirements of Table A above if the total area is equal to
that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function
as a combination living room/dining room.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-19)
§ 151.400 EFFICIENCY UNIT.
   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from
meeting the following requirements.
   (A)   A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear
floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m2). A unit occupied by three
occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet (29.7
m2). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by divisions
(B) and (C) below.
   (B)   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and
refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30
inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this Code shall
be provided.
   (C)   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water
closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
   (D)   The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-20)
§ 151.401 FOOD PREPARATION.
   All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain
suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary
manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary
disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage.
(2009 Code, § 29-4-21)
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS; GENERALLY
§ 151.415 SCOPE.
   The provisions of §§
151.415,
151.416,
151.430 through
151.433,
151.455 through
151.458,
151.470 through
151.472,
151.485 through
151.488,
151.500,
151.501 and
151.515 shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing
fixtures to be provided.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-1)
§ 151.416 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing
facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A
person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy
any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of §§
151.415,
151.416,
151.430 through
151.433,
151.455 through
151.458,
151.470 through
151.472,
151.485 through
151.488,
151.500,
151.501 and
151.515.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-2)
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS; REQUIRED FACILITIES
§ 151.430 DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathroom or shower,
lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a
sanitary, safe working condition.
   (B)   The lavatory shall be place in the same room as the water closet or
located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which
such water closet is located.
   (C)   A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required
lavatory.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-4)
§ 151.431 ROOMING HOUSES.
   At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied
for each four rooming units.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-5)
§ 151.432 HOTELS.
   Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one
water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a
public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-6)
§ 151.433 EMPLOYEES’ FACILITIES.
   (A)   General. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking
facility shall be available to employees.
   (B)   Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain,
water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water
dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or
bathrooms.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-7)
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS; TOILET ROOMS
§ 151.455 PRIVACY.
   Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute
the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and
interior locking shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and
toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-9)
§ 151.456 LOCATION.
   Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory
units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than one
flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-10)
§ 151.457 LOCATION OF EMPLOYEE TOILET FACILITIES.
   (A)   General. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the
employees’ working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not
more than one story above or below the employees’ working area and the path of
travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m).
Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee
and public facilities.
   (B)   Exception. Facilities that are required for employees in storage
structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same
ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet
(152 m) from the employees’ regular working area to the facilities.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-11)
§ 151.458 FLOOR SURFACE.
   In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to
be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-12)
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS; PLUMBING SYSTEMS
AND FIXTURES
§ 151.470 GENERAL.
   All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working
order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be
capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are
designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and
functional condition.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-14)
§ 151.471 FIXTURE CLEARANCES.
   Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearance for usage and cleaning.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-15)
§ 151.472 PLUMBING SYSTEM HAZARDS.
   Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard
to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate
venting, cross-connection, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration
or damage or for similar reasons, the Code Official shall require the defects
to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-16)
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS; WATER SYSTEM
§ 151.485 GENERAL.
   Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or
other plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public water
system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories,
laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered
and cold running water in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-18)
§ 151.486 CONTAMINATION.
   The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water
inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the
fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sinks faucets and other hose bibs or
faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an
approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached
hose connection vacuum breaker.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-19)
§ 151.487 SUPPLY.
   The water supply system shall be installed and maintained provide a supply
of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume
and at pressures adequate to enable the fixture to function properly, safely,
and free from defects and leaks.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-20)
§ 151.488 WATER HEATING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and
capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required
sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not
less than 110°F (43°C).
   (B)   A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom,
toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless
adequate combustion air is provided.
   (C)   An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and
relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water
heaters.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-21)
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS; SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM
§ 151.500 GENERAL.
   All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer
system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-23)
§ 151.501 MAINTENANCE.
   Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and
be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-24)
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS; STORM DRAINAGE
§ 151.515 GENERAL.
   Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on
the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public
nuisance.
(2009 Code, § 29-5-26)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS; GENERALLY
§ 151.530 SCOPE.
   The provisions of §§
151.530,
151.531,
151.545 through 1511.549,
151.560 through
151.565,
151.580 through 151.1582,
151.595 through
151.597,
151.610,
151.611 and
151.625 shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and
equipment to be provided.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-1)
§ 151.531 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A
person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy
any premises which does not comply with the requirements of §§
151.530,
151.531,
151.545 through 1511.549,
151.560 through
151.565,
151.580 through 151.1582,
151.595 through
151.597,
151.610,
151.611 and
151.625.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-2)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS; HEATING FACILITIES
§ 151.545 FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by §§
151.545 through
151.549.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-4)
§ 151.546 RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCIES.
   (A)   General. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable
of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature
required for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the Illinois Plumbing
Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the
requirements of §§
151.545 through
151.549.
   (B)   Exception. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above
30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-5)
§ 151.547 HEAT SUPPLY.
   (A)   General. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or
lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms,
either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof, shall
supply heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from
October to April to maintain a room temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in
all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full
design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall
be as indicated in Appendix D of the Illinois Plumbing Code.
      (2)   In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-
1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-6)
§ 151.548 OCCUPIABLE WORK SPACES.
   (A)   General. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat
during the period from October to April to maintain a temperature of not less
than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1) Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions; and
      (2)   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-7)
§ 151.549 ROOM TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT.
   The required room temperatures shall be measured three feet (914 mm) above
the floor and near the center of the room and two feet (610 mm) inward from the
center of each exterior wall.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-8)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS; MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
§ 151.560 MECHANICAL APPLIANCES.
   All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances,
cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and
maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the
intended function.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-10)
§ 151.561 REMOVAL OF COMBUSTION PRODUCTS.
   (A)   General. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected
to an approved chimney or vent.
   (B)   Exception. Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for
unvented operation.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-11)
§ 151.562 CLEARANCES.
   All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-12)
§ 151.563 SAFETY CONTROLS.
   All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in
effective operation.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-13)
§ 151.564 COMBUSTION AIR.
   A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of
the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-
burning equipment.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-14)
§ 151.565 ENERGY CONSERVATION DEVICES.
   Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning
appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent
piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and
the installation is specifically approved.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-15)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS; ELECTRICAL FACILITIES
§ 151.580 FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in
compliance with the requirements of §§
151.530,
151.531,
151.545 through 1511.549,
151.560 through
151.565,
151.580 through 151.1582,
151.595 through
151.597,
151.610,
151.611 and
151.625 and §§
150.060 and
150.061 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-17)
§ 151.581 SERVICE.
   The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for
determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the ICC
Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt,
single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-18)
§ 151.582 ELECTRICAL SYSTEM HAZARDS.
   Where it is found that the electrical system is a structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service,
improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring
or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the Code
Official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-19)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS; ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
§ 151.595 INSTALLATION.
   All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed
and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-21)
§ 151.596 RECEPTACLES.
   (A)   Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two
separate and remote receptacle outlets.
   (B)   Every laundry area shall contain at least one ground-type receptacle
or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter.
   (C)   Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom
receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-22)
§ 151.597 LIGHTING FIXTURES.
   Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom,
laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric
lighting fixture.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-23)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS; ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS
AND DUMBWAITERS
§ 151.610 GENERAL.
   Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to sustain safely
all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from physical and fire
hazards. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all
times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter; or the
certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the
building operator.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-25)
§ 151.611 ELEVATORS.
   (A)   General. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one
elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is
occupied.
   (B)   Exception. Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be
permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or
servicing.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-26)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS; DUCT SYSTEMS
§ 151.625 GENERAL.
   Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable
of performing the required function.
(2009 Code, § 29-6-28)
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD PLAINS
Section
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Provisions for accomplishing the purpose
   
152.03   Definitions
   
152.04   Base flood elevation
   
152.05   Duties of the Village Manager
   
152.06   Development permit
   
152.07   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
   
152.08   Protecting buildings
   
152.09   Subdivision requirements
   
152.10   Public health and other standards
   
152.11   Carrying capacity and notification
   
152.12   Variances
   
152.13   Disclaimer of liability
   
152.14   Abrogation and greater restrictions
 
   
152.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1; 65 ILCS 5/11-12-12; 65 ILCS 5/11-
30-2; 65 ILCS 5/11-30-8 and 65 ILCS 5/11-31-2
§ 152.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
village by the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2,
5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes:
      (1)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
      (2)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
      (3)   To promote and protect the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
      (4)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
      (5)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
      (6)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available;
      (7)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of
watercourses and flood plains in order to moderate flood and storm water
impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and
riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits and enhance community and economic development;
      (8)   To provide for the orderly growth and development (pursuant to the
village’s comprehensive plan) of an environment that is especially sensitive to
changes from human activity; and
      (9)   To assist in maintaining the capacity of storm water conveyance
systems as defined in the Ordinance Regulating the Disposal of Trash, Debris
and Unwanted Materials Into the Storm Water Conveyance Systems (See §
153.11).
   (B)   Where local ordinances are more restrictive, they shall prevail.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-1) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.02 PROVISIONS FOR ACCOMPLISHING THE PURPOSE.
   (A)   All new development proposals in the special flood hazard areas shall
be reviewed and approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Board of Trustee’s review is to ensure the following:
      (1)   New development will not change the flow of flood or other surface
drainage waters so that other properties become more susceptible to damage;
      (2)   New developments will not create special hazards or nuisances when
flooded; and
      (3)   New buildings and major improvements to existing buildings will not
be subject to damage by the base flood.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-2) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FLOOD. The base
flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
152.04.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled or roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180
days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY.
      (1)   Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the
population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster.
Damage to these CRITICAL FACILITIES can impact the delivery of vital services,
can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community or can put special
populations at risk.
      (2)   Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood protection should be
required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police
stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities;
major roads and bridges; critical utility sites (telephone switching stations
or electrical transformers; and hazardous material storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
         (a)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building or any structural alteration to a building;
         (b)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
         (c)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
180 days per year;
         (d)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
culverts or similar projects;
         (e)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
         (f)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving
or other alterations of the ground surface; and
         (g)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height or velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the flood plain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the flood plain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the flood plain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within
a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOOD PLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
      (1)   These two terms are synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the village, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village, or that may
be annexed into the village, that are subject to inundation by the base flood.
The FLOOD PLAINS of the village are generally identified as such on panel
numbers 17167C, 0265F, 0270F, 0435F and 0450F of the countywide Flood Insurance
Rate Map of Sangamon County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and dated August 2, 2007. FLOOD PLAIN also includes those areas of known
flooding as identified by the community.
      (2)   The FLOOD PLAINS of those parts of unincorporated Sangamon County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be
annexed into the village are generally identified as such on the flood
insurance rate map prepared for Sangamon County by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated August 2, 2007.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus two
feet of freeboard at any given location in the flood plain.
   FLOODWAY. The portion of the flood plain required to store and convey the
base flood. The FLOODWAY for the flood plains of South Fork Sangamon River,
Black Branch Creek and McCoy Branch shall be as delineated on the countywide
flood insurance rate map of Sangamon County prepared by FEMA and dated August
2, 2007. The FLOODWAYS for each of the remaining flood plains of the village
shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or other
sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the State Historic Preservation Agency; and
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the State Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of §
152.08.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
or after the effective date of flood plain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size; and
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SFHA. See definition of FLOOD PLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the ACTUAL START OF
CONSTRUCTION, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, ACTUAL
START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. See BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred
regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must
be included in this determination. The term includes repetitive loss buildings
(see definition).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place during the life of the building in which the cumulative
percentage of improvements:
         (a)   Equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   Increases the floor area by more than 20%.
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. The term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
      (3)   The term does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s flood plain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-3) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.04 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best
available base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the
best available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study
needed to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA
and IDNR/OWR for approval prior any development of the site.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for the flood plains of South Fork Sangamon
River, Black Branch Creek and McCoy Branch shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance Study of Sangamon County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated August 2, 2007.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each flood plain delineated as an “AH
Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the
countywide flood insurance rate map of the county.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining flood plains
delineated as an “A Zone” on the countywide flood insurance rate map of the
county shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (E)   The base flood elevation for the flood plains of those parts of
unincorporated county that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
village, or that may be annexed into the village, shall be as delineated on the
100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the county prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated August 2, 2007.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-4) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.05 DUTIES OF THE VILLAGE MANAGER.
   (A)   The Village Manager shall be responsible for the general
administration of this chapter and ensure that all development activities
within the flood plains under the jurisdiction of the village meet the
requirements of this chapter, with the assistance from the Village Engineer as
necessary.
   (B)   Specifically, the Village Manager shall:
      (1)   Process development permits in accordance with §
152.06;
      (2)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a flood plain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
152.07;
      (3)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to §
152.08 are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
      (4)   Assure that all subdivision and annexations meet the requirements
of §
152.09;
      (5)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of §
152.10;
      (6)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
152.12 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
      (7)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty
actions outlined in §
152.14 as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
      (8)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state and federal permits;
      (9)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
      (10)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and flood plain construction techniques;
      (11)   Cooperate with state and federal flood plain management agencies
to coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this
chapter;
      (12)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, flood plain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
      (13)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter
and make substantial damage determinations for structures within the flood
plain; and
      (14)   Maintain the accuracy of flood plain maps including notifying
IDNR/OWR and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a
modification of the flood plain may change the base flood elevation or result
in a change to the flood plain map.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-5) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.06 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by law
shall commence any development in the flood plain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Village Manager.
   (B)   The Village Manager shall not issue a development permit if the
proposed development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   The application for development permit, made on a form provided by
the village, shall be accompanied by:
         (a)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
         (b)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting
from excavation or filling;
         (c)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
         (d)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
152.08; and
         (e)   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed
engineer or architect in the state. A signed estimate by a contractor
authorized to do business in the state may also meet this requirement.
      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the
Village Manager shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to
be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled
after the date of the site’s first flood insurance rate map is not in the flood
plain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current flood
insurance rate map is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
         (b)   The Village Manager shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site’s first flood insurance rate
map identification.
         (c)   The Village Manager shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state and local permits, approvals or
permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
Village Manager shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state and
local permits have been obtained.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-6) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.07 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map,
and within all other flood plains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B) below, no development shall
be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development, will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat
to public health and safety.
      (2)   The following specific development activities shall be considered
as meeting this requirement:
         (a)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
the following conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources,
Office of Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
            1.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one foot;
            2.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half foot at a point 1,000 feet upstream of
the proposed structure;
            3.   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases
in water surface profile;
            4.   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging or relocating the existing channel;
            5.   The design must be certified by a licensed professional
engineer in the state and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/OWR
permit; and
            6.   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
         (b)   1.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 3; and
            2.   The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells or
other similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers.
         (c)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 4:
            1.   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-
year flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge;
            2.   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge;
            3.   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river,
lake or stream;
            4.   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris;
            5.   All disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction
grades and re-vegetated; and
            6.   All State Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety Code
and federal requirements must be met.
         (d)   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5;
            1.   The boat dock must not extend more than 50 feet into a
waterway and no more than one-quarter of the width of the waterway and shall
not extend beyond the navigational limited established by the IDNR and Corps of
Engineers;
            2.   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet;
            3.   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed 50% of the landowner’s shoreline
frontage nor 50 feet;
            4.   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet of the projected
property line;
            5.   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices;
            6.   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water;
            7.   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with flotation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible;
            8.   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill;
            9.   Non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow; and
            10.   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make
necessary modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corp of
Engineers.
         (e)   1.   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6; and
            2.   The following activities (not involving fill or positive
change in grade) are covered by this permit:
               a.   The construction of underground utility lines, wells or
septic tanks not crossing a lake or stream;
               b.   The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar
structures;
               c.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios and similar structures;
               d.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions and carports;
               e.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
70 square feet in size, nor ten square feet in any dimension. Only one such
building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit; and
               f.   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are
made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
         (f)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the
following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7:
            1.   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection;
            2.   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the
use of riprap or other design measures;
            3.   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation; and
            4.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a
minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (g)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8:
            1.   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of
the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet of cover shall be provided. The
river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition;
            2.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a
minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction;
            3.   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5), shall
be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed; and
            4.   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten days prior to
the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
         (h)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9:
            1.   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap; steel sheet piling; cellular blocks; fabric-formed
concrete; gabion baskets; rock and wire mattresses; sand/cement filled bags;
geotechnical fabric materials; natural vegetation; and treated timber. URBAN
AREAS are defined as areas of the state where residential, commercial or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten years. (The Department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban.);
            2.   In addition to the materials listed in division (A)(2)(h)1.
above, other materials (e.g., tire revertments) may be utilized in rural areas
provided all other conditions of this permit are met;
            3.   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies; garbage of debris; scrap lumber; metal refuse; roofing materials;
asphalt or other bituminous materials; or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the Environmental Protections Act (415 ILCS 5);
            4.   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, 1,000 feet;
            5.   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action;
            6.   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause
erosion or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project;
            7.   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of
the bank;
            8.   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full-width
and cross-sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site. For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe
of the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross-sectional
area of the natural channel be reduced by more than 10% nor the volume of
material placed exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot of the stream bank or
shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and to lessen the
quantity of material required;
            9.   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area;
            10.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction;
            11.   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
               a.   It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s)
or gabion structure(s); and
               b.   The volume of material placed, including the structure,
would not exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot.
            12.   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank
or shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
         (i)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10;
            1.   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with
the requirements of the local flood plain regulations;
            2.   The principle structure to which the project is being added
must have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25,
1988);
            3.   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed 500 square
feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another property;
            4.   Must not involve the placement of any fill material;
            5.   No construction shall be undertaken in, or within, 50 feet of
the bank of the stream channel;
            6.   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored
to prevent its movement during flood conditions;
            7.   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition
must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review; and
            8.   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (j)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11:
            1.   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly
or cumulatively exceed 1,000 feet;
            2.   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel;
            3.   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform
to that of the natural channel upstream and down stream of the site;
            4.   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a
wetland and shall be either:
               a.   Removed from the floodway;
               b.   Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials
would be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross-
sectional area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than 10%,
nor the volume of material placed exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot of
streambank;
               c.   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured flood plain
area such that the average natural flood plain elevation is not increased;
               d.   Used to stabilize an existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
               e.   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
Department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
               f.   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
            5.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a
minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (k)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 12:
            1.   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
               a.   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the
backwater induced by the existing structure; and
               b.   There is no record of complaints of flood damages
associated with the existing structure.
            2.   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects, the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
            3.   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR);
            4.   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement
or relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as
permitted by the Department’s Statewide Permit Number 9 (Minor Shoreline,
Channel and Streambank Protection Activities) or Statewide Permit Number 11
(Minor Maintenance Dredging Activities); and
            5.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
         (l)   Temporary construction activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 13:
            1.   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until
the individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for
which the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and
local authorizations;
            2.   The term TEMPORARY shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR;
            3.   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will
not cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to
adjacent properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
flood plain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks;
            4.   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction
of any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee or dike across
any channel or floodway;
            5.   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or
stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents
that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of Special Condition
Number 3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a
minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the
backwater induced by the temporary structure;
            6.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition;
            7.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction; and
            8.   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution
as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5).
         (m)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in division (A) above may be
permitted only if:
      (1)   The permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-7) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.08 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   (1)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of §
152.07, all buildings located in the flood plain shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation.
      (2)   This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:
         (a)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet;
         (b)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively during
the life of the building. If substantially improved, the existing structure and
the addition must meet the flood protection standards of this section;
         (c)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially
damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section;
         (d)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do
not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage);
         (e)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site
for more than 180 days per year; and
         (f)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
152.03.
   (B)   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure;
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate
debris or refuse materials; and
         (e)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, storm water management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      (2)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace or other foundation that is permanently open to flood waters;
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation;
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot above grade with a minimum of two openings. The
openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation; and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice and floating debris:
            1.   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
            3.   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space; or
            4.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      (3)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade;
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade;
         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four feet
at any point;
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event;
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
      (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are water-tight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood;
      (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice;
      (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity; and
      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this division (C).
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with division (B) above; and
      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile
Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180
days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of division (D) above
unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck;
      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      (5)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
400 square feet;
      (6)   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
      (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement out of the flood plain;
      (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation;
      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model; and
      (10)   The vehicle must be either:
         (a)   Entirely supported by jacks; or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The garage or shed must be non-habitable;
      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use;
      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits;
      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot;
      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage;
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation;
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for
every one square foot of floor area;
      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than $10,000 in market value or
replacement cost whichever is greater or less than 500 square feet;
      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and
overturning;
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers and the like) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation;
and
      (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-8) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.09 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   The village shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are
known, in all official actions related to land management use and development.
   (A)   (1)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation
agreements, and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
meet the damage prevention and building protection standards of §§
152.07 and
152.08.
      (2)   Any proposal for such development shall include the following data:
         (a)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the flood plain,
where the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the
applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
         (b)   The boundary of the floodway when available; and
         (c)   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer in the
state that the proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of
surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
   (B)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible the flood plains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-9) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.10 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   (1)   Public health standards must be met for all flood plain
development.
      (2)   In addition to the requirements of §§
152.07 and
152.08, the following standards apply:
         (a)   No development in the flood plain shall include locating or
storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids,
pollutants, gas or liquid storage tanks, or other hazardous or toxic materials
below the flood protection elevation unless such materials are stored in a
floodproofed and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer
or floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of §
152.08;
         (b)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
         (c)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
         (d)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste
disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be water-tight; and
         (e)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical
facilities shall be located outside the limits of the flood plain. Construction
of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the flood plain if no
feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within
the SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or
three feet above the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever
is greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that
toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access
routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be
provided to all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-10) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.11 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
   (B)   In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing
30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of
the watercourse.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-11) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.12 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for a variance. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
review the applicant’s request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the village. The village may attach such conditions to
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this
chapter.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the flood plain;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing or repairs to roads, utilities or other
public facilities;
      (6)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      (7)   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify an applicant in
writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protection
standards of §
152.08 would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (D)   Variances to the building protection requirements of §
152.08 which are requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair or
alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in the
definition for historic structures in §
152.03, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of
§§
152.07 and
152.08 subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-12) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.13 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the flood plain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-13) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.14 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the village to
fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program including Ord.
04-01. However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or
ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance easements, covenants or
deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-15) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the flood plain or
failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed
to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Village Board of
Trustees or its designee may determine that a violation of the minimum
standards of this chapter exists. The Village Manager shall notify the owner in
writing of such violation.
   (B)   (1)   If such owner fails, after ten days’ notice, to correct the
violation:
         (a)   The village may make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter;
         (b)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense; and
         (c)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
      (2)   The village shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
   (B)   (1)   The Village Manager shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      (2)   The Village Manager is authorized to issue an order requiring the
suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing,
indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary,
to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      (3)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Village Board of Trustees. Written
notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
         (a)   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or
revocation; and
         (b)   The time and place of the hearing.
      (4)   At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on his or her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Village Board of Trustees shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended
or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(2009 Code, § 14-1-14) (Ord. 07-02, passed 4-9-2007)
CHAPTER 153: STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Section
   
153.01   Purpose/intent
   
153.02   Definitions
   
153.03   Applicability
   
153.04   Responsibility for administration
   
153.05   Ultimate responsibility
   
153.06   Discharge prohibitions
   
153.07   Suspension of storm drainage system access
   
153.08   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
153.09   Monitoring of discharges
   
153.10   Use of best management practices
   
153.11   Watercourse protection
   
153.12   Notification of spills
   
153.13   Enforcement; notice of violation
   
153.14   Appeal of notice of violation
   
153.15   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
153.16   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
153.17   Injunctive relief
   
153.18   Compensatory action
   
153.19   Violations deemed a public nuisance
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 PURPOSE/INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the village, through the regulation of non-
storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system, hereinafter known as the Rochester storm drainage
system or the system, in order to comply with requirements of the national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm drainage
system by storm water discharges by any user;
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and illegal discharges to the storm
drainage system; and
      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-1) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm
water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include
treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
      (1)   Any substance, material, waste, gas or other matter or combination
thereof which is regulated by any local governmental authority, the state or
the United States government, including without limitation any substance,
material, waste, gas or other matter which is:
         (a)   Defined as a “hazardous waste”, “hazardous material”, “hazardous
substance”, “extremely hazardous waste” or “restricted hazardous waste” under
any provision of federal or state law;
         (b)   Petroleum or derivate or distillate thereof;
         (c)   Asbestos;
         (d)   Polychlorinated biphenyl;
         (e)   Radioactive material;
         (f)   Designated as a “hazardous substance” pursuant to the Clean
Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.;
         (g)   Defined as a “hazardous waste” pursuant to the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.;
         (h)   Defined as a “hazardous substance” pursuant to the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et
seq.; or
         (i)   A cause or significant contribution to a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed,
because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics.
      (2)   The term ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS shall mean all statutes specifically
described in the foregoing sentence and all federal, state and local
environmental health and safety statutes, ordinances, codes, rules,
regulations, orders, and decrees regulating, relating to or imposing liability
or standards concerning or in connection with HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drainage system, except as exempted in §
153.07.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allowed an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system,
including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
system and any connections to the system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted or approved by the village; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drainage system, which has not been documented in
construction plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the village.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Environmental Protection Agency (or by
the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether
the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drainage system that
is not composed entirely of storm water.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner’s agent.
   POLLUTANT.
      (1)   Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
      (2)   POLLUTANTS may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes
and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, grease, litter or other
discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances and accumulations, so that same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers; hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues
that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance
systems and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   VILLAGE OF ROCHESTER. Employees or designees of the Village of Rochester,
designated to enforce this chapter.
   VILLAGE STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned or privately-owned facilities
by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited
to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets,
piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural
and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, drainage easements
granted to the village and other drainage structures within the corporate
limits of the village.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. All waters which are currently used, were used
in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce;
all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or
foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the
United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in
this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition;
and any waters within the federal definition of WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES at
40 C.F.R. part 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment
ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water
Act.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-2) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
the village.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-3) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The village shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the village may be delegated
in writing by the Village President to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the village.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-4) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.05 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-5) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.06 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.
      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm
drainage system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to,
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
      (2)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge
to the storm drainage system is prohibited except as described as follows:
         (a)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: potable water line flushing or discharge of other
potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream
flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning
condensation, natural springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural
riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if de-chlorinated, typically
less than one part per million (PPM) chlorine concentration), firefighting
activities, roof drainage systems and any other water source not containing
pollutants;
         (b)   Discharges specified in writing by the village as being
necessary to protect public health and safety;
         (c)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the village prior to the time of the test; and
         (d)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drainage system.
   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.
      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying any pollutants or sewage to the storm drainage
system, or allows such a connection to continue.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-6) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.07 SUSPENSION OF STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM ACCESS.
   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
village may, without prior notice, suspend storm drainage system discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
system or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the village may take such steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the system or waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the storm drainage system in violation of this chapter may have
his, her or its storm drainage system access terminated if such termination
would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The village shall notify a violator
of the proposed termination of its storm drainage system access. The violator
may petition the village for a reconsideration and hearing.
   (C)   Reinstatement of storm drainage system. A person violates this chapter
if the person reinstates storm drainage system access to premises terminated
pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the village.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-7) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.08 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm
water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof
of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
village prior to the allowing of discharges to the storm drainage system.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-8) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.09 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have storm
water discharges associated with residential, commercial and industrial
activity, including construction activity.
   (B)   Access to facilities.
      (1)   The village shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities
subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures
in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into
its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow
access to representatives of the village.
      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the village ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
      (3)   The village shall have the right to set up on any permitted
facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the village to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s storm water discharge. Parameters
to be tested shall include, but not be limited to, total suspended solids
(TSS), biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), fecal coliform and pH.
      (4)   The village has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the village and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the village access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this chapter.
A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge
storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the village reasonable access to the permitted facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
      (7)   If the village has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which storm water is discharged, and the village representative is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety
and welfare of the community, then the village may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-9) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.10 USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The village will adopt requirements identifying best management practices
for any activity, operation or facility, which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drainage system or waters
of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at his, her or its own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the system or
watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed
compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a
storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the NPDES permit.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-10) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.11 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, sediment and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or any way retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned uninhabitable structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function or physical integrity of the watercourse.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-11) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.12 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any private property
owner or person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drainage
system or waters of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release. In the event of
such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify
the village in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the village within three business days of the phone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from private
property, a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of
such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge
and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained
for at least three years by the owner or operator.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-12) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.13 ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever the village finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the village may order compliance
by written notice of violation to the responsible person.
   (B)   Such notice may require without limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (C)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-13) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.14 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the village. The notice of appeal must be received within 15 days from the date
of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the village or its
designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice
of appeal. The decision of the village or its designee shall be final.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-14) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.15 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days
of the decision of the village, then representatives of the village shall enter
upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall
be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the village or its designated contractor to enter
upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-15) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.16 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   (A)   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of
the assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely
manner as determined by the decision of the village or by the expiration of the
time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment
against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount
of the assessment.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village by reason of such violation. The liability shall
be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of 9% per
annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the fifteenth day following
discovery of the violation.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-16) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.17 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-17) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.18 COMPENSATORY ACTION.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by
this chapter, the village may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory
actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops,
creek cleanup and the like.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-18) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.19 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-19) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter
shall be subject to a fine in the amount of no less than $100 per violation and
no more than $1,000 for each day said violation continues to occur. The village
may recover all attorney fees, court costs and other expenses associated with
enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, engineering,
sampling and monitoring expenses.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-20)
   (B)   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state, local law, regulation
or ordinance and it is within the discretion of the village to seek cumulative
remedies.
(2009 Code, § 32-1-21)
(Ord. 04-03, passed 4-12-2004)
CHAPTER 154: BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL CODE
Section
In General
   
154.001   Title
   
154.002   Purpose
   
154.003   Jurisdiction
   
154.004   Rules
   
154.005   Definitions
   
154.006   Interpretation
   
154.007   Separability
   
154.008   Suitability of land for subdivision
   
154.009   Connection to village infrastructure
   
154.010   Flood hazard areas
   
154.011   Public lands
   
154.012   Vacation of plats, streets and the like
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.025   Administration
   
154.026   Enforcement
   
154.027   Invalid plans
   
154.028   Building within proposed street extensions
   
154.029   Construction plan review and construction inspection fees
   
154.030   Variations and exceptions
   
154.031   Review of adverse Planning Commission decisions
   
154.032   Amendments
Procedure
   
154.045   General
   
154.046   Pre-application
   
154.047   Preliminary plat
   
154.048   Development construction plans
   
154.049   Final development plat
   
154.050   Guarantee of improvements
   
154.051   Construction and inspection
   
154.052   Conditional acceptance of improvements
   
154.053   Improvements guarantee
   
154.054   Final acceptance
   
154.055   Summary of procedures
Development Design Standards
   
154.070   General
   
154.071   Erosion and sedimentation control principles and standards
   
154.072   Streets
   
154.073   Easements
   
154.074   Blocks
   
154.075   Lots
   
154.076   Public sites and open spaces
   
154.077   Flood plains, wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas
   
154.078   Historical or archaeological significant areas
Required Improvements
   
154.090   General
   
154.091   Erosion control, erosion control plans
   
154.092   Grading
   
154.093   Sanitary sewer system
   
154.094   Storm drainage system
   
154.095   Water main supply system
   
154.096   Streets, curbs and gutters, sidewalks
   
154.097   Street lights
   
154.098   Monuments
   
154.099   Certification of improvements
Individual Property Design Standards
   
154.110   General
   
154.111   Site plan submittal
   
154.112   Erosion and sedimentation control principles and standards
   
154.113   Easements
   
154.114   Floodplains, wetlands, and environmentally sensitive areas
   
154.115   Parking lots and entrances
   
154.116   Refuse containers, storage enclosures and screening
   
154.117   Fences and walls
   
154.118   Signage
   
154.119   Addresses
   
154.120   Utilities
   
154.121   Sanitary sewer
   
154.122   Storm drainage system
   
154.123   Lighting
   
154.124   Landscaping improvements
   
154.125   Noise limits
   
154.126   Fire Department requirements
   
154.127   Energy conservation and ventilation design
   
154.128   Flood plain area
   
154.129   Change in use
Fees
   
154.140   Preliminary plat fee
   
154.141   Construction review and inspections at developer’s expense
   
154.142   Final plat fee
   
154.143   Recording fees
   
154.144   Fair share assessment fee
   
154.145   Individual property site plan review fee
Prohibition of Cannabis Business Establishments
   
154.160   Definitions
   
154.161   Cannabis business establishments prohibited
   
154.162   Public nuisance declared
 
   
154.999   Penalty
IN GENERAL
§ 154.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “Village of
Rochester Business and Industrial Code”.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-1) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted to promote, protect and provide public health,
safety, comfort and general welfare of the residents of the village, to protect
the character and maintain the stability of the incorporated village territory
and its contiguous unincorporated territory, to establish minimum standards and
procedures for the design, construction and development of land for the use of
business or industrial purposes.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-2) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.003 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall be applicable to all parcels, plats and properties within
the village corporate limits and contiguous unincorporated territory of not
more than one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits of the village.
Where the one and one-half mile jurisdiction of the village would overlap with
that of another community, jurisdiction shall be to a line mutually agreed and
adopted by both communities, or in the absence of such an agreed line, to a
straight line between the intersection of the opposite points of crossing of
the jurisdiction line of the two communities.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-3) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.004 RULES.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
   (B)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
   (C)   The word “may” is permissive.
   (D)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-4) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADA. American with Disabilities Act.
   ALLEY, A public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as access to the
side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a public
street.
   ASHRAE. American Society of Hearing, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning
Engineers.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. This BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   BIKEWAY. A road or path built and reserved for bicycle traffic.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or a combination of streets,
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or boundary lines
of the corporate limits of the village.
   BUILDING. A permanent construction having a floor, walls and roof used for
living, business, manufacturing or special purposes.
   BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Plans that fulfill the submittal requirements of
this chapter.
   CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION. Formally attesting that the specific inspections
and tests where required have been performed, and that such tests comply with
the applicable requirements of this chapter.
   CLERK. The Village Clerk of the Village of Rochester.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street, either residential or commercial/industrial,
intended to carry through traffic and to which several local streets are
connected.
   COMMERCE. An interchange of goods or services among people.
   COMMERCIAL. Of or characteristic of commerce; done or acting for profit; the
principles, practices and spirit of commerce.
   COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the village.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Collectively those documents and ordinances of the
village relating to zoning, major street planning and land development.
   CONSTRUCTION PLANS. Plans prepared to show the types, locations, lines and
grades of the proposed streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and
the like, in the proposed subdivision and which shall include cost estimates.
   CROSSWALK. A marked lane for pedestrians crossing a street.
   CUBIC YARDS. The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by
the method of “average end areas”.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street or road with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of all traffic movement.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific
purpose and registered with county authority.
   EXCAVATION. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced or relocated and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   EXISTING GRADE. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior
to excavation or filling.
   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
humans to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   FINAL GRADE. The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after
the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
   FINAL PLAT. The final drawing of the proposed subdivision which shall be
presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board for their
respective considerations and which, if approved, shall be recorded in the
County Recorder’s office for the purpose of conveying land.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters, or
the unusual or rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP. A map delineating “A” zones as areas that are
susceptible to the base flood as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Administration (FEMA) of the United States government.
   FRONTAGE. The length of the front line of lots, tracts or parcels fronting
on a public street, road or right-of-way. The FRONTAGE of lots on curved
streets or cul-de-sacs shall be measured along the front building setback line
which, for this definition, shall not exceed the required front yard distance
from the property line.
   GRADE. The slope and/or vertical elevation change of a road, street or other
public way, specified in percent and shown on street profile plans as required
herein.
   GRADING. Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and which shall
include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
   IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water
main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, planting strip, off-street parking area,
lighting, park, recreation or conservation area, or other facility for which
the village may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation.
   INDUSTRIAL. Of or pertaining to manufacturing, production and/or assembly of
goods and/or products.
   LANDSCAPING. The use of living plants, natural or human-made materials and/
or the altering of contours to beautify (land, property and the like) by
designing areas to enhance the natural scenery, to provide transition and
screening of areas and to provide “green” areas.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
transfer of ownership or for building development.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two
substantially parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot.
   NATURAL DRAINAGE. Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
   OFFICIAL MAP. Map authorized herein and on which may be indicated proposed
public improvements for the purpose of coordinating the construction of public
improvements with future community development.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, trust, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought
to be subdivided under this chapter.
   PARCEL. All contiguous land in one ownership.
   PARKWAY. An unpaved strip of land situated within the public right-of-way of
a street.
   PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALK OR WAY. A public right-of-way within a block, ten feet
or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians but which may include
utilities where necessary, and from which motor propelled vehicles are
excluded.
   PERMITTEE. Any person for whom site development approval is authorized.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the state
and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America,
its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee
of any of the foregoing.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the
Village of Rochester.
   PLAT OFFICER. The Plat Officer of the Village of Rochester.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary drawing indicating the proposed layout of
the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and
Village Board for their consideration.
   REMOVAL. Cutting vegetation to the ground, complete extraction or killing by
spraying.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road,
sidewalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer, drainage ditch or for other special uses. The
usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land platting purposes shall mean that every
right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final record plat is to be
separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way, and
not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. RIGHTS-OF-
WAY intended for streets, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, parks, recreation or conservation area or other uses involving future
maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the owner of
the land on which such right-of-way is established.
   ROCHESTER IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. The minimum construction
specifications for public improvements as required herein or under other
portions of the village code, which are to be used in subdivision construction.
Where construction specifications outlined herein are in conflict with other
minimum required construction specifications of the village, the more
restrictive shall apply.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a public right-of-way, paved or otherwise surfaced,
intended for pedestrian use only.
   SIGNAGE. See §§
156.165 through
156.175 of this code of ordinances.
   SITE. A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT. Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing
improvements.
   STANDARD SPECIFICATION. Published improvement construction standards and
specifications as adopted or referred to by the village.
   STREET (ROADWAY). The paved portion of a public or private right-of-way
which affords primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties, whether
designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway or
however otherwise designated.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the fronts or faces of parallel
curbs or outer parallel limits of the paved portion of a street.
   STRIPPING. Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including
tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of top soil.
   STRUCTURE. A building or assembled framework made of material fitted or
joined together to provide structural supporting portions (i.e., towers,
buildings, bridges, conveyors and the like) which require a licensed structural
engineer.
   SUBDIVIDER (DEVELOPER). Any person or corporation or duly authorized agent
of the owner who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of land into two or more parts, any one of which
is less than five acres, for the purpose, either immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or building development, except that the following
instances shall not be deemed a SUBDIVISION of land:
      (1)   The division of land into parcels of five acres or more in size
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
      (2)   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any
recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
      (3)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land; and
      (4)   The conveyance of parcels of land for railroads, highways or other
public utilities.
   SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. The basic land-planning principles established
as guides for the preparation of preliminary plats as are contained in §§
154.070 through
154.078.
   TITLE. Village of Rochester Commercial and Industrial Code.
   U.S.G.S. United States Geological Survey.
   U.S.G.S. QUADRANGLE MAP. A topographic map as prepared by the U.S.G.S. (7.5
min. scale).
   VACANT. Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Rochester, Illinois.
   VILLAGE BOARD. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Rochester.
   VILLAGE CLERK (CLERK). The Clerk of the Village of Rochester.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. The Engineer for the Village of Rochester as may be
designated from time to time by resolution of the President and Board of
Trustees of the Village of Rochester.
   ZONING CODE. The zoning regulations of the village as amended, being
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-5) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 ; Ord. 18-03, passed
2-12-2018)
§ 154.006 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter upon
the subdivision of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any
kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or
requirements shall govern.
   (C)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this chapter
are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such
easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
chapter shall govern.
   (D)   No subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at the time of
the adoption of this chapter shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of
the adoption of this chapter, and to the extent and in any manner that said
subdivision of land is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter, said
subdivision of land remains unlawful hereunder.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to be a consent,
license or permit to use or subdivide land.
   (F)   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative and additional
limitations upon all other laws and ordinances heretofore passed or which may
be passed hereafter, covering any subject matter in this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-6) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.007 SEPARABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the village that the several
provisions in this chapter be separable in accordance with the following.
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision
of this chapter not specifically included in said judgment.
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular subdivision of
land, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any
other subdivision of land not specifically included in said judgment.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-7) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.008 SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically
unsuitable for development, or lands in environmentally sensitive areas shall
not be subdivided for residential purposes, nor for such other uses as may
increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood
hazard.
   (B)   The Commission shall not recommend the approval of the subdivision of
land if, in the opinion of the Village Engineer and upon adequate investigation
conducted by the Commission, it is determined that subdivision and development
of the site as proposed would not be adequately or properly served by public or
private utilities and would not readily be served by police and fire protection
so that its development would be detrimental to the best interests of the
public.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-8) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.009 CONNECTION TO VILLAGE INFRASTRUCTURE.
   Roads, streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water mains shall not be
connected or tied into village roads, streets, storm sewer, sanitary sewers or
water mains until:
   (A)   The subdivision has been annexed to the village;
   (B)   Construction plan approval has been reviewed and approval recommended
by the Village Engineer;
   (C)   All fees and assessments have been paid;
   (D)   All necessary permits for such connections have been granted by the
appropriate governing agency; and
   (E)   Inspection and approval has been made by an authorized agent for the
village.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-9) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.010 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   Any subdivision which contains or is a part of “A” zones as delineated on
the flood hazard boundary map must observe all rules and regulations outlined
in Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances, as now in force or as may be amended
from time to time, which ordinance regulates the construction, substantial
improvements, subdivision of land, placement of structures or other development
in relation to flood hazard areas.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-10) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.011 PUBLIC LANDS.
   (A)   Planned public improvement sites indicated on an official map, which
is adopted herein by reference, may be required by the village as part of the
approval of the subdivision. Such public improvements may include, but are not
limited to, roadways and the widening of existing roadways, school sites, park,
recreational, and conservation area sites, public building sites, storm
drainage sites, bikeways, cemeteries, water tower and utility easements.
   (B)   Whenever the official map of the village has indicated the necessity
to provide public improvements within a proposed subdivision, the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the Village Board shall require that certain lands be
designated for such public purpose before granting approval to such plat,
except however, that if the governing board of the agency responsible for that
proposed public site by formal action indicates disinterest in the site, the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Village Board may permit the designated
site to be used for any other purpose consistent with this chapter and the
zoning provisions of
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances. Furthermore, such site shall be held
for that specific public improvement for a period of one year from the date of
final approval by the Village Board.
   (C)   Whenever a site for public improvements has been indicated on an
approved final plat, the appropriate public agency shall acquire such land or
commence proceedings to acquire such land by condemnation within one year from
the date of final plat approval; and if the public agency does not do so within
such period of one year, the land so designated may then be used by the owner
in any manner consistent with this chapter and the zoning provisions of
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-11) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.012 VACATION OF PLATS, STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   In cases where an application is made to the Village Board to vacate
any subdivision or part thereof, prior to the sale of any lot in the
subdivision, the Board may by ordinance order the vacation of all or part of
the said subdivision. When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated
providing all the owners of lots in said plat join in the execution of said
application.
   (B)   In cases where an application is made to the Village Board to vacate
any street, alley or public place, the Board may in such cases order the
street, alley or public place, or part thereof vacated and receive from the
owner or owners of property abutting on such street, alley or public place or
part thereof so vacated, compensation in the amount which, in the judgment of
such Board shall be equal to the benefits which will accrue to the owner and
owners of such abutting property by reason of such vacation; provided, that
such order of vacation shall be passed by the affirmative vote of at least two-
thirds of the members of the Board.
   (C)   In all cases where application for vacation of any subdivision,
street, alley or public place or part thereof, is made to said Board, such
application shall be referred to the Village Attorney and Village Engineer who
shall make an investigation of the premises described in such application. The
said Attorney shall make a search to determine whether title is in the
applicant’s name and determine whether any lots or parcels of ground would be
adversely affected by such vacations.
(2009 Code, § 41-1-12) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.025 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The following offices of the government of the village are concerned
with the administration of this chapter.
   (B)   Specific duties are outlined as follows.
      (1)   Plat Officer.
         (a)   The Plat Officer shall be the enforcing officer of this chapter,
and it shall be the duty of said officer to enforce the provision hereof. The
Plat Officer may call upon any department or official of the village to furnish
such information and assistance as may be deemed necessary to affect the proper
enforcement of this chapter, and it shall be the duty of such department or
official to furnish such information and assistance whenever required.
         (b)   In the furtherance of such authority, the Plat Officer shall:
            1.   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter,
including amendments thereto;
            2.   Receive and file all business development plan applications
and supporting data;
            3.   Forward copies of the commercial development site plan and
construction plans to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Zoning Commission
for their review, recommendations and report to the Village Board;
            4.   Forward copies of the commercial development plan to the
Village Board for its consideration;
            5.   Receive and forward commercial construction plans and
specifications to the Village Engineer for their review;
            6.   Receive and file all final plans;
            7.   Forward to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village
Board all final plans for their approval or disapproval;
            8.   Receive and forward to the Planning and Zoning Commission all
review comments from individuals and agencies on preliminary and final plans;
            9.   Receive copies of state and local permits submitted by the
contractor prior to construction and shall maintain a file of all received
material;
            10.   Give written approval to the developer or owner to proceed
with construction;
            11.   Make all other determinations required of the developer by
the regulations contained herein; and
            12.   Maintain a file of driveway/curb cut permits issued by the
village.
      (2)   Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be entrusted with the following responsibilities:
         (a)   Review and recommend, to the Village Board of Trustees, approval
or disapproval or necessary modifications of all preliminary and final
commercial development site plans, and provide approval or disapproval for each
individual business or commercial property site plan to assure compliance with
the ordinances herein;
         (b)   Recommend to the Village Board the granting or denial of
requests for variances or exceptions subject to the provisions of this chapter;
         (c)   Recommend to the Village Board such amendments to this chapter
as the Commission may deem necessary or advisable;
         (d)   Make all other determinations required of them by the
regulations contained herein; and
         (e)   Recommend to the Village Zoning Board such amendment to the
zoning regulations applicable to this chapter as the Commission may deem
necessary or advisable.
      (3)   Village Engineer. The Village Engineer, or consulting engineer
designated by the village to act in this capacity, is hereby vested with the
following responsibilities as requested and authorized in regard to commercial
development control:
         (a)   Recommend approval or disapproval of all engineering plans and
specifications as requested by the Village Board relative to commercial
improvements, fees for such construction plan reviews to be paid by the
developer as provided in this chapter;
         (b)   Recommend the amount of the guarantee to be provided by the
developer;
         (c)   Make periodic and final inspections of commercial development
improvements, including a final inspection at the end of the guarantee period,
when notified and authorized to do so by the Village Board, such construction
inspection fees to be paid by developer as provided in this chapter. Periodic
inspection will be performed by the Village Engineer. The owner/developer shall
engage the services of a professional engineer licensed in the state and be
responsible for full-time inspection and certification of required testing. All
test results shall be submitted by the contractor to the Plat Officer prior to
final acceptance of commercial development improvements;
         (d)   Report his or her findings on all of the above to the Plat
Officer; and
         (e)   Make all other determinations required of him or her by the
regulations contained herein.
      (4)   Village Board. The Village Board is vested with the following
responsibilities in regard to commercial development control:
         (a)   Approve or disapprove all preliminary and final plans referred
to it by the Planning and Zoning Commission;
         (b)   Amend the regulations of this chapter when found necessary and
desirable as hereinafter provided;
         (c)   Institute appropriate proceedings to enforce the provisions of
this chapter;
         (d)   Approve or disapprove intended dedications or public
reservations of land;
         (e)   Order the vacation of a street, alley or other public place and
fix compensation, based on fair market value, received by the village thereof;
         (f)   Act upon variance recommendations referred to it by the Planning
and Zoning Commission; and
         (g)   Make all other determinations required of the Board by the
regulations contained herein.
      (5)   Village Clerk. The Village Clerk is vested with the following
responsibilities in regard to commercial development control:
         (a)   To collect and keep records of any fees, reports and charges as
required by the regulations contained herein;
         (b)   To receive and administer performance guarantees;
         (c)   To make all other determinations required by the regulations
contained herein; and
         (d)   Meet with the Village Engineer for assistance.
      (6)   Village Attorney. The Village Attorney is vested with the following
responsibilities in regard to commercial development control:
         (a)   To review and comment as requested by the Village Board;
         (b)   To review and recommend approval or disapproval of performance
guarantees to the Village Board; and
         (c)   To assist in legal matters and questions as directed by the
Village Board and/or Planning and Zoning Commission.
(2009 Code, § 41-2-1) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.026 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building located on a lot in violation of the regulations of this chapter.
   (B)   No preliminary or final plan shall be approved which does not comply
with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   No building permits shall be issued for construction of buildings or
site development, parking lots, exterior lighting, entrances and the like
without final approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(2009 Code, § 41-2-2) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.027 INVALID PLANS.
   No plan of any commercial development or individual business site plan shall
be valid or entitled to record or receive construction permit unless and until
the same has been approved by the Village Board and the Planning and Zoning
Commission in accordance with the procedure hereinafter provided, and no plan
of a commercial development or individual business site plan shall be approved
without compliance of the standards of design and specifications for
improvement required herein.
(2009 Code, § 41-2-3) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.028 BUILDING WITHIN PROPOSED STREET EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   No building, structure, recreational equipment or permanent
improvement of any type shall be erected within the extension of a street
right-of-way of any street terminated at the boundary of a subdivision, or of
any planned continuous street as indicated in the comprehensive plan of the
village.
   (B)   Such extensions are for the purpose of regulating the traffic flow
within the village in accordance with the best interests of public health,
safety and general welfare.
(2009 Code, § 41-2-4) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.029 CONSTRUCTION PLAN REVIEW AND CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION FEES.
   An hourly engineering fee to be set from time to time by the Village Board,
or charges corresponding to the current rate schedule for the consulting
engineer serving as the Village Engineer, shall be paid to the village to
defray the cost of reviewing and approving plans and specifications for public
improvements and for site inspections of construction of said public
improvements by the Village Engineer. These fees shall be borne by the
developer/owner, and shall be paid in the manner as prescribed in §§
154.140 through 154.146.
(2009 Code, § 41-2-5) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.030 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Hardships. Where the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that
extraordinary hardships or particular difficulties may result from strict
compliance with these regulations, the Commission may recommend deviation from
strict compliance with these regulations so that substantial justice may be
done and the public interest secured; provided that such variation or exception
shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter;
and further provided the Commission shall not recommend variations or
exceptions to the regulations of this chapter unless it shall make findings
based upon the evidence presented in each specific case that:
      (1)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result if the strict interpretation of the
regulations were carried out;
      (2)   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to public
health, safety or general welfare or injurious to the environment, other
property or improvements in the area in which the property is located;
      (3)   The owner/developer circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of this chapter;
      (4)   The granting of the variation or exception will not violate any
other local, state or federal permit requirements; and
      (5)   The act of not obtaining proper permits shall not be considered as
a hardship.
   (B)   Planning and Zoning Commission may attach conditions to variations and
exceptions. In its recommendations on variations and exceptions, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may require certain conditions that will substantially
secure the objectives of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 41-2-6) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.031 REVIEW OF ADVERSE PLANNING COMMISSION DECISIONS.
   (A)   If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends disapproval of a
business development plan, the developer or owner may file with the Village
Clerk a petition to the Village Board for review of such decision of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, pointing out those parts of the decision to
which the developer or owner objects. In such event, a hearing on the
sufficiency or propriety of said business development or individual business
site plan shall be conducted by the Village Board after notice thereof has been
mailed by the Village Clerk at least one week before the hearing to the person
or persons who requested the review and to the Planning and Zoning Commission
Chairperson; provided, however, that any matter which was the subject of a
previous hearing before the Village Board in connection with the same proposed
business development plan shall not be the subject of a second hearing.
   (B)   After the conclusion of any such hearing, the Village Board may by
majority vote of the total Board, affirm the recommendation of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, or by two-thirds majority vote of the total Board modify the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission to approve the business
development plan. If a business development plan is so approved by the Village
Board, the developer shall proceed before the Planning and Zoning Commission
with subsequent review steps provided by this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 41-2-7) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.032 AMENDMENTS.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall from time to time prepare and
recommend in writing to the Village Board such changes or additions to the
provisions and regulations herein contained for business development control as
it may deem necessary or advisable. Such changes or additions shall become
effective after their adoption by the Board by the passage of an amendment of
this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 41-2-8) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
PROCEDURE
§ 154.045 GENERAL.
   (A)   A developer and/or owner, before proceeding with the formal procedure
outlined in this subchapter, is urged to ascertain the problems and
requirements affecting the development of their property.
   (B)   This may best be accomplished by a meeting with the Planning and
Zoning Commission to determine general compliance and understanding of all
related village requirements.
(2009 Code, § 41-3-1) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.046 PRE-APPLICATION.
   (A)   Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the developer/owner may
submit material to the Plat Officer relating to the proposed development or
proposed individual property improvements in order to avail oneself of the
advice and assistance of the Planning and Zoning Commission at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, without the expense and time of a formal
application.
   (B)   It is suggested that for a maximum benefit the material should include
as a minimum:
      (1)   General information required that describes the existing condition
of the site and the proposed development. This information may include data on
existing covenants, land characteristics, available community facilities and
utilities, information describing the development proposal, such as number of
lots, lot width and depth, proposed protective covenants, utilities, street
improvements, existing zoning, surrounding land use and a general location map
showing the development’s location to/or in the village; and
      (2)   A sketch plan showing in simple form the proposed layout of
streets, lots, properties and other features in relation to existing
conditions. The sketch plan does not require formal application, fee or filing
of the plat.
(2009 Code, § 41-3-2) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.047 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Filing the preliminary plat. The developer or owner shall file 22
prints of the preliminary plat of the proposed development and improvements
with the Plat Officer for referral to the Planning and Zoning Commission and
other public officials. A transmittal letter shall be filed with the
preliminary plat that states the ownership of the land to be developed, the
engineer, the availability of utilities, variances requested and other
information pertinent to the Commission’s consideration.
   (B)   Special information required.
      (1)   If the legal owner decides to appoint a duly authorized agent to
act on their behalf, he or she shall file a written statement designating such
agent.
      (2)   Any application wherein the title to land is held in a trust shall
be signed by the land trustee, and the land trustee shall also disclose in
writing the names and amount of beneficial ownership of the trust during the
development process.
   (C)   Contents of the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   Description.
         (a)   Name of proposed development or business (businesses);
         (b)   Area of proposed development or business (businesses);
         (c)   Name and address of owner and developer;
         (d)   Name and address of the state licensed professional engineer and
signed stamp/seal;
         (e)   Scale and north point. Scale to be not more than 50 feet to the
inch;
         (f)   Location sketch showing location of the development in relation
to existing roads and streets;
         (g)   All plats and revised plats must be dated; and
         (h)   Legend.
      (2)   Existing conditions.
         (a)   Topography by contours with interval of two feet or less;
         (b)   The location of all existing property lines, section lines,
streets, buildings, watercourses, utilities, 100-year designated flood plain
and other pertinent features within and adjacent to the proposed development;
and
         (c)   The existing zoning classification of the proposed development.
      (3)   Proposed conditions.
         (a)   Location, width and name of all streets;
         (b)   Location and width of all sidewalks;
         (c)   Layout including property line, lot numbers, scaled dimensions
and property area of all lots; and
         (d)   Location and size of all areas to be conveyed or reserved for
walkways, or other similar semi-public or public uses.
      (4)   Certificates. The appropriate forms of certificates are on file at
the office of the Village Clerk and the developer shall consult the Village
Clerk and provide the appropriate certificates on the preliminary plat
drawings;
      (5)   Vertical and horizontal datums.
         (a)   All subdivisions of land within or to be annexed into the
village shall be surveyed utilizing the State Plane Coordinate System - West
Zone, as applicable. The survey of land shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a state professional land surveyor.
         (b)   Property corner coordinates shall be stated on the final plat in
grid coordinates that list the point number, northing and easting. The
following information shall be included in the final plat and shall be a
condition for approval:
            1.   National Geodetic Survey (NGS) control point movement for
origin of Illinois state plane coordinates;
            2.   Elevation in North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988 datum
(U.S. Survey feet);
            3.   State plane coordinates zone in North American Datum (NAD)
1983 (U.S. Survey feet);
            4.   Northing;
            5.   Easting; and
            6.   Grid factor.
   (D)   Distribution of preliminary plat for review. Upon receipt of the
preliminary plat, prints shall immediately be directed to the following persons
for review and comment:
      (1)   Two prints to the Village Engineer;
      (2)   One print to the Trustee of Public Health and Safety;
      (3)   Two prints to the County Engineer for transmittal of one print to
the appropriate Highway Commissioner;
      (4)   One print to the Soil and Water Conservation District;
      (5)   One print to the District Superintendent of Schools;
      (6)   One copy to be retained by the Plat Officer for his or her records;
      (7)   Two copies to be used for certifying Planning and Zoning Commission
approval; after certification, one to be retained by Village Clerk and one to
be returned to developer;
      (8)   One copy each to telephone, gas, electric, water, sewer and cable
companies to serve the area; and
      (9)   Seven copies to the Planning and Zoning Commission members.
   (E)   Planning and Zoning Commission action.
      (1)   The Plat Officer shall distribute to the Planning and Zoning
Commission members, at least ten days prior to the next meeting of the Planning
and Zoning Commission, seven copies of the preliminary plat along with copies
of any written recommendations of the Plat Officer, Village Engineer and the
Trustee of the Building and Zoning, Soil and Water Conservation District, and
County Engineer and Township Highway Commissioner and District Superintendent
of Schools, or others to whom prints of the plats have been directed.
      (2)   The date of the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission
wherein the preliminary plat is first presented shall be deemed the formal
application date. Within 90 days of the formal application date, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall either recommend approval, recommend conditional
approval with modifications, or recommend disapproval of the preliminary plats.
The 90-day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the developer and
Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   If the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission on the
proposed plan of development is for disapproval, then within said 90-day period
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall furnish to the developer a written
statement setting forth the reasons for disapproval and specifying with
particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this
chapter including the official map.
      (4)   If the preliminary plat is recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, two copies of the proposed plat will be so certified by the
Planning and Zoning Commission Chairperson and a copy of the findings and
action of the Commission relative to the development attached to each. One
certified copy will be filed with the Village Clerk and one copy will be
returned to the developer.
   (F)   Village Board action.
      (1)   Time requirement. The Village Board shall accept or reject said
preliminary plat within 30 days after the next regularly scheduled meeting
following the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission provided the
Planning and Zoning Commission action is at least 15 days prior to the next
Village Board meeting and that eight copies are promptly (within seven days)
provided by the developer to be distributed to the Village Board.
      (2)   If approved. If the preliminary plat is approved, the Village Clerk
shall attach a certified copy of the resolution of approval to two copies of
the plat.
      (3)   If disapproved. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the
resolution shall state the reasons for disapproval, specifying with
particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this
chapter including required relationship to the comprehensive plan and the
official map.
   (G)   Procedure if preliminary plat approved.
      (1)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of
the final plat, nor does it qualify the plat for recording. Said approval shall
only be deemed as approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a
guide to the preparation of a final plat.
      (2)   A copy of the preliminary plat with the Clerk’s certificate shall
remain on file with the Village Clerk, and a copy of the plat so endorsed shall
be returned to the developer. Additional copies of the preliminary plat shall
also be provided by the developer for the Village Engineer and Plat Officer.
(2009 Code, § 41-3-3) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 ; Ord. 07-10, passed
8-13-2007)
§ 154.048 DEVELOPMENT CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   Construction plans submission. The developer or owner shall submit
four sets of detailed construction drawings (five sets for developments not
within and not to be within the corporate limits) and estimate of costs to the
Plat Officer, a minimum of 30 days prior to submission of the final plat. The
drawings shall be in accordance with all design standards of this chapter and
applicable local, county and state design standards. The owner/developer shall
submit copies of all permits or permit applications to the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA), Illinois Department of Natural
Resources (IDNR), Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT), Illinois Office
of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM), United States Army Corps of Engineers
(USACOE) and the like as required by law.
   (B)   Contents of construction drawings.
      (1)   All architectural drawings shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a state licensed architect, and signed and sealed by same.
      (2)   All plumbing, mechanical and electrical drawings shall be prepared
by or under the direct supervision of a state licensed professional engineer
and signed and sealed by same or signed and sealed by a state licensed
professional pursuant to the State Architectural Practice Act, the State
Professional Engineering Practice Act or State Structural Engineering Practice
Act.
      (3)   All structural drawings shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a state licensed professional engineer, and signed and sealed by
same or signed and sealed by a state licensed professional pursuant to the
State Architectural Practice Act, the State Professional Engineering Practice
Act or State Structural Engineering Practice Act.
      (4)   All drawings shall be neatly drawn on reproducible 24 by 36 inch
sheets at a scale of not more than one inch equals 50 feet and consist of a
minimum of:
         (a)   Title sheet showing development location, scales, symbols, index
to sheets, summary of quantities, approval blocks and seals;
         (b)   Site plan with existing and proposed contours showing
drainageways, and flood plain boundaries;
         (c)   Plan and profile for streets;
         (d)   Typical cross-sections for streets, showing right-of-way lines,
proposed pavement widths, surface, base, sub-base and sub-grade type and
thickness; crown; curb and gutters; and sidewalks;
         (e)   Plan and profile for sanitary sewers;
         (f)   Plan and profile for storm sewer;
         (g)   Plan for water mains and appurtenances;
         (h)   Plans to include vertical datum and horizontal coordinate
system;
         (i)   Plans to show soil boring locations;
         (j)   Plans to show retention and/or detention basins and cross-
section information;
         (k)   Plans for street and parking lots, canopies and all proposed
exterior lighting, provide graphic representation of street lighting
photometics clearly showing compliance with §
154.097;
         (l)   Construction details, with details of manholes, inlets, catch
basins, curbs and gutters, drainage structures, other structures, or references
to the Highway Standards published by the State Department of Transportation;
         (m)   Specifications;
         (n)   Erosion and sedimentation control plan as outlined in §
154.091 and consistent with the erosion and sedimentation control principles
and standards of §
154.071. Description of erosion control measures to be taken during
construction;
         (o)   Parking lots, parking spaces, traffic flow patterns, proposed
traffic-control signage, waste and refuse storage areas and design of screening
structures to comply with standards;
         (p)   Landscape planting plans and estimated dollar amount of
landscaping costs;
         (q)   All plan views shall include all utilities, utility easements,
street lighting and sidewalks, where required, to clearly relate the position
of each item in relation to the others;
         (r)   Each sheet shall be numbered and contain basic information as to
project name, north arrow, scale and date;
         (s)   All lots shall be clearly numbered and relate exactly to the
final plat;
         (t)   The basis of design shall be submitted for all construction and
pavement design including drainage calculations; and
         (u)   All construction details including standard details shall be
shown with required dimensions and general notes.
   (C)   Plat Officer action.
      (1)   The Plat Officer shall forward four sets of the construction
drawings to the Village Engineer, and for subdivisions outside the corporate
limits, one set to the County Engineer. The Village Engineer shall review the
drawings and shall either recommend approval, recommend approval with
modifications as noted, or require resubmittal if the modifications are
extensive.
      (2)   If the plans are approved, the four sets of drawings shall be
clearly marked and signed on each title sheet as follows:
      Recommended For Approval By the Village of Rochester
                              by:_______________________________________
Village Engineer          Date                     
      (3)   When the construction plans are approved by the Village Board, the
Plat Officer shall retain one approved set and forward one approved set each to
the developer, the Village Engineer, the Village Clerk, and for developments
outside the corporate limits, to the County Engineer.
      (4)   Upon Village Board approval of the construction plans the developer
may submit the final plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
consideration.
      (5)   Recommendation for approval by the Village Engineer does not
relieve the owner/developer of full responsibility for the design of
improvements and compliance with the requirements of the chapter.
(2009 Code, § 41-3-4) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 ; Ord. 05-07, passed
11-14-2005)
§ 154.049 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAT.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Time limit on developer. Application for final approval of a plat
or development or individual property improvements shall be made within 12
months after preliminary approval has been granted by the Village Board.
      (2)   (a)   Within the aforesaid time period the developer shall file the
original and six prints of the final plat of the proposed development with the
Plat Officer together with a letter of transmittal stating that the final plat
substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat and specifying in what
particulars the final plat deviates from the preliminary plat.
         (b)   Said letter of transmittal shall also include a request for
consideration of the final plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall
be received by the Plat Officer at least ten days before the next scheduled
meeting of the Commission.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have 90 days to review and
consider the final plat and shall approve or disapprove same in the same manner
and form as preliminary plat.
      (4)   If the Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended approval of
the final plat, then the Village Board shall approve or disapprove the final
plat within 60 days after its next regularly scheduled meeting providing copies
of final plats are promptly (within seven days) provided by the developer for
distribution to the Village Board, following the action of the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
      (5)   If the Village Board disapproves the final plat, the resolution
shall state the reasons for the disapproval, specifying with particularity the
aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this chapter.
      (6)   If the Village Board approves the final plat, the Village Clerk
shall retain the original plat in the Clerk’s office.
      (7)   The village shall execute the requisite certificate on the final
plat only after all fees, financial guarantees and other required documents
have been duly executed and provided to the village.
      (8)   The final plat shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of the
county by the Village Clerk within one year of the date said plat was approved.
The permission of the developer shall be required for recording.
   (B)   Contents of the final plat. The final plat shall be drawn in black ink
on Mylar and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Name of development;
         (b)   General legal description;
         (c)   Area in acreage of the development;
         (d)   Scale, north arrow and date; scale to be not more than 50 feet
to the inch; and
         (e)   All required information as outlined in §
154.047.
      (2)   Existing conditions.
         (a)   The location of all existing section lines, lot lines and street
lines lying within or adjacent to the development; and
         (b)   The location of survey monuments found and used in determining
the boundaries of the development.
      (3)   Proposed conditions.
         (a)   The boundary of the development;
         (b)   Location, width and names of all streets;
         (c)   Location and width of all sidewalks and bikeways;
         (d)   Layout, including lot lines and lot numbers of all lots; square
foot area of each lot;
         (e)   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating
the development boundaries, lots, streets, alleys, walkways, easements, setback
lines and other areas for public or private use. Linear dimensions shall be
given to the nearest hundredths of a foot; angular dimensions shall be given to
the nearest ten seconds;
         (f)   Angular and linear dimensions to the nearest quarter section
line and corner;
         (g)   Designation of any lots that are to be reserved for parks,
playgrounds, schools or other public uses;
         (h)   Designation of any lots to be used for duplex or multi-family
use or use other than residential use; and
         (i)   Location of survey monuments.
      (4)   Certificates. Certain certificates must appear on all final plats.
The appropriate forms of certificates are on file at the office of the Village
Clerk and the developer shall consult the Village Clerk and provide the
appropriate certificates on the final plat. An additional certificate
concerning not developing in a flood plain is required by statute and this
certificate form is not provided by the Village Clerk.
(2009 Code, § 41-3-5) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.050 GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to approval of the final plat, the developer shall provide one
of the following:
      (1)   A corporate surety bond equal to 100% of the cost of the
improvement;
      (2)   A cash deposit in the sum of 100% of the cost of the improvement;
and
      (3)   An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other financial
institution in an amount equal to 100% of the cost of the improvement.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, COST OF THE IMPROVEMENT is defined as an
amount equal to the approved cost estimate of the project, including reasonable
inspection fees to be borne by the developer necessary to conform to the
requirements established by this chapter.
   (C)   The Village Attorney must approve, as the case may be, the following:
      (1)   The corporate survey and the terms and conditions, including, but
not limited to, the specific language of the bond; and
      (2)   The depository and escrow agreement in the event a cash deposit is
made.
   (D)   Whichever manner of providing guarantee is chosen by the developer,
the exact terms and conditions of same will be drafted and executed to
accomplish the following.
      (1)   The Village Trustees will have sole authority to determine if the
construction of the improvements is being accomplished in conformity with the
requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   In the event the construction of the improvements is not being
accomplished in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, all or such
part of the bond, cash deposit or letter of credit, as the village deems
appropriate, may be immediately forfeited and paid to the village.
      (3)   If the developer disputes the decision of the village as to
forfeiture, its sole remedy shall be to institute litigation as it deems
appropriate.
   (E)   Up to 90% of the guarantee may be released in portions from time to
time as construction is completed and conditionally approved.
   (F)   Upon completion and conditional approval of all development
improvements, the developer shall provide a two-year written guarantee of the
improvements and shall provide a financial guarantee in a form and substance to
be approved by the Village Board in one of the following ways:
      (1)   Maintain 10% of the existing guarantee in force; or
      (2)   Provide a new guarantee for 10% of the original amount upon release
of the original guarantee.
   (G)   Upon final acceptance of the development improvements by the Village
Engineer, the Village Board shall release the guarantee.
(2009 Code, § 41-3-6) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.051 CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   (1)   After approval of the construction plans, the developer shall
submit copies of all required state and local permits to the Plat Officer.
      (2)   The developer shall also submit where appropriate:
         (a)   Proof of application for an access permit from the County
Highways Department or State Department of Transportation when access to county
or state highway is involved;
         (b)   Proof of application for a § 404 permit and/or required state
rivers, lakes and streams joint application permit (IEPA, IDNR, USACOE) if any
dredging, riprapping, fill work or similar activities will be conducted in or
around streams, wetlands, the 100-year floodway or jurisdictional waters; and
         (c)   Other specific additional information or permits as required by
state, county or as may be requested by the village.
   (B)   Upon receipt and approval of all required permits, the Plat Officer
shall give written approval to the developer to proceed with construction.
   (C)   The developer shall be ultimately responsible for the final location,
elevation, quality and condition of all improvements and it shall be his, her
or its responsibility to employ competent contractors and engineers for this
requirement. The condition of the improvements at the time of inspection shall
be the basis upon which the improvements are rejected or conditionally
accepted. The subdivider shall have his, her or its engineer request shop
drawings from the contractor for all the materials and equipment to be
installed. Shop drawings shall consist of complete descriptive literature on
the equipment including all pertinent dimensions, material specifications,
operation and maintenance data and performance curves and data. Prior to
submittal to the Village Engineer, both the contractor and subdivider’s
engineer will have reviewed the shop drawings and stamped them with the
contractor’s/engineer’s name and signature as proof of review. Copies of all
shop drawings shall be provided to the Village Engineer.
   (D)   The developer shall provide competent and sufficient engineering
inspections so that the developer’s engineer can certify that all construction
was completed substantially in accordance with the approved plans.
   (E)   (1)   The developer or the developer’s engineer or contractor shall
notify the Village Engineer at least 24 hours in advance of the following
construction operations or as required by the Village Engineer.
      (2)   Failure to notify the Village Engineer will be considered a
violation of this chapter, subject to the penalties prescribed herein:
         (a)   Grading;
         (b)   Sanitary sewer construction;
         (c)   Storm sewer construction;
         (d)   Curb and gutter construction;
         (e)   Base course construction;
         (f)   Water main construction;
         (g)   Street light construction;
         (h)   Surface course construction; and
         (i)   Exterior lighting systems.
      (3)   Whenever construction stops for 24 hours or longer, the Village
Engineer shall be notified 24 hours before construction begins again.
   (F)   (1)   The Village Engineer shall periodically inspect the various
stages of construction and bring to the attention of the owner/developer (or
on-site representative thereof) any dissatisfaction with materials or methods
used in construction for remedial action. Testing will be required during
construction in accordance with the applicable specifications with additional
testing as may be required at the direction of the Village Engineer.
      (2)   Testing shall include, but not limited to:
         (a)   Grading; compaction tests, as requested by the Village Engineer
for approval of subgrade prior to paving, moisture content;
         (b)   Sanitary sewer; air test, television test, lamping, visual,
infiltration and deflection tests;
         (c)   Storm sewer; lamping, visual;
         (d)   Portland cement concrete (PCC) curb, gutter, pavements and
sidewalks; for each day in which ten cubic yards or more of concrete is poured,
one set of four standard cylinders shall be cast. As a minimum, one slump test
shall be made from the first load of concrete delivered to the site per day or
each time compressive test cylinders are made and as often thereafter as the
Village Engineer determines necessary. As a minimum, one air content test shall
be made from the first load of concrete delivered to the site per day or each
time compressive test cylinders are made and as often thereafter as the Village
Engineer determines necessary. For miscellaneous concrete pours of less than
ten cubic yards, certification shall be provided documenting that Class SI
concrete has been supplied from an State Department of Transportation certified
source. Slump and air content tests are not required for miscellaneous concrete
pours of less than ten cubic yards;
         (e)   Base course; gradation, compaction test, cores, thickness;
         (f)   Water main; pressure test, visual, bacteriological tests;
         (g)   Bituminous pavement:
            1.   IDOT approved mix design including density, Marshall
stability, flow, bitumen content, gradation, thickness and mix proportions;
            2.   A preliminary pavement testing plan showing the approximate
locations for performing density tests shall be submitted to the Village
Engineer prior to initiating paving activities;
            3.   For binder or base course and surface course, one density test
shall be performed for every 500 feet of lane width paved and every fraction
thereof, with a minimum of two tests per lane per day; and
            4.   Extraction reports detailing the properties noted in division
(F)(2)(g)1. above, for each day of paving activity.
         (h)   Concrete pavement - thickness cores, flexoral strength, mix
proportions, air content, slump and cylinder sample testing.
   (G)   All testing required by the Village Engineer shall be done by the
developer at the direction of the Village Engineer. Copies of all testing media
shall be issued to the owner and to the Village Engineer.
   (H)   Upon completion of construction and correction of defects, the
developer shall submit a written request for approval of all development
improvements, along with a certification by his or her engineer that all
improvements were completed in accordance with the approved plans.
   (I)   The developer shall have his, her or its engineer prepare as-built
record construction plans and submit one paper set and one electronic set to
the village and the Village Engineer for their records. The electronic record
drawings shall be provided in the form of an AutoCAD (latest version) drawing
file. The subdivider shall also have his, her or its engineer provide a copy of
the construction field notes to the village and Village Engineer.
(2009 Code, § 41-3-7) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 ; Ord. 07-10, passed
8-13-2007)
§ 154.052 CONDITIONAL ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Upon satisfactory correction and/or completion of all development
improvements and recommendations by the Village Engineer, the village shall
conditionally accept said improvements subject to a two-year guarantee period.
   (B)   The Plat Officer shall notify the developer in writing, when the
improvements have been conditionally accepted, and said date shall be the
beginning of the two-year guarantee period.
(2009 Code, § 41-3-8) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.053 IMPROVEMENTS GUARANTEE.
   (A)   Upon conditional acceptance of the development improvements by the
village, the developer shall provide the village with a written two-year
guarantee against failure of any of said improvements.
   (B)   The developer shall provide a financial guarantee equal to 10% of the
construction cost of development improvements for this guarantee.
   (C)   Failure shall be as determined by the Village Engineer. At the end of
the two-year period, the Village Engineer shall inspect the development and
inform the developer of any defects that must be corrected.
   (D)   If the developer does not correct the defects, the village may declare
a forfeiture of the guarantee.
(2009 Code, § 41-3-9) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.054 FINAL ACCEPTANCE.
   Upon completion and acceptance of any corrections by the Village Engineer,
the developer’s guarantee shall be released by the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 41-3-10) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.055 SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES.
   The following summary of procedures indicates the normal process for the
submittal of a proposed development and the party responsible for the
completion of each step:
Function Responsibility by:
Function                                         Responsibility by:
1. Optional pre-application location map meeting Developer
with the Planning and Zoning Commission
2. Submit preliminary plat to Plat Officer for   Developer
distribution
3. Submit preliminary plat to Planning and
Zoning Commission with review comments of
Village Engineer, Plat Officer, Trustee of       Plat Officer
Building and Zoning, and County and Township
Highway Officials, District Superintendent of
Schools, Soil and Water Conservation District
4. Review preliminary plat                       Planning and Zoning Commission
5. Submit preliminary plat and recommendation to Planning and Zoning Commission
Village Board
6. Review preliminary plat and approve or reject Village Board
7. Submit construction plans, specifications and
estimates of cost to the Plat Officer for        Developer
delivery to the Village Engineer and when
requested to the Planning and Zoning Commission
8. Review construction plans and submit          Village Engineer
recommendations to Village Board
9. Approve construction plans; construction      Village Board
authorized
10. Submit final plat to Plat Officer along with Developer
financial guarantee for improvements
11. Submit final plat to Planning and Zoning     Plat Officer
Commission
12. Planning and Zoning Commission review of     Planning and Zoning Commission
final plat
13. Submit final plat and recommendation to      Planning and Zoning Commission
Village Board
14. Review and approve final plat, financial     Village Board and Attorney
guarantee
15. Pay all required fees to the village         Developer
16. Record final plat with permission of         Village Clerk
subdivider
17. Certify completion construction to village   Developer
18. Submit as-built plans to the Village         Developer
Engineer
19. Recommendation for Board to conditionally    Village Engineer
accept improvements
20. Provide two year guarantee of improvements   Developer
21. Correct defects at end of two years          Developer
22. Recommendations for final acceptance of      Village Engineer
improvements
23. Final acceptance of improvements             Village Board
24. Release guarantee                            Village Board
 
(2009 Code, § 41-3-11) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.070 GENERAL.
   The following standards and principles of design shall guide the laying out
of commercial and industrial developments.
   (A)   The design of the commercial development shall be in harmony with and
shall conform with the comprehensive plan (including the overall goals of the
village) and the official map and shall be in accordance with good commercial
development design principles not otherwise set forth herein.
   (B)   Natural features, such as topography, distinctive trees or vegetation,
streams, ponds, hilltops, bluffs, creek bottoms and outlook views, shall be
preserved and enhanced wherever possible. In laying out a commercial
development due consideration shall be given to such aesthetic features
existing within the tract being developed and which may add to the aesthetic
quality of existing nearby development.
(2009 Code, § 41-4-1) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.071 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS.
   In all commercial development, measures are required to be taken to assure
that sediment is not transported from the site by a storm event of 25 year
frequency or less and that the following principles will be applicable in the
area to be developed.
   (A)   Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site
so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where
high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible and
natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
   (B)   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible.
Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left undisturbed
wherever possible.
   (C)   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest
practical time during development.
   (D)   Sediment basins, debris basins, de-silting basins, or silt traps or
filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off
waters from land undergoing development.
   (E)   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be
based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs and
benefits involved.
   (F)   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics
and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
   (G)   Provision shall be made to accommodate the increased run-off caused by
changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. Drainageways
should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities
of discharges will not create additional erosion, and should be protected
against erosion and sedimentation during development.
   (H)   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as
practical during development.
   (I)   During construction of public improvements, measures shall be taken to
control erosion and sedimentation to ensure that sediment will not be
transported from the site by a storm event of 25 year frequency or less. The
erosion and sediment control plan shall include measures to stabilize and
protect disturbed areas, keep runoff velocities low, retain sediment on site
and protect disturbed areas from runoff. The location, type and configuration
of controls such as swales, berms, dams, sediment basins and release mechanisms
shall be included with the construction plans.
   (J)   Temporary or permanent soil stabilization measures, whichever is
applicable, shall be applied within 14 days after final grading to all areas
where the soil has been disturbed or the vegetative cover removed. Seeding
mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seed bed preparation, expected
seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application and kind of
quantity of mulch of temporary and permanent vegetative control measures shall
be included with the construction plans. Removal and re-distribution of
sediment/silt shall be done prior to acceptance and final approval.
   (K)   In accordance with IEPA national pollutant discharge elimination
system (NPDES) requirements, the developer/owner shall file a notice of intent
(NOI) to discharge and submit his, her or its pollution prevention plan to the
IEPA when he, she or it is disturbing one acre or more of land.
   (L)   All waste generated as a result of site development activity shall be
properly disposed of and shall be prevented from being carried off the site by
either wind or water.
   (M)   All construction sites shall provide measures to prevent sediment from
being tracked onto public or private roadways.
(2009 Code, § 41-4-2) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.072 STREETS.
   (A)   General. All streets are to be designed in accordance with the State
Department of Transportation Bureau of Design and Environment (BDE) and/or
Local Roads Manual, latest versions.
   (B)   Conformance to standards. The course, general location, pavement and
right-of-way width and grade of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive
plan, official map and standards contained therein. The location of streets in
the proposed development shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographic conditions, to flood plains and wetlands, to
public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
   (C)   Arrangement. Where not shown on the comprehensive plan or the official
map, the arrangement of streets in a commercial development shall either:
      (1)   Provide for the continuation or projection of existing streets in
surrounding areas; or
      (2)   Conform to topographic or other conditions where continuance or
projection of existing streets is impractical or undesirable from the community
viewpoint.
   (D)   Use by through traffic. Streets shall be so laid out that their use by
through traffic will be encouraged, and design of streets extending into future
or existing streets shall be a part of the design.
   (E)   Access to an existing or proposed major street. Access to an existing
or proposed major street shall be limited to a minimum number of intersections
and be determined with due regard for sight distance, distance between
intersection and approach grades.
   (F)   Street grade. No street grade as measured along the centerline shall
be less than 0.50% or more than 7%. The maximum grade on arterial streets shall
not exceed 5%.
   (G)   Street intersections.
      (1)   Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60
degrees.
      (2)   Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet
are prohibited.
      (3)   Curb corners at street intersections shall have a minimum radius of
25 feet.
   (H)   Horizontal deflection of street lines.
      (1)   Where connecting street lines deflect from each other more than ten
degrees, they shall be connected with a curve with a radius adequate to assure
sight distance.
      (2)   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between curves
on collector streets where the curve radius is less than 500 feet.
   (I)   Alleys. Alleys shall not be permitted in proposed commercial
developments.
   (J)   Right-of-way. Street right-of-way widths for streets shown on the
comprehensive plan or the official map shall follow §
154.096(O) but in no case shall be less than as follows:
Arterial streets (other)* 100 feet
Arterial streets (state)  IDOT requirements
Collector streets         60 feet
Cul-de-sac                50 feet
Marginal access           40 feet
Minor streets             50 feet
Pedestrian ways           10 feet
*Right-of-way width of streets and roads should be in accord with the more
restrictive requirements of county, township or village having jurisdiction
over right-of-way width. Extensions of collector streets and arterial streets,
indicated on the official maps, will, for the purpose of determining required
right-of-way, carry the same classification
 
   (K)   Commercial development. In a commercial development that adjoins or
includes an existing street that does not conform to the right-of-way width
required above, one-half of the additional width shall be provided along each
side of such street for the entire frontage included within the land being
developed.
   (L)   Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets. Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets shall
not be allowed.
   (M)   Streets dedicated. All streets shall be dedicated for public use.
   (N)   Reserved strips. Reserved strips controlling access to street rights-
of-way shall not be permitted except upon approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and when control and disposition of the reserved strip is vested in
the Village Board.
   (O)   Street names and numbers.
      (1)   The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
The name of a new street shall not duplicate the name of an existing street
within the area served by the same post office or Fire Department or 911
system.
      (2)   If a proposed development is in close proximity to a municipality
which has adopted a street numbering system, the lots within the development
shall be assigned street numbers in accordance with that municipal street
numbering system, where practicable.
   (P)   Vertical curves. All grade changes shall be connected by vertical
curves. The length of vertical curves shall not be less than 30 times the
algebraic difference in rates for grade for crest curves and 35 times the
algebraic difference for sag curves. When speed limits are to be posted greater
than 30 mph, vertical curvature shall be used as contained within the latest
revision of the Policy on Geometric Design on Highways and Streets (AASHTO) for
urban, local, collector and arterial streets by the respective classification.
The minimum length of vertical curves on all types of streets shall be 30 feet.
   (Q)   Horizontal curves. When a centerline deflection angle is greater than
one degree, the following curves will be required in the street: major and
minor arterials and collector streets shall have a minimum centerline radius of
300 feet and a minimum length of curve of 100 feet; arterials and collectors
having a design speed and/or expected posted speed greater than 30 mph shall be
consistent with the latest revision of the horizontal curvature requirements of
AASHTO, the Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets for the
appropriate roadway classification; the pavement in all cases shall be wide
enough to allow the movement of an 84 passenger school bus (S-Bus) design
vehicle, as described in the State Department of Transportation Bureau of
Design and Environment Manual, latest version.
   (R)   Pavement design calculations and supporting information as described
in the IDOT Bureau of Local Roads and Streets Manual, latest edition, shall be
submitted with the subdivision construction plans for review.
(2009 Code, § 41-4-3) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 ; Ord. 07-10, passed
8-13-2007; Ord. 18-03, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 154.073 EASEMENTS.
   Easements across lots for utilities, cable television, watercourse, drainage
way, channel or stream shall not be less than 15 feet wide and shall be
adjacent to or centered on lot lines. All aboveground utility service boxes are
to be located on front property line.
(2009 Code, § 41-4-4) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.074 BLOCKS.
   (A)   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard
to:
      (1)   Provision of adequate building sites for the type of use
contemplated;
      (2)   Requirements as to lot size and dimensions;
      (3)   Needs for convenient access circulation, control and safety of
street traffic; and
      (4)   Limitations and opportunities for topography.
   (B)   Block lengths shall be not less than 400 feet and shall not exceed
1,400 feet.
   (C)   In cases where the block length exceeds 800 feet and where deemed
essential by the Planning and Zoning Commission to provide pedestrian
circulation to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community
facilities, an easement dedicated to the public for pedestrian crosswalk not
less than ten feet wide shall be provided and a six feet wide sidewalk
constructed.
(2009 Code, § 41-4-5) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.075 LOTS.
   (A)   (1)   All provisions of the village zoning regulations concerning lots
shall apply including lot area, width and depth. No parcel, remainder, outlot
or remnant of land which is part of the tract being developed shall be created
which, by reason of lot width, depth, area, frontage, topography or lack of
access thereto, cannot be used as a zoning lot, or be subject to further
development in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
      (2)   Any remaining parcel or outlot which cannot be made to comply with
the foregoing shall be eliminated by combining the area thereof with one or
more adjoining lots which do not comply or by conveying same for the
appropriate public use to a public body, subject to its acceptance of same.
   (B)   The lot shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of
the development and for the type of development and use contemplated.
   (C)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
(2009 Code, § 41-4-6) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.076 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   When a proposed park, playground or school site is shown on the
comprehensive plan or official map, or in the opinion of the Planning and
Zoning Commission is necessary for the public welfare, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall require the reservation of the appropriate area as specified
in §
154.011.
(2009 Code, § 41-4-7) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.077 FLOOD PLAINS, WETLANDS AND ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS.
   (A)   Disturbance of and encroachment into flood plains, wetlands and
environmentally sensitive areas shall be avoided in the planning and
development of commercial developments.
   (B)   Protection of these areas shall not be secondary to the developer’s
desire to maximize developed spaces or minimize cost. (See
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.)
(2009 Code, § 41-4-8) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.078 HISTORICAL OR ARCHAEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANT AREAS.
   Disturbance of and encroachment into registered historical or known
archaeological significant areas of land shall not be allowed.
(2009 Code, § 41-4-9) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.090 GENERAL.
   (A)   The improvements outlined in this subchapter are required in all
commercial developments.
   (B)   Any proposed improvement which deviates from or is not defined by
these specifications shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for review and consideration.
   (C)   (1)   Critical infrastructure items as defined herein shall be tied to
the vertical and horizontal datums as defined in §
154.047(C):
         (a)   Sanitary sewer manholes, cleanouts and service sewer
terminations;
         (b)   Storm sewer manholes, inlets, grates and flared end sections;
         (c)   In-line potable water valves and shut-off valves;
         (d)   Fire hydrants;
         (e)   Street light poles and exterior/adjacent control panels;
         (f)   Ground water monitoring wells;
         (g)   Utility conduits crossing the public right-of-way with start and
end points;
         (h)   Sewage, storm water and potable water pumping station corners,
if constructed; and
         (i)   Sump pump discharge line cleanouts and discharge points.
      (2)   Each of these items shall be identified in the construction plans
with coordinates and in the record drawings with as-built coordinates.
(2009 Code, § 41-5-1) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 ; Ord. 07-10, passed
8-13-2007)
§ 154.091 EROSION CONTROL, EROSION CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   All grading sitework, throughout the commercial development and the
construction of structures on lots, or installation of required improvements
shall be done in accordance with an erosion and sedimentation control plan
filed as part of the construction documents with the village and IEPA.
   (B)   Such plan shall provide the following information:
      (1)   Areas and acreages proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or seeded,
vegetatively stabilized or left undisturbed;
      (2)   All erosion and sedimentation control measures necessary to meet
the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases of construction and
permanently after completion of development of the site;
      (3)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quality of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures;
      (4)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance;
      (5)   Identification of the person(s) or entity which will have legal
responsibility for maintenance of erosion control structures and measures after
development is completed;
      (6)   The proposed phasing of the commercial site, including stripping
and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and
landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas and the sequence of
clearing, installation of temporary sediment control measures, installation of
storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas and establishment of permanent
vegetative cover;
      (7)   These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the
standards and requirements contained in the Illinois Urban Manual as prepared
by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation
Service, latest edition, available from the County Soil and Water Conservation
District, which standards and requirements are hereby incorporated into this
chapter by reference;
      (8)   The Planning and Zoning Commission with advice and recommendations
of the County Soil and Water Conservation District may waive specific
requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that the information
submitted is sufficient to show that the work will meet erosion and
sedimentation control objectives; and
      (9)   Removal and re-distribution of built-up sediment shall be completed
prior to acceptance and completion of project.
(2009 Code, § 41-5-2) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.092 GRADING.
   (A)   Grading within the right-of-way shall provide a 2% fall from the back
of right-of-way to top of curb.
   (B)   Grading outside the right-of-way lines shall be in accordance with the
approved construction plans.
(2009 Code, § 41-5-3) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
§ 154.093 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The developer shall provide the development with a complete sanitary
sewer system which shall be connected with the municipal sanitary sewer system,
subject to there being capacity within the municipal system to accept the
proposed load.
   (B)   When no municipal sanitary sewer system is available or is not
reasonably accessible to the development, the developer shall provide the
development with a complete sanitary sewer system which shall be connected to a
sanitary sewer system approved by the State Department of Public Health and/or
the State Environmental Protection Agency.
   (C)   When no approved sanitary sewer system is available, or is not
reasonably accessible to the development, one of the following methods of
sewage disposal shall be used:
      (1)   (a)   When the topography of the subdivision does not allow for
connection to the municipal sanitary sewer system with a gravity sewer, the
subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a pumping station that pumps the
sewage to the nearest available municipal sanitary sewer. The pumping station
shall be designed to accommodate the loading produced by the proposed
subdivision and any other upstream areas that are tributary to the subdivision.
Sanitary sewer loading produced by the tributary area shall be estimated using
the following criteria for residential development based on the zoning
classification:
R-S                              15 people/acre
R-1                              21 people/acre
R-2                              36 people/acre
R-3                              Reserved
R-4                              73 people/acre
R-5                              73 people/acre and 250 gallons/person/day
B-1 General Business             15 people/acre of developed land and 250
                                 gallons/person/day
B-2 Highway and Service Business 15 people/acre of developed land and 250
                                 gallons/person/day
                                 15 people/acre of developed land and 250
I-1 Light Industrial             gallons/person/day (exclusive of industrial
                                 waste)
I-2 Heavy Industrial             15 people/acre of developed land (exclusive of
                                 industrial waste) and 250 gallons/person/day
 
         (b)   Once the sewage loading has been determined, the sanitary sewer
system to receive the loading shall be evaluated to determine if it has
adequate capacity. Pumping stations shall be designed in accordance with the
State Rules and Regulations, Title 35, Subtitle C, Chapter II, Part 370,
Illinois Recommended Standards for Sewage Works (latest version). Specific
equipment and materials used in the pumping station such as pumps, valves,
motors, pipe, control panels, wiring and the like shall be subject to approval
by the Village Engineer. Copies of all mechanical and electrical component
testing shall be provided to the Village and Village Engineer. Upon
construction completion of the pumping station, a successful start-up operation
shall be performed in the presence of a manufacturer’s representative, village
representative(s) and Village Engineer. Any and all manufacturer’s warranties
shall be transferred to the village.
      (2)   Private sewage disposal systems consisting of septic tanks and tile
absorption fields or other approved sewage disposal systems laid out in
accordance with the requirements of the State Department of Public Health are
not permissible within the village corporate limits.
   (D)   Whenever a private sewage disposal system is to be utilized, the
developer shall require as a condition of the sale of each lot in the
development that the private sewage disposal system be constructed by the owner
of the lot before occupation of the lot occurs.
   (E)   No storm sewers, sump drain lines, footing tile lines, roof drainage
systems and the like shall be connected to sanitary sewer lines.
   (F)   Sanitary sewer pipe shall have a minimum diameter of eight inches for
main line sewers and six inches for sewer service, and shall be of material,
joints and fittings as specified by the village, or as approved by the Village
Engineer.
   (G)   A tee and sewer service shall be constructed for each individual lot
or parcel in the development and shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter.
The six-inch sewer service shall extend to five feet beyond the right-of-way
line. A service riser may be required by the Village Engineer if the depth of
the main line sewer is excessive. The material for the sewer service pipe shall
be as specified above.
   (H)   Manholes shall be built where sewers change in size, slope or
direction, and at a maximum spacing of 400 feet for sewers 15 inches and less
in diameter and 500 feet for sewers 18 inches through 30 inches in diameter.
Manholes shall be pre-cast concrete and have a minimum 0.1 feet of drop across
the flowline. Manhole lids for sanitary sewer shall be completely closed and
self-sealing. Where sanitary sewers are terminated at the boundary of the
current subdivision so as to serve future development, a six-inch diameter
clean-out shall be constructed at the terminus of the sewer pipe, raised to
grade and capped with a cast iron plug to provide access to the system. The
cleanout shall be acceptable to the Village Engineer.
   (I)   All sanitary sewer construction shall be done in accordance with the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois,
latest edition. All sanitary sewer trenches shall be backfilled with select
granular FA-6 as defined by the State Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition) and
Supplemental and Recurring Special Provisions Gradation FA-6 and compacted by
approved methods.
   (J)   If larger size sewers are required by the village to serve areas other
than the commercial development, the cost difference may be paid by the village
in accordance with any such policies in effect at the time the development is
considered.
   (K)   Upon completion of the sanitary sewer system, the developer’s engineer
shall certify that the sanitary sewer system has been constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and shall furnish the village with
copies of the record drawings. The developer’s engineer shall submit test
results to the Village Engineer and Sangamon County Water Reclamation District
for allowable leakage and deflection (where applicable) with the record
drawings. When noncomplying or improperly installed systems and material is
reported, all corrective cost of repairs and replacements shall be the
responsibility of the installing contractor and/or all responsible parties.
   (L)   The Springfield Metro Sanitation District shall inspect service
connections prior to backfilling.
(2009 Code, § 41-5-4) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 ; Ord. 07-10, passed
8-13-2007)
§ 154.094 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The developer shall provide the development with a storm drainage
system that is acceptable to the Village Engineer, which shall include storm
water detention. The subdivider, through the subdivider’s engineer, shall
submit drainage calculations supporting the storm drainage and detention system
signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer in the state. Included in
the drainage calculations shall be a signed statement by the licensed
professional engineer that the construction plans account for changes in the
drainage of surface waters in the subdivision, as required in the Illinois Plat
Act, 765 ILCS 205/2. Language for this statement shall be as follows:
      “To the best of my knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters
will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part
thereof, or, that if such surface water drainage will be changed, reasonable
provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface waters
into pubic areas, or drams which the subdivider has a right to use, and that
such surface waters will be planned for in accordance with generally accepted
engineering practices so as to reduce the likelihood of damage to the adjoining
property because of the construction of the subdivision.”
   (B)   The storm drainage system shall be adequate to properly drain the
development and all other upstream areas that are tributary to the development.
Runoff from such upstream areas shall be calculated as if they were fully
developed according to their existing zoning classifications.
   (C)   The storm drainage system shall be designed using a minimum five-year
storm at the upstream end of the system and a minimum 25-year storm for the
remainder of the system. Drainage calculations to support the storm sewer and
storm water detention facility design shall be submitted along with the
construction plans. Drainage calculations shall include a narrative and summary
of the existing and proposed drainage patterns, surface cover types, times of
concentration, flow rates, rainfall intensities and pipe and storage
capacities. Said calculations shall be signed and sealed by a state licensed
professional engineer. The subdivider is strongly encouraged to utilize
recognized best management practices (BMPs), such as conserving open space,
reducing imperviousness, utilizing bio-swales, creating depression storage,
installing permeable pavement and the like, for reducing the quantity of storm
water runoff and improving the quality of storm water runoff to mimic the
natural watershed hydrology.
   (D)   The storm drainage system discharge onto adjacent downstream
properties shall be designed so as not to increase the rate of runoff in
conformance with the drainage laws of the state.
   (E)   The storm drainage system discharge points shall be provided with
erosion control and velocity dissipation structures adequate to prevent damage
to downstream properties, with structures to protect unauthorized entry into
piping.
   (F)   Drainage structures shall be as specified by the village or as
approved by the Village Engineer. Storm drain structures shall utilize
resilient connectors between storm sewer pipes and laterals as specified in
ASTM C 1478.
   (G)   All storm sewer construction shall be performed in accordance with the
State Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction (latest edition) and supplemental and recurring special
provisions. All storm sewers shall be backfilled with approved trench backfill
material and compacted by approved methods. All storm sewer pipe shall be
gasketed pipe.
   (H)   All field tiles encountered during construction shall be repaired as
directed by the Village Engineer, with the size location, pipe material and
depth indicated on the record drawings.
   (I)   Where field tiles are damaged and it is determined by the Village
Engineer that it cannot be repaired, provisions shall be made to re-route field
tile to the nearest available storm sewer.
   (J)   All storm sewer grates, catch basin grates, curb and gutter grates
shall be stenciled with “DUMP NO WASTE! DRAINS TO WATERWAYS” message. Any
variations in the wording of the message shall be approved by the Village
Engineer.
   (K)    Sump pump discharge lines shall connect to a storm sewer, where
available. When a storm sewer is not available, a sump pump collector line
shall be provided by the subdivider. All sump pump discharge lines are to
discharge groundwater only. The desired location of the sump pump collector
line is the rear yard drainage easement. The subdivider’s engineer shall be
responsible for sizing the sump pump collector line so that it maintains a
minimum velocity of two feet/second. Collector pipe material shall be a minimum
four-inch diameter PVC Schedule 40. Sump pump collector lines shall be a
minimum depth of 30 inches. Clean outs shall be provided at dead ends, bends
greater than eleven and one-fourth degrees and lengths longer than 300 feet.
Sump pump discharge line taps that disturb the street pavement are prohibited.
Sump pump discharge line details, dimensions and locations shall be provided on
the record drawings. The village shall not provide the sump pump collector line
(s) or any services regarding these lines. The village does not consider sump
pump collector lines to be part of the village infrastructure, with the
collector systems remaining the responsibility to the homeowner(s) or through a
Homeowner Association (HOA) to provide any maintenance.
   (L)   Rear yard drainage swales shall be provided, as needed and as
determined by the Village Engineer, to convey storm water runoff from
individual lots to the storm drainage structures provided by the subdivider.
The rear yard drainage swales shall have a minimum two feet bottom width, four
to one (4:1) side slopes and laid at a minimum slope of 0.5%. Permanent
elevation monuments shall be established by the subdivider at the summit of
each swale for the purposes of recording the swale starting point and
elevation, prior to certification of completed construction of the subdivision
by the village. Any modification of rear yard drainage swales and resulting
conflicts, after conditional acceptance by the village, shall be addressed by
the entity that caused the modification.
   (M)   For tributary areas of five acres or more, storm water detention
calculations shall utilize a hydrograph method acceptable to the Village
Engineer that generates runoff volumes through inflow hydrographs that account
for the watershed features being drained. Inflow hydrographs shall be generated
by the design formula using a design storm with a range of rainfall durations
(one to 24 hours) associated with a recurrence interval of 100 years (1% chance
of occurrence in any given year) and the post development watershed runoff
conditions. The critical rainfall duration shall be used to size the detention
basin. Rainfall depths and durations shall be as provided by the State Water
Survey Bulletin 70 - Frequency Distributions and Hydroclimatic Characteristics
of Heavy Rainstorms in Illinois, latest edition. Rainfall distribution shall be
as provided for in the Illinois State Water Survey Circular 173 - Time
Distributions of Heavy Rainstorms in Illinois, latest edition. The allowable
release rate from the detention facility shall be computed using a recurrence
interval of 100 years (1% chance of occurrence in any given year) for the storm
period calculated by the time of concentration and the pre-developed watershed
runoff conditions. The Village Engineer shall have the discretion to require
the use of a recurrence interval less than 100 years (1% chance) to protect
inadequate downstream infrastructure or sensitive downstream areas.
   (N)   For tributary areas of less than five acres, the rational method may
be used to calculate runoff volumes and allowable release rates as outlined in
the latest version of the Illinois Department of Transportation Drainage
Manual. The allowable release rate from the detention facility shall be
calculated using a recurrence interval of 100 years (1% chance of occurrence in
any given year) for the storm period calculated by the time of concentration
and the pre-developed watershed runoff conditions. The Village Engineer shall
have the discretion to require the use of a recurrence interval less than 100
years to protect inadequate downstream infrastructure or sensitive downstream
areas.
   (O)   Detention ponds serving tributary areas greater than five acres shall
include a forebay (sediment trap) to capture sediment and pollutants contained
in the storm water runoff. The forebay shall be sized for a range of 15% to 25%
of the design capture runoff volume and designed to reduce the incoming channel
velocity to less than four feet/second. Where a sediment trap is not practical
or feasible as determined in concert with the Village Engineer, other means
shall be utilized to control sediment.
   (P)   Detention ponds shall include an emergency spillway that is designed
to safely pass the 100-year critical duration storm event to protect the
integrity of the pond embankment.
   (Q)   Development covenants shall provide village officials or their
representative’s access to the detention pond for inspection immediately after
completion of construction and annual inspections as required by their national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA).
(2009 Code, § 41-5-5) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001; Ord. 07-10, passed 8-
13-2007; Ord. 14-02, passed 4-14-2014; Ord. 22-24, 11-14-2022)
§ 154.095 WATER MAIN SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   (A)   For all proposed developments within the village or to be annexed to
the village, the developer shall provide the development with a complete water
main supply system which shall be connected to the municipal water supply
subject to there being capacity within the municipal system to serve that
development.
   (B)   If connection to the village system is not reasonable or feasible, the
developer shall provide a complete water main supply system connected to a
public water supply system approved by the State Department of Public Health
and IEPA with satisfactory provision for the operation and maintenance thereof.
   (C)   No individual or private water supply shall be allowed in commercial
developments without approval from the village and approval from the Village
Engineer.
   (D)   Water mains shall be of a type as specified by the village or as
approved by the Village Engineer.
   (E)   Water mains shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter. Larger size
water mains shall be provided if required to adequately serve the proposed
development. If larger size mains are required by the village to serve areas
other than the proposed development, the cost difference may be paid by the
village in accordance with any such policies in effect at the time the
development is considered. When PVC water main pipe is used, tracer wire (thin,
soft drawn, solid No. 12 copper) shall be installed, as a minimum, directly on
the water main every 20 feet and brought to the surface at valves and hydrants.
Deflections of the water main greater than 11.25 degrees shall be thrust
protected with either thrust restraints or restrained joint pipe. When the
water main connections are required that involve two different pipe materials,
the connection shall be made with a Model 3501 Transition Coupling by PowerSal
Engineering or approved equal.
   (F)   Village standard fire hydrants shall be provided at a maximum spacing
of 600 feet. The location of the hydrants shall be at lot lines and at block
corners. Village standard fire hydrants shall be Mueller Co. Centurion steamer
type with two two and one-half inch standard nozzles, one four and one-half
inch pumper nozzle, five and one-fourth inch barrel and painted yellow.
    (G)   Village standard fire hydrants shall be provided at a maximum spacing
of 600 feet. The location of the hydrants shall be at lot lines and at block
corners. Village standard fire hydrants shall be Mueller Co. Centurion steamer
type with two two and one-half inch standard nozzles, one four and one-half (4
Viz) inch pumper nozzle, five and one-fourth inch barrel and painted a color
choice of the Village.
   (H)   The water mains shall be located generally on the south and west sides
of streets, between the sidewalk and curb with a minimum cover of four feet
zero inches.
   (I)   All water main crossings of streets shall be backfilled with FA-
6 select granular backfill and mechanically compacted in eight inch lifts to a
point five feet behind the curb.
   (J)   All water main construction shall be performed in accordance with the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois,
latest edition.
   (K)   An individual water service shall be installed for each lot or parcel
in the development.
    (L)   The meter pit shall be installed three feet from the sidewalk, on the
commercial and industrial property side. Single service water meter pits shall
be 18-inch diameter PVC and 24-inch diameter PVC for double service meter pits.
Each meter box shall have a cover labeled “WATER METER” on the lid and shall be
Model No. H-10810 by Mueller Co. Meter connections shall be Mueller Co. B2404
R2-583415 Yoke with H-14227 compression connections at each end. Meters are to
be provided and installed by the village.
(2009 Code, § 41-5-6) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001; Ord. 05-07, passed 11-
14-2005; Ord. 07-10, passed 8-13-2007; Ord. 21-19, passed 7-12-2021)
§ 154.096 STREETS, CURBS AND GUTTERS, SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Streets shall be constructed in accordance with requirements of this
chapter and other construction standards of the village. If streets larger than
that required for the development are necessary and appropriate, the village
may participate in accordance with any such policies in effect at the time the
development is considered.
   (B)   All street construction shall be done in accordance with the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the State Department of
Transportation, latest edition, and in accordance with the approved
construction plans.
   (C)   All underground utilities that lie or cross under the proposed
pavement shall be constructed prior to any street construction. Trenches shall
be backfilled in accordance with the State Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition) and
supplemental and recurring special provisions with FA-6 and compacted by
approved methods to a point five feet behind the curb. All underground
utilities that cross under existing pavement shall be backfilled with State
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction (latest edition) and supplemental and recurring special provisions
gradation FA-6 and the disturbed pavement restored with an equal or greater
strength pavement cross-section.
   (D)   Streets with an aggregate base course shall be constructed so that the
aggregate base course can be exposed through one winter season prior to being
surfaced.
   (E)   Sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement concrete and shall
be at least five feet wide and four inches thick and a minimum 4000PSI
strength. Sidewalks may be waived by Planning and Zoning Commission, but only
after specific exception as outlined in the table Street Classification and
Design Standards in division (O) below.
   (F)   (1)   The standard curb and gutter required adjacent to flexible
pavement shall be a mountable type constructed of portland cement concrete with
the following dimensions: 24 inches wide, eight inches thick on the front face
pavement side; ten inches thick on the back face; seven inches thick at
centerline (flow line); and a ten-inch radius in the flow line. The curb and
gutter adjacent to concrete pavement, if poured monolithically, may be limited
to the thickness of the pavement. When poured separately, D-form, tie bars
shall be placed in the pavement accordance with the State Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and
shall be poured to full thickness as described above.
      (2)   In developments proposed to have streets with an anticipated
average daily traffic volume of 2,500 or more, a barrier type curb and gutter
similar to Type B6.18 as described in the State Department of Transportation,
Highway Standards, shall be used. Other locations where a barrier type curb and
gutter are required shall be determined by the engineer for the development and
the Village Engineer.
   (G)   If the pavement sub-base is unstable, as indicated by the proof roll
(s), lime stabilized soil mixture shall be utilized. The lime stabilized soil
mixture shall be prepared in accordance with the State Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest
edition) and supplemental and recurring special provisions. The contractor may
have the option of removing unstable soil and replacing with appropriate soil
to meet compaction requirements.
   (H)   Street improvements shall be in accordance with the State Department
of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
(latest edition), supplemental and recurring special provisions and the Street
Classification and Design Standards table.
   (I)   All street construction shall be subject to final inspection and
recommendation for acceptance by the Village Engineer and the Trustee in charge
of streets.
   (J)   Before pavement construction can begin, the entire subgrade shall be
compacted to not less than 95% of the standard laboratory density. Densities
shall be determined as provided in the latest edition of the State Department
of Transportation publication Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction. The number of density tests required shall be determined by the
Village Engineer. Proof rolling may also be required by the Village Engineer.
   (K)   If it is found that the subgrade cannot be compacted, it shall be
removed and replaced with suitable materials. The depth to which this
unsuitable material is replaced shall be determined by the Village Engineer.
   (L)   Portland cement concrete pavement construction shall be completed
without delay and shall be closed to traffic for 14 days after placement or
seven days with a modulus of rupture of 650 pounds per square inch.
   (M)   Bituminous pavement shall meet the density and material mixture of the
compacted bituminous mixture as outlined in the State Department of
Transportation publication Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
   (N)   The minimum crown used on all pavements shall be one-quarter inch per
foot measured from the edge of the pavement to the centerline of the street.
   (O)   All pavements shall be tested with a profilograph and shall meet IDOT
publication Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
Street Classification and Design Standards
Street         ROW Width Pavement Width Aggregate Base HMA Surface PCC Pavement
Classification
Street Classification and Design Standards
Street         ROW Width Pavement Width Aggregate Base HMA Surface PCC Pavement
Classification
Commercial     60 ft.    27 ft.         8 in.          6 in.       8 in.
collector
Major arterial 120 ft.   36 ft.         12 in.         8 in.       10 in.
Minor arterial 80 ft.    30 ft.         8 in.          7 in.       10 in.
Note 1: Curb and gutter required on all streets. Pavement width shown is edge
of pavement to edge of pavement
Note 2: Sidewalks required on both sides of all commercial and industrial
development streets unless a specific requested variance is approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, where in its opinion that due to the unusual
and unique situation in the proposed development, sidewalks are not required,
and the lack of such sidewalks would not compromise the safety of the future
residents or public. Requirements for sidewalks on other than developed streets
is dependent on conditions. Sidewalks shall be a minimum width of 5 feet
Note 3: Standards are for local streets. Street construction of state or county
jurisdiction will be to state and county standards, except that streets
constructed by other jurisdictions will be expected to provide sidewalks within
the village
Note 4: Aggregate base course shall be Type A
Note 5: PCC pavement shall be IDOT Class PV
Note 6: PCC pavement joint spacing shall be 12.5 ft. maximum for the 7 in.
thickness and 15 ft. maximum for the 8 in. thickness.
Note 7: Pavement designs not using typical thicknesses may be used, however, an
IDOT Bureau of Local Road (BLR) 20-year pavement design must be submitted for
review and approval
Note 8: All pavement thicknesses and construction shall conform to the latest
version of the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
 
(2009 Code, § 41-5-7) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 ; Ord. 14-05, passed
5-12-2014; Ord. 18-03, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 154.097 STREET LIGHTS.
   (A)   The development shall be provided with a complete street lighting
system in accordance with the American National Standard Institute Practice for
Roadway Lighting - ANSI/IES RP-8 (current edition).
   (B)   The street lighting system shall provide for a light at each
intersection and lights along streets to maintain recommended luminance and
illuminance values for roadways at a maximum spacing of 350 feet between poles.
   (C)   All street light fixtures shall be as approved by the Central Illinois
Light Company for complete serviceability. Fixtures shall include lamp,
ballast, photocell, socket, lens, reflector and mounting bracket. Each street
light shall include luminaire fusing sized as required by the luminaire
manufacturer and shall be installed in double pole in-line fuse holder as
manufactured by Buss, Hey or equivalent so that each pole can be serviced
independently. Fusing shall be located in a handhole at the base of each pole.
   (D)   Poles shall be of metal or concrete construction and of a type stocked
by CILCO, unless approved otherwise by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
Street Trustee.
   (E)   Mounting height shall, in general, be 30 feet for commercial/
industrial streets, as is appropriate for the luminaire.
   (F)   Luminaires for commercial/industrial streets shall be a minimum of 150
watt metal halide with a built-in regulator ballast and photocell or LED lamp
source and driver(s) with Kelvin temperature of 3000K or pre-approved Kelvin
temperature. Luminaires on major streets shall be 250 watt metal halide with
built-in regulator ballast and photocell or LED lamp source and driver(s) with
Kelvin temperature of 3000K or pre-approved Kelvin temperature. A type II or
type III distribution pattern shall be used to provide proper coverage.
   (G)   The developer shall provide complete electrical engineering plans and
specifications for the design of street lighting. Engineering shall be
completed, sealed and signed by a professional engineer, licensed in the state.
(2009 Code, § 41-5-8) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 ; Ord. 17-37, passed
11-13-2017)
§ 154.098 MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Monuments shall be set at all accessible lot corners and at angle
points and points of curvature, after the development has been final graded.
   (B)   Monuments shall be set by or under the direction of a state registered
land surveyor, and shall be iron pipe, three-fourths inch by 24 inches or
equal.
   (C)   The developer shall install village right-of-way markers, as directed
by the Village Engineer.
   (D)   (1)   At least one permanent benchmark shall be set within the
subdivision by a state professional land surveyor, regardless of the number of
additions, provided the additions are contiguous, in the form of a permanent
marker.
      (2)   The permanent market shall meet the following requirements.
         (a)   The permanent marker shall be located in the public right-of-
way, be easily accessible and not impede other surrounding infrastructure.
Location of the permanent marker shall be approved by the Village Engineer.
         (b)   The datum of the permanent marker shall be the following:
vertical datum shall be North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988 (U.S. survey
feet) and horizontal datum shall be North American Datum (NAD) 1983 (U.S.
survey feet).
         (c)   The vertical attributes of the permanent marker shall be
determined by conventional surveying methods (i.e., level and rod) and
utilizing a closed loop level traverse. The vertical attributes for each
permanent marker shall be documented by the state professional land surveyor
with proof that it is tied to another monument by submission of field notes
signed by the state professional land surveyor. The horizontal attributes of
the permanent marker may be determined by conventional surveying methods or
through the use of global positioning system (GPS) equipment. The horizontal
attributes of each permanent marker shall be documented by the state
professional land surveyor with proof that it is tied to another monument by
submission of field notes signed and sealed by the state professional land
surveyor for attributes obtained through the use of conventional surveying
methods. For horizontal attributes obtained through the use of GPS equipment,
the state professional land surveyor shall provide surveying files that
document the number of sites occupied, the respective coordinates of the sites
and the length of time the sites were occupied. All vertical and horizontal
attribute documentation shall be submitted to the Village Engineer. A minimum
of three monument ties (to the nearest tenth of a foot), such as street lights,
fire hydrants, manholes, valve boxes and the like, shall also be provided by
the state professional land surveyor. The permanent marker shall be documented
on the final plat and its inclusion shall be a condition for approval of the
final plat and recorded with the county.
         (d)   Permanent markers shall be either bronze or aluminum, four
inches in diameter and suitable for embedment in concrete. Permanent markers
shall be item C4D or C4DB by Bernsten International, Inc. or the equivalent
approved by the Village Engineer. Permanent markers shall be embedded in
concrete that is a minimum of 12 inches in diameter and four feet in depth.
Each permanent marker shall be detectable by standard metal detecting
equipment. The permanent marker attributes of marker number, state plane
coordinates and NAVD 1988 elevation shall be engraved on the marker.
         (e)   The Village Engineer shall assign a unique number to each
permanent marker set in concrete and this number shall be included on the
monument and on the record drawings and final plat.
         (f)   Any person or persons who damage or deface a permanent marker
shall be subject to the penalties as outlined in §
154.999.
(2009 Code, § 41-5-9) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 ; Ord. 07-10, passed
8-13-2007) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.099 CERTIFICATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Upon completion of all improvements, the developer’s engineer shall certify,
in writing, to the village that all improvements have been constructed
substantially in accordance with the approved construction plans. Upon
receiving this certificate, the Village Engineer and a village representative
from the Streets Department shall conduct a punch list review and shall issue a
letter to the developer’s engineer for corrective work. Once all punch list
items are completed to the approval of the Village Engineer and the village,
only then shall the certificate be accepted.
(2009 Code, § 41-5-10) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 )
INDIVIDUAL PROPERTY DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.110 GENERAL.
   The following standards and principles of design in this subchapter shall
guide the laying out of the following zoned properties: B-1, B-2, I-1, I-2 and
R-5.
   (A)   Required submittals. If the property is over three acres, and/or has
shared access, and/or has more than one principal building, the property owner
shall submit to the Plat Officer the following information and additional
requested information for review and recommendation by the Village Planning and
Zoning Commission to the Village Board and for approval or disapproval by the
Village Board before a building permit will be issued:
      (1)   Nine copies of the site plan with all information as outlined in
this chapter shall be submitted to the Village Manager. The Village Manager
shall distribute seven copies to the Planning and Zoning Commission, one copy
to the Village Engineer, and one copy shall be retained by the Village Manager;
and
      (2)   Nine copies of the site plan modified as required by the Planning
and Zoning Commissions comments (if agreed to) as outlined in this code shall
be submitted to the Village Manager. The Village Manager shall distribute seven
copies to the Village Board, one copy to the Village Engineer, and one copy
shall be retained by the Village Manager.
   (B)   Optional submittals. The property owner may submit the following
information and additional requested information for review and approval by the
Village Engineer concurrently with the submittal of the site plan or after the
site plan has been approved. No building permit will be issued until the site
plan and construction plans have both been approved.
      (1)   Three copies of construction documents (such as drawings,
specifications, and addendums) with proper architect/engineer seals and
signatures as required by §
154.048(B)(1), (B)(2) and (B)(3), as applicable, licensed in the state, shall
be submitted to the Village Manager for distribution;
      (2)   Permit fee value shall be as set by the Village Board;
      (3)   All new and remodeled structures shall be required to comply with
this code and shall provide all required professional design seals and
signatures for buildings that are included in the following zoning
classifications:
         (a)   Zoning district B-1;
         (b)    Zoning district B-2;
         (c)   Zoning district R-5;
         (d)   Zoning district I-1; and
         (e)   Zoning district I-2.
      (4)   Copies of all structural calculations shall be submitted for file
purposes to the Village Manager for buildings that meet any of the following
criteria:
         (a)   Any structure which has two or more floors that are intended for
public occupancy and has total square footage per floor of 2,000 or more;
         (b)   Any single-story structure that exceeds 30 feet in height as
measured from the finished first floor to the peak of the roof; or
         (c)   A copy of the shop drawings for any pre-engineered metal
building including the stamp of an architect or engineer licensed in the state.
   (C)   Procedure.
      (1)   Procedure for the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be as
follows:
         (a)   The Village Manager shall distribute to the Planning and Zoning
Commission members and Village Engineer, at least ten days prior to the next
meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission, eight copies of the site plan
along with copies if any of written recommendations of the Village Manager,
Village Engineer, and/or the Director of Building and Zoning, or others to whom
prints of the site plan have been directed.
         (b)   The date of the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission
wherein the site plan is first presented shall be deemed the formal application
date. Within 45 days of the formal application date, the Planning and Zoning
Commissioner shall either recommend approval, recommend conditional approval
with modifications or recommend disapproval of the site plan, if the Planning
and Zoning Commission is able to convene a quorum.
         (c)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the site plan
for technical compliance with §
154.111, technical compliance per zoning, and public infrastructure layout.
         (d)   If the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission on
the proposed site plan is for disapproval, then within said 45 day period, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall furnish to the property owner a written
statement setting forth the reasons for disapproval and specifying with
particularity the aspects in which the proposed site plan fails to conform to
this code including the official map.
         (e)   Planning and Zoning Commission shall present its recommendation
to the Village Board at the next regularly scheduled Village Board meeting
unless the 45-day time limit has been extended by mutual consent of the
property owner and the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (2)   Procedure for the Village Board shall be as follows:
         (a)   The Village Manager shall distribute to the Village Board and
Village Engineer, at least seven days prior to the next meeting of the Village
Board, eight copies of the site plan along with copies if any of written
recommendations of the Village Manager, Village Engineer and/or the Director of
Building and Zoning, or others to whom prints of the site plan have been
directed.
         (b)   The date of the meeting of the Village Board wherein the site
plan is first presented shall be deemed the formal application date. Within 30
days of the formal application date, the Village Board shall either approve,
approve with modifications or disapprove of the site plan, if the Village Board
is able to convene a quorum. The 30-day time limit may be extended by mutual
consent of the property owner and the Village Board.
         (c)   The Village Board shall review the site plan for technical
compliance with §
154.111, technical compliance per zoning, and public infrastructure layout.
         (d)   If the recommendation of the Village Board on the proposed site
plan is for disapproval, then within said 30-day period the Village Board shall
furnish to the property owner a written statement setting forth the reasons for
disapproval and specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed
site plan fails to conform to this code including the official map.
         (e)   If the recommendation of the Village Board on the proposed site
plan is for approval, then a building permit may be issued when the Village
Engineer has approved the construction documents (such as drawings,
specifications, and addendums) with proper architect/engineer seals and
signatures as required by §
154.048(B)(1).
   (D)   Fair share assessment fee. Fair share assessment fee shall be issued
for all structures and buildings.
   (E)   Building codes. All public, commercial, industrial and business
structures shall be designated and constructed in accordance with the codes
adopted by the village as stipulated in the villages’ ordinances, including all
village zoning ordinances which are pertinent to the appropriate zoning
certification.
   (F) Setbacks. Setbacks of permanent structures and/or buildings shall comply
with village zoning ordinances which are pertinent to the appropriate zoning
certification.
   (G)   Penalties. Violation of any provisions contained within this chapter
and which do not contain specific penalty amounts shall be assessed the dollar
value amount as written in §
154.999.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.111 SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL.
   (A)   Drawings shall contain the following:
      (1)   Site plan (1"=50' minimum scale);
      (2)   North arrow;
      (3)   Symbols list;
      (4)   Licensed architect or engineer’s name, address, sealed and signed
by same;
      (5)   Owner’s name/address and business name;
      (6)   Property lines, setbacks and easements;
      (7)   Erosion/sediment control design, details and maintenance;
      (8)   Floodplains, wetland and/or environmentally sensitive areas;
      (9)   Entrances and exits;
      (10)   Paved surfaces;
      (11)   Parking spaces;
      (12)   Loading/unloading dedicated areas;
      (13)   Traffic flow indications;
      (14)   Emergency lanes;
      (15)   Building(s) outlined with setbacks shown;
      (16)   Refuse containers and enclosures;
      (17)   Fences and walls;
      (18)   Signage location and design;
      (19)   Utilities and utility easements;
      (20)   Storm water management;
      (21)   Exterior lighting design;
      (22)   Landscaping design;
      (23)   Exterior storage areas and screening;
      (24)   Sidewalks; and
      (25)   Fire hydrant location(s).
   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board shall review the
proposed site plan for technical compliance with the list presented in division
(A) of this section.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.112 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS.
   Commercial and industrial properties are required to take measures to assure
that sediment is not transported from the site by a storm event of 25-year
frequency or less and that the following principles will be applicable in the
area to be developed:
   (A)   Site design should be related to the topography and soils of the site
so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where
high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible and
natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
   (B)   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible.
Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left undisturbed
wherever possible.
   (C)   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest
practical time during construction.
   (D)   Sediment basins, debris basins, de-silting basins, or silt traps or
filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off
waters from land undergoing development.
   (E)   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be
based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs and
benefits involved.
   (F)   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics
and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
   (G)   Provision shall be made to accommodate the increased run-off caused by
changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. Drainageways
should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities
of discharges will not create additional erosion, and should be protected
against erosion and sedimentation during development.
   (H)   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as
practical during construction.
   (I)   During construction of public improvements, measures shall be taken to
control erosion and sedimentation to ensure that sediment will not be
transported from the site by a storm event of 25- year frequency or less. The
erosion and sediment control plan shall include measures to stabilize and
protect disturbed areas, keep runoff velocities low, retain sediment on site
and protect disturbed areas from runoff. The location, type and configuration
of controls such as swales, berms, dams, sediment basins, and release
mechanisms shall be included with the construction plans.
   (J)   Temporary or permanent soil stabilization measures, whichever is
applicable, shall be applied within 15 days after final grading to all areas
where the soil has been disturbed or the vegetative cover removed. Seeding
mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seed bed preparation, expected
seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application and kind of
quantity of mulch of temporary and permanent vegetative control measures shall
be included with the construction plans.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.113 EASEMENTS.
    Easements across lots for utilities, cable television, water course,
drainageway, channel or stream shall not be less than 15 feet wide and shall be
adjacent to or centered on lot lines. All above ground utility service boxes
are to be located on front or street side of the property.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.114 FLOODPLAINS, WETLANDS AND ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS.
   Disturbance of and encroachment into floodplains, wetlands, and
environmentally sensitive areas shall be avoided or minimized in the planning
and design of the property. Protection of these areas shall not be secondary to
the developer’s desire to maximize developed spaces or minimize cost.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.115 PARKING LOTS AND ENTRANCES.
   (A)   Businesses are required to provide off-street parking and parking lots
shall be designed to accommodate the required quantity of parking spaces and
handicap parking spaces as required by
 Chapter 156.
   (B)   Parking lots and entrances shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt
and shall be designed properly for traffic and weight loads (such as cars,
tractor trailers, and the like).
   (C)   Parking lots and entrances shall have lane and parking spaces striped
and clearly marked with traffic direction flow arrows. Disabled parking spaces
shall be striped per ADA and shall have the current regulation signage and fine
indicated.
   (D)   Businesses that offer shopping carts for customers shall provide
exterior holding racks or stalls for carts.
   (E)   Provide loading and unloading areas and those areas are to be clearly
labeled and marked.
   (F)   Entrances shall be designed with locations being selected with
relationship to existing and future intersections and entrances, and shall
comply with state Department of Transportation and all pertinent regulations
and access permits shall be obtained.
   (G)   Upon request of the Planning and Zoning Commission, a traffic impact
study shall be required and shall address the following issues:
      (1)   Increased traffic burden;
      (2)   Increased exhaust emissions;
      (3)   Parking impact;
      (4)   Traffic counts daily and peak;
      (5)   Pedestrian safety;
      (6)   Vehicular weight design requirements;
      (7)   Fire department access;
      (8)   Hazardous material cargo; and
      (9)   Traffic signage or traffic lights warrants.
   (H)   The design of the site, parking and entrances shall provide for
emergency vehicular access, with access clearances maintained around all
structures.
   (I)   When determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission that an
emergency lane is required based upon the physical dimensions of the structure,
an emergency lane shall be indicated with proper signage to indicate “NO
PARKING - EMERGENCY LANE” and shall be 12 inches wide by 18 inches tall and
placed 50 feet apart along the required lane at the mounting height of six and
one-half feet above the sidewalk. Curbs shall be painted yellow by painting the
vertical face of the curb and six inches wide across the top.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.116 REFUSE CONTAINERS. STORAGE ENCLOSURES AND SCREENING.
   (A)   All exterior trash receptors or storage containers or loose refuse and
exterior storage shall be screened from public view with an approved designed
screen or enclosure structure.
   (B)   Design of a proposed screen or enclosure shall be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for approval and shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Drawing format minimum 11 inches by 17 inches;
      (2)   Minimum scale one-eighth inch equals one foot;
      (3)   Plan view and four elevations;
      (4)   Dimensioned completely; and
      (5)   List of materials to be used in the construction of the screen, or
enclosure.
   (C)   The design shall encompass the following design criteria:
      (1)   Height, width and length of enclosure or screen shall be designed
to physically screen the view of the receptor and storage area from adjoining
sidewalk, street or road, and from residential viewing angles;
      (2)   The material used in construction shall be durable and weather-
resistant;
      (3)   Colors of screen or enclosures shall be compatible with the main
building and not of color or finish to draw attention;
      (4)   Screen or enclosure shall have a lockable gate or gates to secure
from scavengers or public access; and
      (5)   Location of trash/refuse enclosure shall be selected for ease of
depositing and pickup but shall not be located at front of the business or
building or in a location that may be objectionable to adjoining businesses or
property owners.
   (D)   Refuse containers shall be enclosed on four sides with required access
opening with gates.
   (E)   Enclosure construction shall be of durable weatherproof materials,
with aesthetic design considered with relationship to the main structure.
   (F)   The location of containers and rubbish areas shall not create visual
obstruction for safety.
   (G)   Maintenance of enclosures is required, and the failure to maintain the
enclosures will be considered a violation and a fine of $100 per day may be
issued by the Trustee of Public Health and Safety.
   (H)   Applications where the Planning and Zoning Commission determines, due
to health and/or safety issues, there is a need for screening, a screen shall
be provided.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.117 FENCES AND WALLS.
   (A)   Fencing and walls shall comply with zoning code §
156.038.
   (B)   Walls for screening and retainage shall be designed and constructed of
durable weatherproof material and shall not create visual obstruction for
safety.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.118 SIGNAGE.
   (A)   Signage for businesses or promotions shall comply with
Chapter 156.
   (B)   Illumination of signage shall comply with §
156.060 of this code and shall not create hazardous, visual impacting glare, or
reveal the lamp source to motorists or pedestrians.
   (C)   If hazardous, or visual impacting glare, lamp source or reflection is
determined, the violation shall be corrected within five days upon receipt of
notice from the village and if corrections are not completed or a valid reason
not given, a fine of $100 per day shall be issued per violation until the
corrections are made.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.119 ADDRESSES.
   (A)   Each structure shall provide a numerical street address visible from
the street in a location that is illuminated at night time for ease of
identification.
   (B)   The size of the lettering shall be minimum three-fourths inch wide
stroke and six inches tall numbering.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.120 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Utilities and utility easements shall be provided for all businesses.
   (B)   All utilities shall be supplied and installed underground.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.121 SANITARY SEWER.
   (A)   Each structure shall be provided with a sanitary sewer service.
   (B)   The sewer service size shall be in compliance with the State Plumbing
Code, and Sangamon County Water Reclamation District ordinances, with a minimum
sewer service size of six inches up to and within five feet of the building
foundation.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.122 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The property owner shall provide a storm drainage system that is
acceptable to the Village Engineer, which shall include storm water detention.
   (B)   The storm drainage system shall be adequate to properly drain the
property and all other upstream areas that are tributary to the property.
Runoff from such upstream areas shall be calculated as if they were fully
developed according to their existing zoning classifications.
   (C)   The storm drainage system shall be designed using a minimum five-year
storms at the upstream end of the system and a minimum 25-year storm for the
main collector of the system.
   (D)   The storm drainage system discharge onto adjacent downstream
properties shall be designed so as not to increase the rate of runoff in
conformance with the drainage laws of the state.
   (E)   The storm drainage system discharge points shall be provided with
erosion control and velocity dissipation structures adequate to prevent damage
to downstream properties.
   (F)   Drainage structures shall be as specified by the village or as
approved by the Village Engineer.
   (G)   All storm sewer construction shall be performed in accordance with the
“Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction” of the state
Department of Transportation, latest edition. All storm sewers shall be
backfilled with approved trench backfill material and compacted by approved
methods in accordance with the “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction” of the state Department of Transportation, latest edition.
   (H)   All field tiles encountered during construction shall be repaired,
rerouted or connected to the nearest storm drainage pipe as directed by the
village, with the size, location, and depth to be indicated on the as-built
plans and protected from further damage.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.123 LIGHTING.
   (A) All exterior lighting design shall be provided with the use of sharp
cut-off style light fixtures that shall not exceed a distribution angle of
light projection of 70 degrees from the vertical position of the fixture. This
shall apply to pole and/or wall-mounted light fixtures.
   (B)   Lamp sources shall be energy efficient and long lamp life type.
   (C)   Light distribution shall not extend beyond property line.
   (D)   Source imaging, harsh, glaring or obstructive style light fixtures
and/or poor optical control lenses are not acceptable and will not be allowed.
   (E)   Design foot candles shall comply with recommended foot candle level,
as outlined by latest edition of IES for specific level of lighting. Special
foot candle levels that exceed IES recommendations shall be submitted in a
variance request format for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (F)   Parking lot perimeter and security lighting shall be of the same lamp
source. Accent and landscape lighting are to the discrepancy of the land or
building owner and shall meet the design intent as outlined in division (A)
above. No flashing or strobing lighting shall be allowed.
   (G)   Flood lighting of vertical surfaces shall not provide lamp source
image towards streets, roads, or as determined by Planning and Zoning
Commission or Village Public Health and Safety Trustee.
   (H)   A complete site lighting design shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for review and approval and shall contain fixture locations,
mounting heights, lamp source, fixture submittal, and foot-candle photometric
information for assurance of compliance with this code.
   (I)   Upon completion of the construction and testing of exterior lighting
system, a walkthrough during darkness shall be conducted by the owner, Public
Health and Safety Trustee and members of the Planning and Zoning Commission to
approve the site lighting design and system. If areas are found to be in
violation of the ordinances, a written directive to correct the violations
shall be issued within ten working days and corrective action shall be
completed within 45 days or a fine of up to $100 per day per violation shall be
issued.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.124 LANDSCAPING IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Each property and/or business as it is designed and constructed shall
provide greenways, plantings (trees, shrubs), and properly designed landscaping
based on the size and value of the building(s) and site construction with the
following minimum percentages being followed in providing the required
landscape improvements:
 
Total Value of Construction (New and Minimum Percentage (Value) for Landscape
Remodeling)                          Improvement
$5,000 - $100,000                    5% ($250-$5,000)
$100,001 - $500,000                  4% ($5,000 - $20,000)
$500,001 - $1,000,000                3% ($15,000 - $30,000)
$1,000,001 - $5,000,000              2% ($20,000 - $100,000)
$5,000,001 - $20,000,000             Minimum of $100,000
 
   (B)   Design of landscaping in which value requirements exceed $15,000 plans
shall be submitted for review and comment to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   (C)   Plans shall be prepared by a state licensed landscape architect.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.125 NOISE LIMITS.
    Noise generation on site shall be controlled to minimize sound levels.
Sound should be reduced to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of
the construction, noise, dust and unsightly debris and between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and no tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of
sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the
neighboring property shall be used during those hours.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021; Ord. 21-23,
passed 10-12-2021)
§ 154.126 FIRE DEPARTMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Design of site and facility shall provide fire department access for
all sides of structure for means of access.
   (B)   Submit to the Fire Department in 11 inch by 17 inch drawing
containing:
         (1)   Floor plan of each floor;
         (2)   Entrances clearly shown;
         (3)   Fire alarm enunciator and control panel locations;
         (4)   Sprinkler system main and Siamese connection locations;
         (5)   Hazardous material storage locations and list of materials; and
         (6)   Owner name and phone numbers.
   (C)   Businesses are required to provide updated information as
modifications, remodeling, and changes of use occur.
   (D)   All public buildings shall have an exterior Knox-box installed at an
agreed upon location between the owner/architect and the Fire Department.
   (E)   Containment of bulk storage of hazardous material shall be clearly
designated through exterior signage in compliance with state EPA.
   (F)   These regulations shall be subject to any rule or regulation
heretofore or hereafter adopted by the state Fire Marshall pursuant to “An Act
to Regulate the Storage, Transportation, Sale and Use of Gasoline and Volatile
Oils” approved June 28, 1919 as amended.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.127 ENERGY CONSERVATION AND VENTILATION DESIGN.
   Buildings and structures shall be designed and comply with ASHRAE 90-
1 energy efficiencies and ASHRAE 62-1 ventilation requirements.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
§ 154.128 FLOOD PLAIN AREA.
    No building or structure shall be erected or no fill placed within the
regulatory flood plain.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 ) Penalty, see
§
154.999
§ 154.129 CHANGE IN USE.
   (A)   A change in use of existing business or property shall require a
submittal of drawings clearly indicating a change in the existing site
development as it pertains to entrances, parking, exterior lighting, building
footprint, exterior storage, landscaping, or as requested by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
   (B)   Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a fine of $250
per day until required submittal of information is received.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed c ; Ord. 21-04, passed 3-8-2021 )
FEES
§ 154.140 PRELIMINARY PLAT FEE.
   (A)   All preliminary plats filed with the Village Clerk and distributed for
review by the Planning and Zoning Commission under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be subject to:
      (1)   Preliminary plat review by a consulting engineering firm authorized
by the Village Board to make such review;
      (2)   Any other review, study or analysis as may be deemed necessary due
to the specific impact of the proposed preliminary plat on the village by the
Planning and Zoning Commission or the Village Board of Trustees; and
      (3)   Payment of all expenses incurred by the village in relation to the
requirements for consideration of the preliminary plat.
   (B)   The subdivider shall deposit with the Village Clerk at the time of
submission of such preliminary plat, a cash amount of $1,500 toward payment of
all expenses to be incurred by the village related to the preliminary plat. The
consulting engineering firm shall be compensated by the village for one
preliminary plat review cycle as outlined in §
154.047, to be provided in accordance with the regular rates charges to the
village by the consulting engineer for such services. Any other expense
incurred by the village shall be charged to the subdivider at the actual
amount. If the aggregate of all expenses incurred by the village in relation to
the preliminary plat, including consulting engineering service fees for the one
preliminary plat review cycle, are less than $1,500, the difference shall be
refunded to the subdivider upon the village’s approval of the preliminary plat.
If the aggregate of all expenses are greater than $1,500, the difference shall
be paid by the subdivider upon the village’s submission of the final invoices
for all such expenses. The subdivider shall remit to the village an amount
equal to the difference between the actual total expenses incurred by the
village and the amount deposited with the village prior to approval of the
preliminary plat.
   (C)   Should the subdivider decide to pursue approval of the preliminary
plat from the Planning and Zoning Commission and additional reviews are
necessary, or other issues related to the preliminary plat or pre-application
map arise that require review and/or comment, the subdivider shall deposit with
the Village Clerk an additional cash amount as determined by the Village Board
of Trustees through a proposal by the Village Engineer or any other designated
party to provide these review services.
(2009 Code, § 41-7-1) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001 ;  Ord. 16-01, passed
2-8-2016)
§ 154.141 CONSTRUCTION REVIEW AND INSPECTIONS AT DEVELOPER’S EXPENSE.
   (A)   All required improvements to be constructed under the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to both construction plan review and inspections
during construction on behalf of the village by a consulting engineering firm
authorized by the Village Board to make such reviews and inspections. The
developer shall deposit with the Village Clerk at the time of submission of
construction drawings, a cash amount equal to 6% of the estimated cost of
construction. The consulting engineering firm shall be compensated by the
village for construction plan review and inspection services, as outlined in §
154.051, provided in accordance with the regular rates charged by the
consulting engineer for such services.
   (B)   Any fees paid to the consulting engineer by the village for inspection
services shall be deducted from the 6% cash deposit made by the developer. If
the cost of construction plan review and inspection services exceeds the amount
of the deposit, the excess amount shall be paid to the village by the developer
prior to final acceptance of the improvements by the village. If the cost of
inspection services is less the 6% cash deposit, the unused balance shall be
refunded to the developer by the villager when all improvements have been
accepted by the village and final billing rendered by the consulting engineer.
(2009 Code, § 41-7-2) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001)
§ 154.142 FINAL PLAT FEE.
   The developer shall pay a non-refundable final plat fee of $25 per lot, with
a minimum of $250 to the Village Clerk at the time the final plat is submitted
for approval.
(2009 Code, § 41-7-3) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001)
§ 154.143 RECORDING FEES.
   The developer shall pay the sum of $50 plus actual recording fees to the
Village Clerk at such time as the final plat is recorded.
(2009 Code, § 41-7-4) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001)
§ 154.144 FAIR SHARE ASSESSMENT FEE.
   The developer and/or individual property owner shall pay the required fair
share assessment fee at the time of permit application.
(2009 Code, § 41-7-6) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001)
§ 154.145 INDIVIDUAL PROPERTY SITE PLAN REVIEW FEE.
   (A)   All individual property site plans filed with the Village Clerk and
distributed for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be subject to:
      (1)   Individual property site plan review by a consulting engineering
firm authorized by the Village Board to make such review;
      (2)   Any other review, study or analysis as may be deemed necessary due
to the specific impact of the proposed individual property site plan on the
village by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Village Board of Trustees;
and
      (3)   Payment of all expenses incurred by the village in relation to the
requirements for consideration of the individual property site plan.
   (B)   The property owner shall deposit with the Village Clerk at the time of
submission of such site plan, a cash amount of $1,500 toward payment of all
expenses to be incurred by the village related to the site plan. The consulting
engineering firm shall be compensated by the village for one individual
property site plan review cycle as outlined in §
154.110, to be provided in accordance with the regular rates charges to the
village by the consulting engineer for such services. Any other expense
incurred by the village shall be charged to the property owner at the actual
amount. If the aggregate of all expenses incurred by the village in relation to
the site plan, including consulting engineering service fees for the one
individual property site plan review cycle, are less than $1,500, the
difference shall be refunded to the property owner upon the village’s approval
of the site plan. If the aggregate of all expenses are greater than $1,500, the
difference shall be paid by the property owner upon the village’s submission of
the final invoices for all such expenses. The property owner shall remit to the
village an amount equal to the difference between the actual total expenses
incurred by the village and the amount deposited with the village prior to
approval of the individual property site plan.
(2009 Code, § 41-7-7) (Ord. 10-09-01, passed 10-09-2001; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-
8-2016)
PROHIBITION OF CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 154.160 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft
grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization
or transporting organization.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to cultivate,
dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of Financial
and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business
establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-
infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to
purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers,
per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended
from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization
or business that is licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or
agent.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-9-2019)
§ 154.161 CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The following adult-use cannabis business establishments are
prohibited in the village.
   (B)   No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or
aid, abet or assist in the operation within the village any of the following:
      (1)   Adult-use cannabis craft grower;
      (2)   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center;
      (3)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization;
      (4)   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser;
      (5)   Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor; and
      (6)   Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-9-2019; Ord. 21-14, passed - -2021)  Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.162 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Operation of any prohibited cannabis business establishment within the
village is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to
all available remedies.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-9-2019) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each
violation, and each day such violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(2009 Code, § 41-2-9)
   (B)   Any person who violates §
154.116(G) shall be fined $100 per day, which may be issued by the Code
Officer.
(2009 Code, § 41-6-7)
   (C)   If hazardous, or visual impacting glare, lamp source or reflection is
determined and corrections are not completed or a valid reason not given within
five days in violation of §
154.118, a fine of $100 per day shall be issued per violation until the
corrections are made.
(2009 Code, § 41-6-9)
   (D)   If corrective action is not completed within 45 days, a fine of up to
$100 per day per violation shall be issued for violation of §
154.123.
(2009 Code, § 41-6-14)
   (E)   Failure to comply with §
154.129 shall constitute a fine of $250 per day until required submittal of
information is received.
(2009 Code, § 41-6-20)
   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §§
154.160 through
154.162 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $750 nor
less than $500. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 10-09-01, passed  10-09-2001 ; Ord. 19-30, passed 12-9-2019)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
In General
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Purpose
   
155.003   Jurisdiction
   
155.004   Rules
   
155.005   Definitions
   
155.006   Interpretation
   
155.007   Separability
   
155.008   Suitability of land for subdivision
   
155.009   Connection to village utilities
   
155.010   Flood hazard areas
   
155.011   Public lands
   
155.012   Vacation of plats, streets and the like
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.025   Administration
   
155.026   Enforcement
   
155.027   Invalid plats
   
155.028   Unlawful division
   
155.029   Building within proposed street extensions
   
155.030   Construction plan review and construction inspection fees to be paid
by subdivider
   
155.031   Variations and exceptions
   
155.032   Review of adverse Planning Commission’s decisions
   
155.033   Amendments
Procedure
   
155.045   General
   
155.046   Preapplication
   
155.047   Preliminary plat
   
155.048   Construction plans
   
155.049   Final subdivision plat
   
155.050   Guarantee of improvements
   
155.051   Construction and inspection
   
155.052   Conditional acceptance of improvements
   
155.053   Improvements guarantee
   
155.054   Final acceptance
   
155.055   Summary of procedures
   
155.056   Tract survey
Design Standards
   
155.070   General
   
155.071   Erosion and sedimentation control principles and standards
   
155.072   Streets
   
155.073   Easements
   
155.074   Blocks
   
155.075   Lots
   
155.076   Public sites and open spaces
   
155.077   Flood plains, wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas
Required Improvements
   
155.090   General
   
155.091   Erosion control, erosion control plans
   
155.092   Grading
   
155.093   Sanitary sewer system
   
155.094   Storm drainage system
   
155.095   Water main supply system
   
155.096   Street classification and design standards
   
155.097   Street lights
   
155.098   Monuments
   
155.099   Certification of improvements
Procedure for Minor Subdivisions
   
155.110   Purpose of minor subdivision procedure; definition of minor
subdivision
   
155.111   Pre-application requirement and procedures
Fees
   
155.125   Preliminary plat fee
   
155.126   Construction review and inspections at subdivided expense
   
155.127   Final plat fee
   
155.128   Recording fees
   
155.129   Minor subdivision fees
   
155.130   Fair share assessment
Plat Officer
   
155.145   Establishment and appointment of Plat Officer
Official Map
   
155.160   Official map establishment
   
155.161   Amendments or additions to official map
Erosion and Sediment Control
   
155.175   Introduction/purpose
   
155.176   Definitions
   
155.177   Permits
   
155.178   Review and approval
   
155.179   Erosion and sediment control plan
   
155.180   Design requirements
   
155.181   Inspection
   
155.182   Enforcement
   
155.183   Separability
IN GENERAL
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This chapter may be known, cited and referred to as the “Village of
Rochester Subdivision Code”.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-1) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the people; to protect the
character and maintain the stability of the village and contiguous
unincorporated territory; to assure the orderly development of the village; and
to establish reasonable standards of design and procedure for subdivision and
for resubdivision of land within the village and contiguous unincorporated
territory.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-2) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.003 JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall be applicable to all subdivision and resubdivisions
of land within the corporate limits of the village and contiguous
unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond the
corporate limits of the village. Where the one and one-half mile jurisdiction
of the village would overlap with that of another community, jurisdiction shall
be to a line mutually agreed and adopted by both communities, or in the absence
of such an agreed line, to a straight line between the intersection of the
opposite points of crossing of the jurisdiction lines of the two communities.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-3) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.004 RULES.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural the
singular.
   (B)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
   (C)   The word “may” is permissive.
   (D)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (E)   Whenever a word or term defined herein appears in the text of this
chapter its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof
and any word appearing in parenthesis directly thereafter shall be construed in
the same manner.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-4) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as access to the
side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other
street.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. This BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or a combination of streets,
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or boundary lines
of the corporate limits of the village.
   CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION. Formally attesting that the specific inspections
and tests where required have been performed and that such tests comply with
the applicable requirements of this chapter.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street, either residential or commercial/industrial,
intended to carry through traffic and to which several minor streets are
connected.
   COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the village.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Collectively those documents and ordinances of the
village relating to zoning, major street planning and land development.
   CONSTRUCTION PLANS. Plans prepared to show the types, locations, lines and
grades of the proposed streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and
the like in the proposed subdivision and which shall include cost estimates.
   CROSSWALK. A sidewalk through a block, normally provided where long blocks
would otherwise inhibit pedestrian movement.
   CUBIC YARDS. The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by
the method of average end areas.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street or road with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of all traffic movement.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific
purpose.
   EXCAVATION. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced or relocated and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   EXISTING GRADE. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior
to excavation or filling.
   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
humans to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   FINAL GRADE. The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after
the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
   FINAL PLAT. The final drawing of the proposed subdivision which shall be
presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board for their
respective considerations and which, if approved, shall be recorded in the
County Recorder’s office for the purpose of conveying land.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general or temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters, or
the unusual or rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP. A map delineating “A” Zones as areas that are
susceptible to the base flood as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Administration (FEMA) of the United States government.
   FRONTAGE. The length of the front line of lots, tracts or parcels fronting
on a public street, road or right-of-way. The FRONTAGE of lots on curved
streets or cul-de-sacs shall be measured along the front building setback line
which, for this definition, shall not exceed the required front yard distance
from the property line.
   GRADE. The slope of a road, street or other public way, specified in percent
and shown on street profile plans as required herein.
   GRADING. Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and which shall
include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
   IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC. Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water
main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, planting strip off-street parking area,
lighting, park, recreation or conservation area or other facility for which the
village may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
transfer of ownership or for building development.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two
substantially parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot.
   NATURAL DRAINAGE. Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
   OFFICIAL MAP. Map authorized herein and on which may be indicated proposed
public improvements for the purpose of coordinating the construction of public
improvements with future community development.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, trust, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought
to be subdivided under this chapter.
   PARCEL. All contiguous land in one ownership.
   PARKWAY. An unpaved strip of land situated within the public right-of-way of
a street.
   PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALK or WAY. A public right-of-way within a block, ten feet
or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians but which may include
utilities where necessary and from which motor propelled vehicles are excluded.
   PERMITTEE. Any person for whom site development approval is authorized.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the state
and its agencies or political subdivisions and the United States of America,
its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee
of any of the foregoing.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the
Village of Rochester.
   PLAT OFFICER. The Plat Officer of the Village of Rochester.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary plat drawing indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and Village Board for their consideration.
   REMOVAL. Cutting vegetation to the ground, complete extraction or killing by
spraying.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road,
sidewalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer, drainage ditch or for other special uses. The
usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land platting purposes shall mean that every
RIGHT-OF-WAY hereafter established and shown on a final record plat is to be
separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such RIGHT-OF-WAY, and
not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. RIGHTS-OF-
WAY intended for streets, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, parks, recreation or conservation area or any other uses involving
future maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the
owner of the land on which such RIGHT-OF-WAY is established.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a public right-of-way, paved or otherwise surfaced,
intended for pedestrian use only.
   SITE. A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT. Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing
improvements.
   STANDARD SPECIFICATION. Published improvement construction standards and
specifications as adopted or referred to by the village.
   STREET (ROADWAY). The paved portion of a public or private right-of-way
which affords primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties, whether
designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway or
however otherwise designated.
   STREET, MINOR RESIDENTIAL. A street of limited continuity used primarily for
access to abutting properties and local needs of a neighborhood, and on which
through traffic is discouraged.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the fronts or faces of parallel
curbs or other parallel limits of the paved portion of a street.
   STRIPPING. Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including
tree removal, clearing and storage or removal of topsoil.
   SUBDIVIDER (DEVELOPER). Any person or corporation or duly authorized agent
of the owner who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of land into two or more parts, any one of which
is less than five acres, for the purpose, either immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or building development, except that the following
instances shall not be deemed a subdivision of land:
      (1)   The division of land into parcels of five acres or more in size
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
      (2)   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any
recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
      (3)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land;
      (4)   The conveyance of parcels of land for railroads, highways or other
public utilities; and
      (5)   The severance of the fee ownership of units of a two-family
attached dwelling unit, when each is in full conformance with the provisions of
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances including, but not limited to, the
minimum required lot area and width specified in §
156.078(C) and required yard area as prescribed in §
156.078(D).
   SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. The basic land-planning principles established
as guides for the preparation of preliminary plats as are contained in §
155.070 through
155.077.
   U.S.G.S. United States Geological Survey.
   U.S.G.S. QUADRANGLE MAP. A topographic map as prepared by the U.S.G.S.
   VACANT. Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
   VILLAGE CLERK (CLERK). The Clerk of the Village of Rochester.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. The Engineer for the Village of Rochester as provided in
§§
32.095 and
32.096 of this code of ordinances.
   VILLAGE SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. The minimum
construction specifications for public improvements as required herein or under
other portions of the village code of ordinances, which are to be used in
subdivision construction. Where construction specifications outlined herein are
in conflict with other minimum required construction specifications of the
village, the more restrictive shall apply.
   ZONING CODE. The zoning regulations of the village as amended, being Chapter
156 of the village code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-5) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 96-6, passed 5-13-1996;
Ord. 18-03, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 155.006 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter upon
the subdivision of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any
kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or
requirements shall govern.
   (C)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of this chapter
are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such
easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
chapter shall govern.
   (D)   No subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at the time of
the adoption of this chapter shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of
the adoption of this chapter, and to the extent and in any manner that said
subdivision of land is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter, said
subdivision of land remains unlawful hereunder.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to be a consent,
license or permit to use or subdivide land.
   (F)   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative and additional
limitations upon all other laws and ordinances heretofore passed or which may
be passed hereafter, covering any subject matter in this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-6) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.007 SEPARABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the village that the several
provisions of this chapter be separable in accordance with the following.
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision
of this chapter not specifically included in said judgment.
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular subdivision of
land, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any
other subdivision of land not specifically included in said judgment.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-7) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.008 SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   Land subject to flooding. Land subject to flooding and land deemed to
be topographically unsuitable for development, or lands in environmentally
sensitive areas shall not be subdivided for residential purposes, nor for such
other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate
erosion or flood hazard.
   (B)   Suitable land for subdivision.
      (1)   To be suitable for subdivision, land proposed to be subdivided
shall have essential utilities and public services available within a
reasonable distance and time period. Land to which these essential utilities
and services will not be provided shall be deemed unsuitable for subdividing.
      (2)   Essential utilities and services and criteria for determining if
they can adequately be provided shall include the following:
         (a)   Sanitary sewer system. Sanitary sewer system shall be provided
in accordance with §
155.093, provided that if the land cannot be served with sanitary trunk sewers,
the land shall be unsuitable for subdividing unless it can be shown that
adequate private sewage systems can be provided, as required by §
155.093. Due to various environmental factors and considerations, some land
will not be suitable for private sewage systems.
         (b)   Water main supply system. Water main supply system shall be
provided in accordance with §
155.095 and only as may be approved by the village’s water supplier pursuant to
the village’s agreement to obtain water service, provided that private wells
may be permitted for developments outside the village if the developer can
demonstrate that it is not feasible to extend water mains to the land proposed
to be subdivided. As a minimum guideline, the extension of 120 feet of water
main per each individual lot of the preliminary plan shall be deemed feasible.
This distance shall be measured between the nearest suitable public water main
and the proposed development. Mains within the development shall not count
toward this extension footage.
         (c)   Streets, curbs and gutters.
            1.   Land proposed to be subdivided shall be suitable for street
construction and shall not have limitations which adversely affect construction
conditions. Factors to be considered include:
               a.   Soil type as it affects shrinkage, swelling, frost heave
and related considerations;
               b.   Water table as it affects subgrade; and
               c.   Slope as it affects maintenance, snow plowing, sight
distance, parking safety and need for large amounts of fill.
            2.   The Village Engineer shall make the final determination on
suitability for street construction, including §
155.096 for further requirements which may affect suitability.
            3.   The suitability of existing streets for access to the proposed
subdivision and/or for incorporation into the proposed subdivision’s street
system shall also be considered. A street shall be considered suitable if:
               a.   The street is constructed of all weather material
(concrete, asphalt, oil mat);
               b.   The pavement has the equivalent strength to carry emergency
and safety vehicles (minimum two-inch asphalt on six-inch crushed rock);
               c.   The paved area is at least 20 feet wide with a road bed 24
feet wide;
               d.   There is a minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet six
inches; and
               e.   The street has good positive drainage and is not subject to
frequent flooding.
   (C)   Other requirements.
      (1)   The site must be in conformance with the village’s comprehensive
plan.
      (2)   Development must be in accord with appropriate jurisdictional flood
plain regulations.
      (3)   The site must be of a shape, size and terrain so that usable lots
and streets in conformance with this chapter can and will be created. To
achieve conformance, the site may require special design or may require the
contemporaneous subdividing of adjacent property.
      (4)   Development must not have a major conflict with existing use of
adjacent property unless it is shown that factors which cause the conflict can
and will be mitigated.
      (5)   Development must not cause major off-site impacts and problems
relating to, but not limited to, streets, drainage, water system and parks. If
it is determined that major off-site impacts will result, the subdivider must
agree to mitigate the portion of the impact caused by the subdivision.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-8) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 97-6, passed 4-14-1997)
§ 155.009 CONNECTION TO VILLAGE UTILITIES.
   Storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water mains shall not be connected or tied
into the village storm sewer, sanitary sewers or water mains until:
   (A)   The subdivision has been annexed to the village;
   (B)   Construction plan approval has been reviewed and approval recommended
by the Village Engineer;
   (C)   All fees and assessments have been paid;
   (D)   All necessary permits for such connections have been granted by the
appropriate governing agency; and
   (E)   Inspection and approval has been made by an authorized agent for the
village.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-9) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.010 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   Any subdivision which contains or is a part of “A” Zones as delineated on
the flood hazard boundary map must observe all rules and regulations outlined
in Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances, and ordinance regulating development
in special flood hazard areas, as now in force or as may be amended from time
to time, which ordinance regulates the construction, substantial improvements,
subdivision of land, placement of structures or other development in relation
to flood hazard areas.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-10) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.011 PUBLIC LANDS.
   (A)   Planned public improvement sites indicated on the official map, which
is adopted herein by reference, may be required by the village as part of the
approval of the subdivision. Such public improvements may include, but are not
limited to, roadways and the widening of existing roadways, school sites,
parks, recreational and conservation area sites, public building sites, storm
drainage sites, bikeways and utility easements.
   (B)   Whenever the official map of the village has indicated the necessity
to provide public improvements within a proposed subdivision, the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the Village Board shall require that certain lands be
designed for such public purpose before granting approval to such plat; except,
however, that if the governing board of the agency responsible for that
proposed public site by formal action indicates disinterest in the site, the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Village Board may permit the designated
site to be used for any other purpose consistent with this chapter and the
zoning provisions of
Chapter 156 of the village code of ordinances. Furthermore, such site shall be
held for that specific public improvement for a period of one year from the
date of final plat approval by the Village Board.
   (C)   Whenever a site for public improvements has been indicated on an
approved final plat, the appropriate public agency shall acquire such land or
commence proceedings to acquire such land by condemnation within one year from
the date of final plat approval, and if the public agency does not do so within
such period of one year, the land so designated may then be used by the owner
in any manner consistent with this chapter and the zoning provisions of
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-11) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.012 VACATION OF PLATS, STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   In cases where an application is made to the Village Board to vacate
any subdivision or part thereof, prior to the sale of any lot in the
subdivision, the Board may by ordinance order the vacation of all or part of
the said subdivision. When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated
providing all the owners of lots in said plat join in the execution of said
application.
   (B)   In cases where an application is made to the Village Board to vacate
any street, alley or public place, the Board may in such cases order the
street, alley or public place or part thereof vacated and receive from the
owner or owners of property abutting on such street, alley or public place or
part thereof so vacated, compensation in an amount which, in the judgment of
such Board, shall be equal to the benefits which will accrue to the owner or
owners of such abutting property by reason of such vacation; provided, that
such order of vacation shall be passed by the affirmative vote of at least two-
thirds of the members of the Board.
   (C)   In all cases where application for vacation of any subdivision,
street, alley or public place or part thereof, is made to said Board, such
application shall be referred to the Village Attorney and Village Engineer who
shall make an investigation of the premises described in such application. The
said attorney shall make a search to determine whether title is in the
applicant’s name and determine whether any lots or parcels of ground would be
adversely affected by such vacations.
(2009 Code, § 35-1-12) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.025 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The following offices of the government of the village are concerned
with the administration of this chapter.
   (B)   Specific duties are outlined as follows.
      (1)   Plat Officer.
         (a)   The Plat Officer shall be the enforcing officer of this chapter,
and it shall be his or her duty to enforce the provisions hereof. The Plat
Officer may call upon any department or official of the village to furnish him
or her with such information and assistance as he or she may deem necessary to
effect the proper enforcement of this chapter, and it shall be the duty of such
department or official to furnish such information and assistance whenever
required.
         (b)   In the furtherance of such authority, the Plat Officer shall:
            1.   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter,
including amendments thereto;
            2.   Receive and file all subdivision applications, preliminary
plats and supporting data;
            3.   Forward copies of the preliminary plat to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for its recommendations and report;
            4.   Forward copies of the preliminary plat to the Village Board
for its consideration;
            5.   Receive and forward subdivision construction plans and
specifications to the Village Engineer for his or her review;
            6.   Receive and file all final plats;
            7.   Forward to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village
Board all final plats for their approval or disapproval;
            8.   Receive and forward to the Planning and Zoning Commission all
review comments from individuals and agencies on preliminary and final plats;
            9.   Receive copies of state and local permits submitted by a
contractor prior to construction;
            10.   Give written approval to the subdivider to proceed with
construction; and
            11.   Make all other determinations required by him or her by the
regulations contained herein.
   (B)   Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be entrusted with the following responsibilities:
      (1)   Review and recommend approval or disapproval or necessary
modifications of all preliminary and final subdivision plats;
      (2)   Recommend to the Village Board the granting or denial of requests
for variations or exceptions subject to the provisions of this chapter;
      (3)   Recommend to the Village Board from time to time such amendments to
this chapter as the Commission may deem necessary or advisable; and
      (4)   Make all other determinations required of them by the regulations
contained herein.
   (C)   Village Engineer. The Village Engineer, or consulting engineer
designated by the village to act in this capacity, is hereby vested with the
following responsibilities as requested and authorized in regard to subdivision
control:
      (1)   Recommend approval or disapproval of all engineering plans and
specifications as requested by the Village Board relative to subdivision
improvements, fees for such construction plan reviews to be paid by the
subdivider as provided in this chapter;
      (2)   Recommend the amount of the guarantee to be provided by the
subdivider;
      (3)   Make periodic and final inspections of subdivision improvements,
including a final inspection at the end of the guarantee period, when notified
and authorized to do so by the Village Board, such construction inspection fees
to be paid by subdivider as provided in this chapter. Only periodic inspection
will be performed by Village Engineer. The owner/developer shall engage the
services of an engineer and be responsible for full time inspection and
certification of required testing. All test results shall be submitted by
contractor to Plat Officer prior to final acceptance of subdivision
improvements;
      (4)   Report his or her findings on all of the above to the Plat Officer;
and
      (5)   Make all other determinations required by him or her by the
regulations contained herein.
   (D)   Village Board. The Village Board is vested with the following
responsibilities in regard to subdivision control:
      (1)   Approve or disapprove all preliminary and final plats referred to
it by the Planning and Zoning Commission;
      (2)   Amend the regulations of this chapter when found necessary and
desirable as hereinafter provided;
      (3)   Institute appropriate proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
chapter;
      (4)   Approve or disapprove intended dedications or public reservations
of land;
      (5)   Order the vacation of a street, alley or other public place and fix
compensation received by the village therefor;
      (6)   Act upon variance recommendations referred to it by the Planning
and Zoning Commission; and
      (7)   Make all other determinations required of the Board by the
regulations contained herein.
   (E)   Village Clerk. The Village Clerk is vested with the following
responsibilities in regard to subdivision control, to:
      (1)   Collect and keep records of any fees and charges as required by the
regulations contained herein;
      (2)   Record in the County Recorder’s office all approved final plats;
      (3)   Receive and administer performance guarantees; and
      (4)   Make all other determinations required by the regulations contained
herein.
   (F)   Village Attorney. The Village Attorney is vested with the following
responsibilities in regard to subdivision control: to review and recommend
approval or disapproval of performance guarantees to the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 35-2-1) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.026 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell such parcel before a plat of said
subdivision has been approved by the Village Board and filed with the County
Recorder of Deeds.
   (B)   The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes
and bounds description (with the intent of evading this chapter) for purpose of
sale, transfer or lease shall be subject to all the requirements and
regulations contained in this chapter.
   (C)   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building located on a lot or plot subdivided or sold in violation of the
regulations of this chapter.
   (D)   No preliminary or final plat shall be approved which does not comply
with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 35-2-2) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.027 INVALID PLATS.
   No plat of any subdivision shall be valid or entitled to record unless and
until the same has been approved by the Village Board in accordance with the
procedure hereinafter provided, and no plat of a subdivision shall be approved
without compliance with the standards of design and specifications for
improvement required herein.
(2009 Code, § 35-2-3) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.028 UNLAWFUL DIVISION.
   From and after the effective date of this chapter, no lot or tract of land
located within the village or within the extraterritorial area of jurisdiction
of the village shall be subdivided without complying with this chapter, the
village zoning code (
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances) and the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(2009 Code, § 35-2-4) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 96-6, passed 5-13-1996)
§ 155.029 BUILDING WITHIN PROPOSED STREET EXTENSIONS.
   No building, structure or permanent improvement of any type shall be erected
within the extension of street right-of-way of any street terminated at the
boundary of a subdivision or of any planned continuous street as indicated in
the comprehensive plan of the village. Such extensions are for the purpose of
regulating the traffic flow within the village in accordance with the best
interests of public health, safety and general welfare.
(2009 Code, § 35-2-5) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.030 CONSTRUCTION PLAN REVIEW AND CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION FEES TO BE PAID
BY SUBDIVIDER.
   An hourly engineering fee to be set from time to time by the Village Board
or charges corresponding to the current rate schedule for the consulting
engineer serving as the Village Engineer shall be paid to the village to defray
the cost of reviewing and approving plans and specifications for public
improvements and for site inspections of construction of said public
improvements by the Village Engineer. These fees shall be borne by the
subdivider and shall be paid in the manner as prescribed in §§
155.125 through
155.130.
(2009 Code, § 35-2-6) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.031 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Hardships. Where the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that
extraordinary hardships or particular difficulties may result from strict
compliance with these regulations, the Commission may recommend deviation from
strict compliance with these regulations so that substantial justice may be
done and the public interest secured; provided, that such variation or
exception shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of
this chapter and, further provided, the Commission shall not recommend
variations or exceptions to the regulations of this chapter unless it shall
make findings based upon the evidence presented in each specific case that:
      (1)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result if the strict interpretation of the
regulations were carried out; and
      (2)   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to public
health, safety or general welfare or injurious to the environment, other
property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located.
   (B)   Exception to procedure for minor subdivisions. The subdivision of a
parcel of land along an existing public street or road into not more than five
lots for single-family residential use and not involving the construction of
public improvements shall be considered a minor subdivision and shall follow
the procedure and requirements as outlined in §§
155.110 and
155.111.
   (C)   Planning and Zoning Commission may attach conditions to variations and
exceptions. In its recommendations on variations and exceptions, the Commission
may require conditions that will substantially secure the objectives of this
chapter.
(2009 Code, § 35-2-7) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.032 REVIEW OF ADVERSE PLANNING COMMISSION’S DECISIONS.
   (A)   If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends disapproval of a
preliminary plat or final plat, or a preapplication map of a minor subdivision,
the subdivider may file with the Village Clerk a petition to the Village Board
for review of such decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission, pointing out
those parts of the decision to which the subdivider objects. In such event, a
hearing on the sufficiency or propriety of said preliminary plat or final plat
shall be conducted by the Village Board after notice thereof has been mailed by
the Village Clerk at least one week before the hearing to the person or persons
who requested the review and to the Planning and Zoning Commission Chairperson;
provided, however, that any matter which was the subject of a previous hearing
before the Village Board in connection with the same proposed subdivision shall
not be the subject of a second hearing.
   (B)   After the conclusion of any such hearing, the Village Board may by
majority vote of the total Board, affirm the recommendations of the Commission,
or by two-thirds majority vote of the total Board modify the recommendation of
the Commission to approve the preliminary plat or final plat. If a preliminary
plat or a minor subdivision preapplication map is so approved by the Village
Board, the subdivider shall proceed before the Planning and Zoning Commission
with subsequent review steps provided by this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 35-2-8) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.033 AMENDMENTS.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall from time to time prepare and
recommend in writing to the Village Board such changes or additions to the
provisions and regulations herein contained for subdivision control as it may
deem necessary or advisable. Such changes or additions shall become effective
after their adoption by the Board by the passage of an amendment of this
chapter.
(2009 Code, § 35-2-9) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
PROCEDURE
§ 155.045 GENERAL.
   A subdivider, before proceeding with the formal procedure outlined in this
subchapter, is urged to ascertain the problems and requirements affecting the
subdivision of his or her property. This may best be accomplished by a meeting
with the Planning and Zoning Commission to determine general compliance and
understanding of all related village requirements.
(2009 Code, § 35-3-1) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.046 PREAPPLICATION.
   (A)   Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit
material to the Plat Officer relating to the proposed subdivision in order to
avail himself or herself of the advice and assistance of the Planning and
Zoning Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting, without the expense
and time of a formal application.
   (B)   It is suggested that for a maximum benefit the material should include
as a minimum:
      (1)   General subdivision information that describes the existing
condition of the site and the proposed development. This information may
include data on existing covenants, land characteristics, available community
facilities and utilities, information describing the subdivision proposal, such
as number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, proposed protective
covenants, utilities, street improvements, existing zoning, surrounding land
use and a general location map showing the subdivision’s location to/or in the
village; and
      (2)   A sketch plan showing in simple form the proposed layout of
streets, lots and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch
plan does not require formal application, fee or filing of the plat.
(2009 Code, § 35-3-2) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.047 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Filing the preliminary plat. The subdivider shall file 21 prints of
the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision with the Plat Officer for
referral to the Planning and Zoning Commission and other public officials. A
transmittal letter shall be filed with the preliminary plat that states the
ownership of the land to be subdivided, the engineer, the availability of
utilities, variances requested, proposed covenants and other information
pertinent to the Commission’s consideration.
   (B)   Special information required.
      (1)   If the legal owner desires to appoint a duly authorized agent to
act on his or her behalf, he or she shall file a written statement designating
such agent.
      (2)   Any application wherein the title to land is held in a trust shall
be signed by the land trustee, and the land trustee shall also disclose in
writing the names and amount of beneficial ownership of all persons with a
beneficial interest in the trust. Any changes in the beneficial ownership of
the trust during the subdivision process shall be immediately disclosed in
writing by the trustee.
   (C)   Contents of the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   Description.
         (a)   Name of proposed subdivision;
         (b)   Area of proposed subdivision;
         (c)   Name and address of owner and developer;
         (d)   Name and address of engineer.
         (e)   Scale and north point. Scale to be not more than 100 feet to the
one inch;
         (f)   Location sketch showing location of the subdivision in relation
to existing roads; and
         (g)   All plats and revised plats must contain date.
      (2)   Existing conditions.
         (a)   Topography by contours with interval of two feet or less;
         (b)   The location of all existing property lines, section lines,
streets, buildings, watercourses, utilities, 100-year designated flood plain
and other pertinent features within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision;
and
         (c)   The existing zoning classification of the proposed subdivision.
      (3)   Proposed conditions.
         (a)   Location, width and name of all streets;
         (b)   Location and width of all alleys and walkways;
         (c)   Layout including lot line, lot numbers, scaled dimensions and
lot area of all lots;
         (d)   Location and size of any areas to be conveyed or reserved for
parks, scenic ways, walkways, playgrounds, schools, public buildings or other
similar semi-public or public uses; and
         (e)   Designation of any lots to be used for duplex or multi-family
development.
      (4)   Certificates. Certain certificates must appear on all preliminary
plats. The appropriate forms of certificates are on file at the office of the
Village Clerk and the subdivider shall consult the Village Clerk and provide
the appropriate certificates on the preliminary plat.
      (5)   Vertical and horizontal datums.
         (a)   All subdivisions of land within or to be annexed into the
village shall be surveyed utilizing the State Plane Coordinate System - West
Zone, as applicable. The survey of land shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a state professional land surveyor.
         (b)   Property corner coordinates shall be stated on the final plat in
grid coordinates that list the point number, northing and easting. The
following information shall be included in the final plat and shall be a
condition for approval:
            1.   National Geodetic Survey (NGS) control point monument for
origin of State Plane Coordinates;
            2.   Elevation in North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988 datum
(U.S. Survey feet);
            3.   State Plane Coordinates Zone in North American Datum (NAD)
1983 (U.S. Survey feet);
            4.   Northing;
            5.   Easting; and
            6.   Grid factor.
   (D)   Distribution of preliminary plat for review. Upon receipt of the
preliminary plat, prints shall immediately be directed to the following persons
for review and comment:
      (1)   Two prints to the Village Engineer;
      (2)   One print to the Director of Building and Zoning;
      (3)   Two prints to the County Superintendent of Highways for transmittal
of one print to the appropriate Highway Commissioner;
      (4)   One print to the Soil and Water Conservation District;
      (5)   One print to the District Superintendent of Schools;
      (6)   One copy to be retained by the Plat Officer for his or her records;
      (7)   Two copies to be used for certifying Planning and Zoning Commission
approval. After certification, one to be retained by Village Clerk and one to
be returned to subdivider;
      (8)   One copy each to telephone, gas, electric and cable companies to
serve the area;
      (9)   Seven copies to the Planning and Zoning Commission members; and
      (10)   One copy to the Fire District.
   (E)   Planning and Zoning Commission action.
      (1)   The Plat Officer shall distribute to the Planning and Zoning
Commission members, at least ten days prior to the next meeting of the Planning
and Zoning Commission, seven copies of the preliminary plat along with copies
of any written recommendations of the Plat Officer, Village Engineer and the
Director of Building and Zoning, Soil and Water Conservation District and
County Superintendent of Highways and Township Highway Commissioner and
District Superintendent of Schools, or others to whom prints of the plats have
been directed.
      (2)   The date of the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission
wherein the preliminary plat is first presented shall be deemed the formal
application date. Within 90 days of the formal application date, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall either recommend approval, recommend conditional
approval with modifications or recommend disapproval of the preliminary plat.
The 90-day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and
Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   If the recommendation of the Commission on the proposed plan of
subdivision is for disapproval, then within said 90-day period the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall furnish to the subdivider a written statement setting
forth the reasons for disapproval and specifying with particularity the aspects
in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this chapter including the
official map.
      (4)   If the preliminary plat is recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, two copies of the proposed plat will be so certified by the
Planning and Zoning Commission Chairperson and a copy of the findings and
action of the Commission relative to the subdivision attached to each. One
certified copy will be filed with the Village Clerk and one copy will be
returned to the subdivider.
   (F)   Village Board action.
      (1)   Time requirement. The Village Board shall accept or reject said
preliminary plat within 30 days after the next regularly scheduled meeting
following the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission provided the
Planning and Zoning Commission action is at least 15 days prior to the next
Village Board meeting and that eight copies are promptly (within seven days)
provided by the subdivider to be distributed to the Village Board.
      (2)   If approved. If the preliminary plat is approved, the Village Clerk
shall attach a certified copy of the resolution of approval of two copies of
the plat.
      (3)   If disapproved. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the
resolution shall state the reasons for disapproval, specifying with
particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this
chapter including required relationship to the comprehensive plan and the
official map.
   (G)   Procedure if preliminary plat approved.
      (1)   (a)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute
approval of the final plat, nor does it qualify the plat for recording.
         (b)   Said approval shall only be deemed as approval of the layout
submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of a final
plat.
      (2)   A copy of the preliminary plat with the Clerk’s certificate shall
remain on file with the Village Clerk, and a copy of the plat so endorsed shall
be returned to the subdivider. Additional copies of the preliminary plat shall
also be provided by the subdivider for the Village Engineer and Plat Officer.
(2009 Code, § 35-3-3) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 06-04, passed 7-10-
2006)
§ 155.048 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   Construction plans submission. The subdivider shall submit four sets
of detailed construction drawings (five sets for subdivisions not within and
not to be within the corporate limits) and estimate of costs to the Plat
Officer, a minimum of 30 days prior to submission of the final plat. The
drawings shall be in accordance with all design standards of this chapter and
applicable local, county and state design standards.
   (B)   Contents of construction drawings.
      (1)   All drawings shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision
of a state registered professional engineer and, if necessary, a state
registered structural engineer. All drawings shall be signed, sealed and dated
by the same.
      (2)   All drawings shall be neatly drawn on reproducible 18-inch by 24-
inch or 24-inch by 36-inch sheets at a scale of not more than one inch equals
100 feet and consist of a minimum of:
         (a)   Title sheet showing development location, scales, symbols, index
to sheets, summary of quantities, approval blocks and seals;
         (b)   Site plan with existing and proposed contours showing drainage
ways and flood plain boundaries;
         (c)   Plan and profile for streets;
         (d)   Typical cross-sections for streets, showing right-of-way lines,
proposed pavement widths, surface, base, sub-base and subgrade type and
thickness, crown, curbs and gutters and sidewalks;
         (e)   Plan and profile for sanitary sewers;
         (f)   Plan and profile for storm sewers;
         (g)   Plan for water mains and appurtenances;
         (h)   Plans for street lighting;
         (i)   Construction details, with details of manholes, inlets, catch
basins, curbs and gutters, drainage structures, other structures or references
to the Highways Standards published by IDOT;
         (j)   Specifications; and
         (k)   Erosion and sedimentation control plan as outlined in §
155.091, and consistent with the erosion and sedimentation control principles
and standards of §
155.071. Description of erosion control measures to be taken during
construction.
      (3)   All plan views shall include all utilities, utility easements and
sidewalks, where required, to clearly relate the position of each item in
relation to the others.
      (4)   Each sheet shall be numbered and contain basic information as to
project name, north arrow, scale and date.
      (5)   All lots shall be clearly numbered and relate exactly to the final
plat.
      (6)   The basis of design shall be submitted for all construction and
pavement design including drainage calculations.
      (7)   All construction details including standard details shall be shown
with required dimensions and general notes.
   (C)   Plat Officer action.
      (1)   The Plat Officer shall forward four sets of the construction
drawings to the Village Engineer and for subdivisions outside the corporate
limits, one set to the County Superintendent of Highways. The Village Engineer
shall review the drawings and shall either recommend approval, recommend
approval with modifications as noted or require resubmittal if the
modifications are extensive.
      (2)   If the plans are approved, the four sets of drawings shall be
clearly marked and signed on each title sheet as follows:
      Recommended For Approval By the Village of Rochester
                              by:_______________________________________
   Village Engineer             Date                        
      (3)   When the construction plans are approved by the Village Board, the
Plat Officer shall retain one approved set and forward one approved set each to
the subdivider, the Village Engineer, the Village Clerk and for subdivisions
outside the corporate limits, to the County Superintendent of Highways.
      (4)   Upon Village Board approval of the construction plans, the
subdivider may submit the final plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
its consideration.
      (5)   Recommendation for approval by the Village Engineer does not
relieve the owner/developer of full responsibility for the design of
improvements and compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 35-3-4) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 05-08, passed 11-14-
2005)
§ 155.049 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Time limit on subdivider. Application for final approval of a plat
shall be made within 24 months after preliminary approval has been granted by
the Village Board.
      (2)   Filing. Within the aforesaid time period the subdivider shall file
the original and six prints of the final plat of the proposed subdivision with
the Plat Officer together with a letter of transmittal stating that the final
plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat and specifying in
what particulars the final plat deviates from the preliminary plat. Said letter
of transmittal shall also include a request for consideration of the final plat
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be received by the Plat Officer
at least ten days before the next scheduled meeting of the Commission.
      (3)   Review period. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have 45
days to review and consider the final plat and shall approve or disapprove same
in the same manner and form as preliminary plat.
      (4)   Village Board approval or disapproval. If the Planning and Zoning
Commission has recommended approval of the final plat, then the Village Board
shall approve or disapprove the final plat within 60 days after its next
regularly scheduled meeting providing copies of final plats are promptly (with
seven days) provided by the subdivider for distribution to the Village Board,
following the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (5)   Village Board disapproval. If the Village Board disapproves the
final plat, the resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval,
specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to
conform to this chapter.
      (6)   Village Board approval. If the Village Board approves the final
plat, the Village Clerk shall retain the original plat in the Clerk’s office.
      (7)   Certificate. The village shall execute the requisite certificate on
the final plat only after all fees, financial guarantees and other required
documents have been duly executed and provided to the village.
      (8)   Recordation. The final plat shall be recorded with the Recorder of
Deeds of the county by the Village Clerk within one year of the date said plat
was approved. The permission of the subdivider shall be required for recording.
   (B)   Contents of the final plat. The final plat shall be drawn in black ink
on Mylar and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Name of subdivision;
         (b)   General legal description;
         (c)   Area in acreage of the subdivision; and
         (d)   Scale, north arrow and date; scale to be not more than 100 feet
to the one inch.
      (2)   Existing conditions.
         (a)   The location of all existing section lines, lot lines and street
lines lying within or adjacent to the subdivision; and
         (b)   The location of survey monuments found and used in determining
the boundaries of the subdivision.
      (3)   Proposed conditions.
         (a)   The boundary of the subdivision;
         (b)   Location, width and names of all streets;
         (c)   Location and width of all alleys and walkways;
         (d)   Layout, including lot lines and lot numbers of all lots; square
foot area of each lot;
         (e)   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating
the subdivision boundaries, lots, streets, alleys, walkways, easements, setback
lines and other areas for public or private use. Linear dimensions shall be
given to the nearest hundredth of a foot; angular dimensions shall be given to
the nearest ten seconds;
         (f)   Angular and linear dimensions to the nearest quarter section
line and corner;
         (g)   Designation of any lots that are to be reserved for parks,
playgrounds, schools or other public uses;
         (h)   Designation of any lots to be used for duplex or multi-family
use or use other than residential use; and
         (i)   Location of survey monuments.
      (4)   Certificates. Certain certificates must appear on all final plats.
The appropriate forms of certificates are on file at the office of the Village
Clerk and the subdivider shall consult the Village Clerk and provide the
appropriate certificates on the final plat. An additional certificate
concerning not developing in a flood plain is required by statute and this
certificate form is not provided by the Village Clerk.
(2009 Code, § 35-3-5) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.050 GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall provide one
of the following:
      (1)   A corporate surety bond equal to 100% of the cost of the
improvement; and
      (2)   A cash deposit in the sum of 100% of the cost of the improvement.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, COST OF THE IMPROVEMENT is defined as an
amount equal to the approved cost estimate of the project, including reasonable
inspection fees to be borne by the subdivider necessary to conform to the
requirements established by this chapter.
   (C)   The Village Attorney shall approve, as the case may be, the following:
      (1)   The corporate surety and the terms and conditions including, but
not limited, to the specific language of the bond;
      (2)   The depository and escrow agreement in the event a cash deposit is
made; and
      (3)   The bank, or other financial institution, and terms and conditions
of the irrevocable letter of credit.
   (D)   Whichever manner of providing guarantee is chosen by the subdivider,
the exact terms and conditions of same will be drafted and executed to
accomplish the following:
      (1)   The village will have sole authority to determine if the
construction of the improvements is being accomplished in conformity with the
requirements of this chapter;
      (2)   In the event the construction of the improvements is not being
accomplished in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, all or such
part of the bond, cash deposit or letter of credit, as the village deems
appropriate, may be immediately forfeited and paid to the village; and
      (3)   If the subdivider disputes the decision of the village as to
forfeiture, its sole remedy shall be to institute litigation as it deems
appropriate.
   (E)   Up to 90% of the guarantee may be released in portions from time to
time as construction is completed and conditionally approved.
   (F)   Upon completion and conditional approval of all subdivision
improvements, the subdivider shall provide a two-year written guarantee of the
improvements and shall provide a financial guarantee in a form and substance to
be approved by the Village Board in one of the following ways:
      (1)   Maintain 10% of the existing guarantee in force; or
      (2)   Provide a new guarantee for 10% of the original amount upon release
of the original guarantee.
   (G)   Upon final acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the Village
Engineer, the Village Board shall release the guarantee.
(2009 Code, § 35-3-6) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 05-08, passed 11-14-
2005)
§ 155.051 CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   (1)   After approval of the construction plans, the subdivider shall
submit copies of all required state and local permits to the Plat Officer.
      (2)   He or she shall also submit where appropriate:
         (1)   Proof of application for an access permit from the County
Highway Department when access to county highway is involved;
         (2)   Proof of application for a § 404 and/or required state rivers,
lakes and streams permit if any dredging, riprapping, fill work or similar
activities will be conducted in or around streams, the 100-year floodway or
jurisdictional water; and
         (3)   Other specific additional information as may be requested by the
village.
   (B)   Upon receipt and approval of all required permits, the Plat Officer
shall give written approval to the subdivider to proceed with construction.
   (C)   The subdivider shall be ultimately responsible for the final location,
elevation, quality and condition of all improvements and it shall be his or her
responsibility to employ competent contractors and engineers for this
requirement. The condition of the improvements at the time of inspection shall
be the basis upon which the improvements are rejected or conditionally
accepted. The subdivider’s engineer shall request shop drawings from the
contractor for all the materials and equipment to be installed. Shop drawings
shall consist of complete descriptive literature on the equipment including all
pertinent dimensions, material specifications, operation and maintenance data
and performance curves and data. Prior to submittal to the Village Engineer,
both the contractor and subdivider’s engineer will have reviewed the shop
drawings and stamped them with the name and signature of the contractor and/or
the engineer as proof of review. Copies of all shop drawings shall be provided
to the Village Engineer.
   (D)   The subdivider shall provide sufficient engineering inspection so that
the subdivider’s engineer can certify that all construction was completed
substantially in accordance with the approved plans.
   (E)   (1)   The subdivider or his or her engineer or contractor shall notify
the Village Engineer at least 24 hours in advance of the following construction
operations.
      (2)   Failure to notify the Village Engineer will be considered a
violation of this chapter, subject to the penalties prescribed herein:
         (a)   Grading;
         (b)   Sanitary sewer construction;
         (c)   Storm sewer construction;
         (d)   Curb and gutter construction;
         (e)   Base course construction;
         (f)   Water main construction;
         (g)   Street light construction; and
         (h)   Surface course construction.
      (3)   Whenever construction stops for 24 hours or longer, the Village
Engineer shall be notified 24 hours before construction begins again.
   (F)   (1)   The Village Engineer shall periodically inspect the various
stages of construction at his or her discretion and bring to the attention of
the owner/developer (or on-site representative thereof) any dissatisfaction
with materials or methods used in construction for remedial action. Testing
will be required during construction in accordance with the applicable
specifications with additional testing as may be required at the direction of
the Village Engineer.
      (2)   Testing shall include, but not limited to:
         (a)   Grading; compaction tests, as requested by the Village Engineer
for approval of subgrade prior to paving, moisture content, infiltration and
deflection tests;
         (b)   Sanitary sewer; air test, lamping, television test, visual. For
purposes of this division (F)(2)(b), the owner/developer is to provide a
televised, internal pipe inspection of the entire sanitary sewer system using a
color, closed circuit television inspection system specifically designed for
use in sewer lines, the camera for which shall be equipped with a continuous
display of the date, line section and distance counter to the nearest foot, and
all such television inspections shall be recorded on two-hour digital files or
digital video discs (DVDs) and shall be of such quality that joints, tees, pipe
wall, sanitary sewer services and other appurtenances can be viewed easily;
         (c)   Storm sewer; lamping, visual;
         (d)   Portland cement concrete (PCC) curb, gutter, pavements and
sidewalks; for each day in which ten cubic yards or more of concrete is poured,
one set of four standard cylinders shall be cast. As a minimum, one slump test
shall be made from the first load of concrete delivered to the site per day or
each time compressive test cylinders are made and as often thereafter as the
Village Engineer determines necessary. As a minimum, one air content test shall
be made from the first load of concrete delivered to the site per day or each
time compressive test cylinders are made and as often thereafter as the Village
Engineer determines necessary. For miscellaneous concrete pours of less than
ten cubic yards, certification shall be provided documenting that Class SI
concrete has been supplied from a State Department of Transportation certified
source. Slump and air content tests are not required for miscellaneous concrete
pours of less than ten cubic yards;
         (e)   Base course; gradation, compaction test, cores, thickness;
         (f)   Water main; pressure test, visual, bacteriological tests;
         (g)   Bituminous pavement:
               1.   IDOT approved mix design including density, Marshall
stability, flow, bitumen content, gradation, thickness and mix proportions;
               2.   A preliminary pavement testing plan showing the approximate
locations for performing density tests shall be submitted to the Village
Engineer prior to initiating paving activities;
               3.   For binder or base course and surface course, one density
test shall be performed for every 500 feet of lane width paved and every
fraction thereof, with a minimum of two tests per lane per day; and
               4.   Extraction reports detailing the properties noted in
division (F)(2)(g)1. above, for each day of paving activity.
         (h)   Concrete pavement - thickness cores, flexural strength, mix
proportions, air content.
   (G)   All testing required by the Village Engineer shall be done by the
subdivider at the direction of the Village Engineer.
   (H)   Upon completion of construction and correction of defects, the
subdivider shall submit a written request for approval of all subdivision
improvements, along with a certification by his or her engineer that all
improvements were completed in accordance with the approved plans.
   (I)   The subdivider shall have its engineer prepare record drawing plans
and submit two paper sets and two electronic sets each to the village and
Village Engineer for their records. The electronic record drawings shall be
provided in the form of AutoCAD (latest version) drawing files. The subdivider
shall also have its engineer provide a copy of the construction field notes to
the village and Village Engineer.
   (J)   Upon the completion of the infrastructure improvements by the
developer, and prior to conditional acceptance of the improvements by the
village, the developer shall arrange with the village to pay for the expenses
incurred by the village for street name signs that meet current requirements of
the village. The village will perform the installation of the signs at the
village’s expense. The expense for the signs shall be the actual cost of the
signs, including posts, and other such materials required for a complete
installation.
(2009 Code, § 35-3-7) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 97-6, passed 4-14-1997;
Ord. 98-9, passed 10-10-1998; Ord. 05-08, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 06-04, passed
7-10-2006; Ord. 07-11, passed 8-13-2007)
§ 155.052 CONDITIONAL ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Upon satisfactory correction and/or completion of all subdivision
improvements and recommendations by the Village Engineer, the village shall
conditionally accept said improvements subject to a two-year guarantee period.
The purpose of the conditional acceptance is to allow the village to begin
maintenance and operational duties; however, the subdivider is still
responsible to provide all the required improvements free of any defects, other
than ordinary wear and tear and naturally occurring obsolescence, at the end of
the two-year guarantee period. The conditional acceptance shall not be deemed
to be a release by the village of the subdivider’s obligations hereunder. The
Plat Officer shall notify the subdivider in writing, when the improvements have
been conditionally accepted, and said date shall be the beginning of the two-
year guarantee period.
(2009 Code, § 35-3-8) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 97-6, passed 4-14-1997)
§ 155.053 IMPROVEMENTS GUARANTEE.
   Upon conditional acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the village,
the subdivider shall provide the village with a two year guarantee against
defects in the subdivision improvements. The subdivider shall provide a
financial guarantee equal to 10% of the construction cost of subdivision
improvements for this guarantee. Defects shall be as determined by the Village
Engineer, and shall include as examples and without limitation such items as
settlement, damaged sidewalks, streets or streetlights, inoperable valves,
siltation and erosion. At the end of the two-year period, the Village Engineer
shall inspect the subdivision and inform the subdivider of any defects that
must be corrected. If the subdivider does not correct the defects, the village
may declare a forfeiture of the guarantee.
(2009 Code, § 35-3-9) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 97-6, passed 4-14-1997)
§ 155.054 FINAL ACCEPTANCE.
   Upon completion and acceptance of any corrections by the Village Engineer,
the subdivider’s guarantee shall be released by the Village Board.
(2009 Code, § 35-3-10) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.055 SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES.
   The following summary of procedures indicates the normal process for the
development of subdivision and the party responsible for the completion of each
step:
Function Responsibility by:
Function                                         Responsibility by:
1. Optional pre-application location map meeting Subdivider
with the Planning and Zoning Commission
2. Submit preliminary plat to Plat Officer for   Subdivider
distribution
3. Submit preliminary plat to Planning and
Zoning Commission with review comments of
Village Engineer, Plat Officer, Director of      Plat Officer
Building and Zoning, and County and Township
Highway Officials, District Superintendent of
Schools, Soil Conservation District
4. Review preliminary plat                       Planning and Zoning Commission
5. Submit preliminary plat and recommendation to Planning and Zoning Commission
Village Board
6. Review preliminary plat and approve or reject Village Board
7. Submit construction plans, specifications and
estimates of cost to the Plat Officer for        Subdivider
delivery to the Plan Officer for delivery to the
Village Engineer
8. Review construction plans and submit          Village Engineer
recommendations to Village Board
9. Approve construction plans; construction      Village Board
authorized
10. Submit final plat to Plat Officer along with Subdivider
financial guarantee for improvements
11. Submit final plat to Planning and Zoning     Plat Officer
Commission
12. Planning and Zoning Commission review of     Planning and Zoning Commission
final plat
13. Submit final plat and recommendation to      Planning and Zoning Commission
Village Board
14. Review and approve final plat, financial     Village Board and Attorney
guarantee
15. Pay all required fees to the village         Subdivider
16. Record final plat with permission of         Village Clerk
subdivider
17. Certify completion construction to village   Subdivider
18. Submit as-built plans to the Village         Subdivider
Engineer
19. Recommendation for Board to conditionally    Village Engineer
accept improvements
20. Provide two year guarantee of improvements   Subdivider
21. Correct defects at end of two years          Subdivider
22. Recommendations for final acceptance of      Village Engineer
improvements
23. Final acceptance of improvements             Village Board
24. Release guarantee                            Village Board
 
(2009 Code, § 35-3-11) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 05-08, passed 11-14-
2005)
§ 155.056 TRACT SURVEY.
   (A)   Tract survey requirements. In addition to the requirements of this
chapter, a tract survey shall be required for any conveyance, division or
subdivision of real property for which no plat is required under this chapter
when such conveyance, division or subdivision:
      (1)   Is described in metes and bounds;
      (2)   Results in the remaining parcel or tract being less than five
acres; or
      (3)   Is a conveyance of real property as provided for the in Condominium
Act.
   (B)   Contents of tract survey. When a tract survey is required, the
following shall be submitted:
      (1)   A land survey showing right-of-way dedication or dedication of an
easement for roadway purposes in conformance with the comprehensive plan of the
village adopted by Ord. 91-2, passed May 6, 1991; and
      (2)   Certification by a state professional land surveyor together with
the surveyor’s seal, attesting to the accuracy of the survey.
   (C)   Review process.
      (1)   Five copies of the tract survey shall be submitted to the Tract
Survey Officer, accompanied by the appropriate fee as established by the Tract
Survey Officer from time to time.
      (2)   The Tract Survey Officer shall review the survey to ensure that it
conforms to the pertinent requirements of the this chapter. The owner shall be
notified of Tract Survey Officer approval or disapproval within one business
day. If the Tract Survey Officer finds that the tract survey does not meet the
requirements of this chapter, the disapproval or noncompliance found shall be
specified in writing. If the Tract Survey Officer finds that the tract survey
does meet the requirements of the Subdivision Code the following shall be
printed or stamped on the original and signed by the Tract Survey Officer:
County of Sangamon    )
                  )   ss.
State of Illinois         )
   I, Sangamon County Plats Officer, do hereby approve this tract survey in
accordance with the provisions of the Land Subdivision Regulations of
Rochester, Illinois.
Date: ______________________________            
__________________________________
Sangamon County Plats Officer
      (3)   The Tract Survey Officer shall keep one copy and transmit four
copies of the approved tract survey to the owner for recording.
   (D)   Recording the tract survey. After the tract survey has been approved,
the original shall be recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the
county. If the tract survey is not recorded within 180 days of approval by the
Tract Survey Officer, the approval shall be null and void.
   (E)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      TRACT SURVEY. A land survey made by a state registered land surveyor,
complying with the requirements of this section.
      TRACT SURVEY OFFICER. The Executive Director of the Springfield-Sangamon
County Regional Planning Commission or a duly authorized representative of the
Executive Director.
(2009 Code, § 35-3-12) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 98-11, passed 12-14-
1998)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 155.070 GENERAL.
   (A)   The design of the subdivision shall be in harmony with and shall
conform with the comprehensive plan (including the overall goals of the
village) and the official map and shall be in accordance with good subdivision
design principles not otherwise set forth herein.
   (B)   Natural features, such as distinctive trees or vegetation, streams,
ponds, hilltops, bluffs, creek bottoms and outlook views, shall be preserved
and enhanced wherever possible. In laying out a subdivision, due consideration
shall be given to such aesthetic features existing within the tract being
subdivided and which may add to the aesthetic quality of existing nearby
subdivisions.
(2009 Code, § 35-4-1) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.071 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS.
   In all subdivision development, measures are required to be taken to assure
that sediment is not transported from the site by a storm event of ten year
frequency or less and that the following principles will be applicable in the
area to be subdivided.
   (A)   Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site
so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where
high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible and
natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
   (B)   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible.
Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left undisturbed
wherever possible.
   (C)   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest
practical time during development.
   (D)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps or
filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off
waters from land undergoing development.
   (E)   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be
based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs and
benefits involved.
   (F)   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics
and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
   (G)   Provision shall be made to accommodate the increased run-off caused by
changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. Drainageways
should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities
of discharges will not create additional erosion, and should be protected
against erosion and sedimentation during development.
   (H)   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as
practical during development.
   (I)   During construction of public improvements, measures shall be taken to
control erosion and sedimentation to ensure that sediment will not be
transported from the site by a storm event of ten year frequency or less. The
erosion and sediment control plan shall include measures to stabilize and
protect disturbed areas, keep run-off velocities low, retain sediment on site
and protect disturbed areas from runoff. The location, type and configuration
of controls such as swales, berms, dams, sediment basins and release mechanisms
shall be included with the construction plans.
   (J)   Temporary or permanent soil stabilization measures, whichever is
applicable, shall be applied within 14 days after final grading to all areas
where the soil has been disturbed or the vegetative cover removed. Seeding
mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seed bed preparation, expected
seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application and kind and
quantity of mulch for temporary and permanent vegetative control measures shall
be included with the construction plans.
(2009 Code, § 35-4-2) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.072 STREETS.
   All streets are to be designed in accordance with the State Department of
Transportation Bureau of Design and Environment (BDE) and/or Local Roads
Manual, or any replacement or substitute therefor, as such may be in effect
from time to time.
   (A)   General. The course, general location, pavement and right-of-way width
and grade of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan, official map
and standards contained herein. The location of streets in the proposed
subdivision shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned
streets, to topographic conditions, to flood plains and wetlands, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses
of the land to be served by such streets.
   (B)   Arrangement of streets. Where not shown on the comprehensive plan or
the official map, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
      (1)   Provide for the continuation or projection of existing streets in
surrounding areas; or
      (2)   Conform to topographic or other conditions where continuance or
projection of existing streets is impractical or undesirable from the community
viewpoint.
   (C)   Minor residential streets. Minor residential streets shall be so laid
out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
   (D)   Access to existing or proposed major street. Access to an existing or
proposed major street shall be limited to a minimum number of intersections and
be determined with due regard for sight distance, distance between intersection
and approach grades.
   (E)   Street grades. No street grade as measured along the centerline shall
be less than 0.5% or more than 7%. The maximum grade on arterial streets shall
not exceed 5%.
   (F)   Street intersections.
      (1)   Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60
degrees.
      (2)   Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet
are prohibited.
      (3)   Curb corners at street intersections shall have a minimum radius of
25 feet.
   (G)   Horizontal deflection of street lines.
      (1)   Where connecting street lines deflect from each other more than ten
degrees, they shall be connected with a curve with a radius adequate to assure
sight distance.
      (2)   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between curves
on collector streets where the curve radius is less than 500 feet.
   (H)   Alleys. Alleys shall not be permitted in proposed residential
districts.
   (I)   Right-of-way.
      (1)   Street right-of-way widths for streets shown on the comprehensive
plan or the official map shall follow §
155.096(L) but in no case shall be less than as follows:
Alleys                    20
Arterial streets (other)* 100
Arterial streets (state)  IDOT requirements
Collector streets         60
Cul-de-sac                50
Marginal access           40
Minor streets             50
Pedestrianways            10
*Right-of-way width of streets and roads should be in accord with the more
restrictive requirements of county, township or village having jurisdiction
over right-of-way width. Extensions of collector streets and arterial streets,
indicated on the official map, will, for the purpose of determining required
right-of-way, carry the same classification
 
      (2)   In a subdivision that adjoins or includes an existing street that
does not conform to the right-of-way width required above, one-half of the
additional width shall be provided along each side of such street for the
entire frontage included within the land being subdivided.
   (J)   Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets. Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets shall
not be longer than 500 feet. They shall be provided with a circular turnaround
having an outside surface diameter of the paved surface of at least 80 feet and
right-of-way line diameter of at least 100 feet. The center of the turnaround
shall be located on the centerline or between the centerline of the street and
its left right- of-way line, facing into the turnaround.
   (K)   Dedication to public. All streets shall be dedicated to the public.
   (L)   Reserved strips. Reserved strips controlling access to street rights-
of-way shall not be permitted except upon approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and when control and disposition of the reserved strip is vested in
the Village Board.
   (M)   Street names and numbers.
      (1)   The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
The name of a new street shall not duplicate the name of an existing street
within the area served by the same post office or Fire Department.
      (2)   If a proposed subdivision is in close proximity to a municipality
which has adopted a street numbering system, the lots within the subdivision
shall be assigned street numbers in accordance with that municipal street
numbering system, where practicable.
   (N)   Vertical curves. All grade changes shall be connected by vertical
curves. The length of vertical curves shall not be less than 30 times the
algebraic difference in rates of grade for crest curves and 35 times the
algebraic difference for sag curves. When speed limits are to be posted greater
than 30 mph, vertical curvature shall be used as contained within the latest
revision of A Policy on Geometric Design on Highways and Streets (AASHTO) for
urban, local, collector and arterial streets by the respective classification.
The minimum length of vertical curves on all types of streets shall be 30 feet.
   (O)   Horizontal curves. When a centerline deflection angle is greater than
one degree, the following curves will be required in the street: major and
minor arterials and collector streets shall have a minimum centerline radius of
300 feet and a minimum length of curve of 100 feet; arterials and collectors
having a design speed and/or expected posted speed greater than 30 mph shall be
consistent with the latest revision of the horizontal curvature requirements of
AASHTO, A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets for the
appropriate roadway classification; all other types of streets shall have a
minimum centerline radius of 100 feet. The pavement in all cases shall be wide
enough to allow the movement of an 84 passenger school bus (S-Bus) design
vehicle, as described in the State Department of Transportation Bureau of
Design and Environment Manual, latest version.
   (P)   Pavement design calculations. Pavement design calculations and
supporting information as described in the IDOT Bureau of Local Roads and
Streets Manual, latest edition, shall be submitted with the subdivision
construction plans for review.
(2009 Code, § 35-4-3) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 05-08, passed 11-14-
2005; Ord. 06-04, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 18-03, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 155.073 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements across lots for utilities, cable television, watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream shall not be less than 12 feet wide and shall be
adjacent to or centered on lot lines.
   (B)   All aboveground utility service boxes are to be located on rear lot
lines.
(2009 Code, § 35-4-4) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.074 BLOCKS.
   (A)   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard
to:
      (1) Provision of adequate building sites for the type of use
contemplated;
      (2)   Requirements as to lot size and dimensions;
      (3)   Needs for convenience access circulation, control and safety of
street traffic; and
      (4)   Limitations and opportunities for topography.
   (B)   Block lengths shall be not less than 400 feet and shall not exceed
1,400 feet.
   (C)   In cases where the block length exceeds 800 feet and where deemed
essential by the Planning and Zoning Commission to provide pedestrian
circulation to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community
facilities, an easement dedicated to the public for a pedestrian crosswalk not
less than ten feet wide shall be provided and a six feet wide sidewalk
constructed.
(2009 Code, § 35-4-5) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.075 LOTS.
   (A)   All provisions of the village zoning regulations concerning lots shall
apply including lot area, width and depth. No parcel, remainder, outlot or
remnant of land which is part of the tract being subdivided shall be created
which, by reason of lot width, depth, area, frontage, topography or lack of
access thereto, cannot be used as a zoning lot, or be subject to further
subdivision in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Any remaining parcel
or outlot which cannot be made to comply with the foregoing shall be eliminated
by combining the area thereof with one or more adjoining lots which do comply
or by conveying same for the appropriate public use to a public body, subject
to its acceptance of the same.
   (B)   The lot shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of
the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
   (C)   Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to
provide separation of residential development from major streets or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
   (D)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
(2009 Code, § 35-4-6) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.076 PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   When a proposed park, playground or school site is shown on the
comprehensive plan or official map, or in the opinion of the Planning and
Zoning Commission is necessary for the public welfare, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall require the reservation of the appropriate areas as specified
in §
155.011.
(2009 Code, § 35-4-7) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.077 FLOOD PLAINS, WETLANDS AND ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS.
   Disturbance of and encroachment into flood plains, wetlands and
environmentally sensitive areas shall be avoided or minimized in the planning
and development of subdivision. Protection of these areas shall not be
secondary to the subdivider’s desire to maximize developed spaces or minimize
cost.
(2009 Code, § 35-4-8) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 155.090 GENERAL.
   (A)   The improvements outlined in this subchapter are required in the
development of all subdivisions.
   (B)   Any proposed improvement which deviates from or is not defined by
these specifications shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for review and consideration.
   (C)   (1)   Critical infrastructure items as defined herein shall be tied to
the vertical and horizontal datums as defined in §
155.047(C):
         (a)   Sanitary sewer manholes, cleanouts and service sewer
terminations;
         (b)   Storm sewer manholes, inlets, grates and flared end sections;
         (c)   In-line potable water valves and shut-off valves;
         (d)   Fire hydrants;
         (e)   Street light poles;
         (f)   Ground water monitoring wells;
         (g)   Utility conduits crossing the public right-of-way with start and
end points;
         (h)   Sewage, storm water and potable water pumping station corners,
if constructed;
         (i)   Sump pump discharge line cleanouts and discharge points; and
         (j)   Street light poles and exterior/adjacent control panels.
      (2)   Each of these items shall be identified in the construction plans
with coordinates and in the record drawings with as-built coordinates.
(2009 Code, § 35-5-1) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 06-04, passed 7-10-
2006; Ord. 07-11, passed 8-13-2007)
§ 155.091 EROSION CONTROL, EROSION CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   All grading sitework, throughout the development of the subdivision
and the construction of structures on lots, or installation of required
improvements shall be done in accordance with an erosion and sedimentation
control plan filed as part of the construction documents.
   (B)   Such plan shall provide the following information:
      (1)   Areas and acreages proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or seeded,
vegetatively stabilized or left undisturbed;
      (2)   All erosion and sedimentation control measures necessary to meet
the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases of construction and
permanently after completion of development of the site;
      (3)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application and kind and quality of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures;
      (4)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance;
      (5)   Identification of the person(s) or entity which will have legal
responsibility for maintenance of erosion control structures and measures after
development is completed;
      (6)   The proposed phasing of development of the site, including
stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction and final grading and
landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas and the sequence of
clearing, installation of temporary sediment control measures, installation of
storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas and establishment of permanent
vegetative cover;
      (7)   These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the
standards and requirements contained in the Illinois Urban Manual as prepared
by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation
Service, the latest edition, or such other document used in place thereof
available from the County Soil and Water Conservation District, which standards
and requirements are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference; and
      (8)   The Planning and Zoning Commission with advice and recommendations
of the County Soil and Water Conservation District may waive specific
requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that the information
submitted is sufficient to show that the work will meet erosion and
sedimentation control objectives.
(2009 Code, § 35-5-2) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 05-08, passed 11-14-
2005)
§ 155.092 GRADING.
   Grading within the right-of-way shall provide a 2% fall from the back of
right-of-way to top of curb. Grading outside the right-of-way lines shall be in
accordance with the approved construction plans.
(2009 Code, § 35-5-3) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.093 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary
sewer system which shall be connected with the municipal sanitary sewer system,
subject to there being capacity within the municipal system to accept the
proposed load.
   (B)   When no municipal sanitary sewer system is available or is not
reasonably accessible to the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide the
subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system which shall be connected to a
sanitary sewer system approved by the State Department of Public Health and/or
the State Environmental Protection Agency.
   (C)   When no approved sanitary sewer system is available, or is not
reasonably accessible to the subdivision, one of the following methods of
sewage disposal shall be used:
      (1)   (a)   When the topography of the subdivision does not allow for
connection to the municipal sanitary sewer system with a gravity sewer, the
subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a pumping station that pumps the
sewage to the nearest available municipal sanitary sewer. The pumping station
shall be designed to accommodate the loading produced by the proposed
subdivision and any other upstream areas that are tributary to the subdivision.
Sanitary sewer loading produced by the tributary area shall be estimated using
the following criteria for residential development based on the zoning
classification:
 
Zoning District Loading Estimate
R-S             15 people/acre
R-1             21 people/acre
R-2             36 people/acre
R-3             Reserved
R-4             73 people/acre
R-5             73 people/acre and 250 gallons/person/day
 
         (b)   Once the sewage loading has been determined, the sanitary sewer
system to receive the loading shall be evaluated to determine if it has
adequate capacity. Pumping stations shall be designed in accordance with the
State of Illinois Rules and Regulations, Title 35, Subtitle C, Chapter II, Part
370, Illinois Recommended Standards for Sewage Works (latest version). Specific
equipment and materials used in the pumping station such as pumps, valves,
motors, pipe, control panels, wiring and the like, shall be subject to approval
by the Village Engineer. Copies of all mechanical and electrical component
testing shall be provided to the village and Village Engineer. Upon
construction completion of the pumping station, a successful start-up operation
shall be performed in the presence of a manufacturer’s representative, village
representatives and Village Engineer. Any and all manufacturer’s warranties
shall be transferred to the village.
      (2)   Private sewage disposal systems consisting of septic tanks and tile
absorption fields or other approved sewage disposal systems laid out in
accordance with the requirements of the State Department of Public Health are
permissible only outside the village limits.
   (D)   Whenever a private sewage disposal system is to be utilized, the
subdivider shall require as a condition of the sale of each lot in the
subdivision that the private sewage disposal system is constructed by the owner
of the lot before occupation of the lot occurs.
   (E)   No storm sewers, sump drain lines, footing tile lines and the like
shall be connected to sanitary sewer lines.
   (F)   Sanitary sewer pipe shall have a minimum diameter of eight inches for
main line sewers and four inches for lateral sewers, and shall be of material,
joints and fittings as specified by the village or as approved by the Village
Engineer.
   (G)   A tee and lateral shall be constructed for each individual lot or
parcel in the subdivision and shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter.
The four-inch lateral shall extend to eight feet beyond the easement. A service
riser may be required by the Village Engineer if the depth of the main line
sewer is excessive. The material for the lateral pipe shall be as specified
above.
   (H)   (1)   Manholes shall be built where sewers change in size, slope or
direction, and at a maximum spacing of 400 feet for sewers 15 inches and less
in diameter and 500 feet for sewers l8 inches through 30 inches in diameter.
Manholes shall be precast concrete and have a minimum of 0.1 feet of drop
across the flowline. Where manholes are constructed in areas susceptible to
surface runoff infiltration, the frame and lid of such manholes will be of the
bolt down and water-tight type. Manhole lids for sanitary sewer shall be
completely closed and self sealing. Where sanitary sewers are terminated at the
boundary of the current subdivision so as to serve future development, a six-
inch diameter clean-out shall be constructed at the terminus of the sewer pipe,
raised to grade and capped with a cast iron plug to provide access to the
system. The cleanout shall be acceptable to the Village Engineer.
      (2)   The sewer lines shall be located generally on the north and east
sides of the streets, within a dedicated village easement contiguous with the
street right-of-way with a minimum cover of three feet.
   (I)   All sanitary sewer construction shall be done in accordance with the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois,
latest edition. All sanitary sewer trenches shall be backfilled with approved
material select granular backfill as defined by the State Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest
edition) and supplemental and recurring special provisions, gradation FA-6 and
compacted by approved methods.
   (J)   If larger size sewers are required by the village to serve areas other
than the subdivision, the cost difference may be paid by the village in
accordance with any such policies in effect at the time the subdivision is
considered.
   (K)   Upon completion of the sanitary sewer system, the subdivider’s
engineer shall certify that the sanitary sewer system has been constructed in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications and shall furnish the
village with copies of the record drawings, using current technology and, at
the discretion of the Village Engineer, a suitable computer disk containing all
information as required in §
155.051(F) transferred to a database software. The subdivider’s engineer shall
submit test results to the Village Engineer and the Springfield Metropolitan
Sanitary District for allowable leakage and deflection (where applicable) with
the record drawings.
   (L)   The sewer lines shall be located generally on the north and east sides
of the streets, with a dedicated village easement contiguous with the street
right-of-way with a minimum cover of three feet.
(2009 Code, § 35-5-4) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 97-6, passed 4-14-1997;
Ord. 98-9, passed 10-10-1998; Ord. 05-08, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 06-04, passed
7-10-2006)
§ 155.094 STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   The subdivider, through the subdivider’s engineer, shall submit
drainage calculations supporting the storm drainage and detention system signed
and sealed by a licensed professional engineer in the state. Included in the
drainage calculations shall be a signed statement by the licensed professional
engineer that the construction plans account for changes in the drainage of
surface waters in the subdivision, as required in 765 ILCS 205/2 (Plat Act).
Language for this statement shall be as follows:
      “To the best of my knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters
will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part
thereof, or, that if such surface water drainage will be changed, reasonable
provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface waters
into public areas, or drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that
such surface waters will be planned for in accordance with generally accepted
engineering practices so as to reduce the likelihood of damage to the adjoining
property because of the construction of the subdivision.”
   (B)   The storm drainage system shall be adequate to properly drain the
subdivision and all other upstream areas that are tributary to the subdivision.
Runoff from such upstream areas shall be calculated as if they were fully
developed according to their existing zoning classifications.
   (C)   The storm drainage system shall be designed using a minimum five-year
storm at the upstream end of the system and a minimum ten-year storm for the
remainder of the system. Drainage calculations to support the storm sewer and
storm water detention facility design shall be submitted along with the
construction plans. Drainage calculations shall include a narrative and summary
of the existing and proposed drainage patterns, surface cover types, times of
concentration, flow rates, rainfall intensities and pipe and storage
capacities. Said calculations shall be signed and sealed by a state registered
professional engineer. The subdivider is strongly encouraged to utilize
recognized best management practices (BMPs), such as conserving open space,
reducing imperviousness, utilizing bio-swales, creating depression storage,
installing permeable pavement and the like, for reducing the quantity of storm
water runoff and improving the quality of storm water runoff to mimic the
natural watershed hydrology.
   (D)   The storm drainage system discharge onto adjacent downstream
properties shall be designed so as not to increase the rate of runoff in
conformance with the drainage laws of the state.
   (E)   The storm drainage system discharge points shall be provided with
erosion control and velocity dissipation structures adequate to prevent damage
to downstream properties.
   (F)   Drainage structures shall be as specified by the village or as
approved by the Village Engineer. Storm drain structures shall utilize
resilient connectors between storm sewer pipes and laterals as specified in
ASTM C 1478.
   (G)   All storm sewer construction shall be performed in accordance with the
Illinois Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction (latest edition) and supplemental and recurring special
provisions, or such other document used in place thereof. All storm sewer pipe
shall be gasketed pipe in accordance with the respective ASTM standards for the
pipe being proposed. All storm sewers shall be backfilled with approved trench
backfill material and compacted by approved methods.
   (H)   All field tiles encountered during construction shall be repaired as
directed by the village, with the size, pipe material, location, and depth
indicated on the record drawings. Where field tiles are damaged and it is
determined by the Village Engineer that it cannot be repaired, provisions shall
be made to reroute the field tile to the nearest available storm sewer.
   (I)   Sump pump discharge lines shall connect to a storm sewer, where
available. When a storm sewer is not available, a sump pump collector line
shall be provided by the subdivider. All sump pump discharge lines are to
discharge groundwater only. The desired location of the sump pump collector
line is the rear yard drainage easement. The subdivider’s engineer shall be
responsible for sizing the sump pump collector line so that it maintains a
minimum velocity of two feet/second. Collector pipe material shall be a minimum
four inch diameter PVC Schedule 40. Sump pump collector lines shall be a
minimum depth of 30 inches. Clean outs shall be provided at dead ends, bends
greater than 11.25 degrees and lengths longer than 300 feet. Sump pump
discharge line taps that disturb the street pavement are prohibited. Sump pump
discharge line details, dimensions and locations shall be provided on the
record drawings.
   (J)   Rear yard drainage swales shall be provided, as needed and as
determined by the Village Engineer, to convey storm water runoff from
individual lots to the storm drainage structures provided by the subdivider.
The rear yard drainage swales shall have a minimum two feet bottom width, four
to one (4:1) side slopes and laid at a minimum slope of 0.5%. Permanent
elevation monuments shall be established by the subdivider at the summit of
each swale for the purposes of recording the swale starting point and
elevation, prior to certification of completed construction of the subdivision
by the village. Any modification of rear yard drainage swales and resulting
conflicts, after conditional acceptance by the village shall be addressed by
the entity that caused the modification.
   (K)   All storm sewer grates, catch basin grates, curb and gutter grates
shall be stenciled with “DUMP NO WASTE! DRAINS TO WATERWAYS” message.
Variations in the wording of the message shall be approved by the Village
Engineer.
   (L)   For tributary areas of five acres or more, storm water detention
calculations shall utilize a hydrograph method acceptable to the Village
Engineer that generates runoff volumes through inflow hydrographs that account
for the watershed features being drained. Inflow hydrographs shall be generated
by the design formula using a design storm with a range of rainfall durations
(one to 24 hours) associated with a recurrence interval of 100 years (1% chance
of occurrence in any given year) and the post development watershed runoff
conditions. The critical rainfall duration shall be used to size the detention
basin. Rainfall depths and durations shall be as provided by the State Water
Survey Bulletin 70 - Frequency Distributions and Hydroclimatic Characteristics
of Heavy Rainstorms in Illinois, latest edition. Rainfall distribution shall be
as provided for in the State Water Survey Circular 173 - Time Distributions of
Heavy Rainstorms in Illinois, latest edition. The allowable release rate from
the detention facility shall be calculated using a recurrence interval of 100
years (1% chance of occurrence in any given year) for the storm period
calculated by the time of concentration and the pre-developed watershed runoff
conditions. The Village Engineer shall have the discretion to require the use
of a recurrence interval less than 100 years (1% chance) to protect inadequate
downstream infrastructure or sensitive downstream areas.
   (M)   For tributary areas of less than five acres, the rational method may
be used to calculate runoff volumes and allowable release rates as outlined in
the latest version of the State Department of Transportation Drainage Manual.
The allowable release rate from the detention facility shall be calculated
using a recurrence interval of 100 years (1% chance of occurrence in any given
year) for the storm period calculated by the time of concentration and the pre-
developed watershed runoff conditions. The Village Engineer shall have the
discretion to require the use of a recurrence interval less than 100 years to
protect inadequate downstream infrastructure or sensitive downstream areas.
   (N)   Detention ponds serving tributary areas greater than five acres shall
include a forebay (sediment trap) to capture sediment and pollutants contained
in the storm water runoff. The forebay shall be sized for a range of 15% to 25%
of the design capture runoff volume and designed to reduce the incoming channel
velocity to less than four feet/second. Where a sediment trap is not practical
or feasible as determined in concert with the Village Engineer, other means
shall be utilized to control sediment.
   (O)   Detention ponds shall include an emergency spillway that is designed
to safely pass the 100-year critical duration storm event to protect the
integrity of the pond embankment.
   (P)   Subdivision covenants shall provide village officials or their
representative’s access to the detention pond for inspection immediately after
completion of construction and annual inspections as required by their national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA).
(2009 Code, § 35-5-5) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 05-08, passed 11-14-
2005; Ord. 06-04, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 14-02, passed 4-14-2014)
§ 155.095 WATER MAIN SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   (A)   For all proposed subdivisions within the village or to be annexed to
the village, the subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water
main supply system which shall be connected to the municipal water supply
subject to there being capacity within the municipal system to serve that
subdivision.
   (B)   If connection to the village system is not reasonable or feasible, the
subdivider shall provide a complete water main supply system connected to a
community water supply system approved by the State Department of Public Health
with satisfactory provision for the operation and maintenance thereof.
   (C)   If connection to an approved community water supply system is not
reasonable or feasible, the subdivider shall provide an individual water supply
on each lot in the subdivision in accordance with minimum standards of State
Department of Public Health or the County Health Department as appropriate.
   (D)   If the subdivider is to provide an individual water supply for each
lot, it shall be provided as a condition of the sale of the lot, that the
occupation of the lot by the owner cannot occur until the water supply is
constructed.
   (E)   Water mains shall be of a type as specified by the village or as
approved by the Village Engineer. When PVC water main pipe is used, tracer wire
(thin, soft drawn, solid No. 12 copper) shall be installed, as a minimum,
directly on the water main every 20 feet and brought to the surface at valves
and hydrants. Deflections of the water main greater than 11.25 degrees shall be
thrust protected with either thrust restrains or restrained joint pipe. When
water main connections are required that involve two different pipe materials,
the connection shall be made with a Model 3501 Transition Coupling by PowerSeal
Engineering or approved equal, as determined by the Village Engineer and
Village Superintendent of Public Works.
   (F)   Water mains shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter. Larger size
water mains shall be provided if required to adequately serve the proposed
subdivision. If larger mains are required by the village to serve areas other
than the proposed subdivision, the cost difference may be paid by the village
in accordance with any such policies in effect at the time the subdivision is
considered.
    (G)   Village standard fire hydrants shall be provided at a maximum spacing
of 600 feet. The location of the hydrants shall be at lot lines and at block
corners. Village standard fire hydrants shall be Mueller Co. Centurion steamer
type with two and one-half inch standard nozzles, one four and one-half (4 Viz)
inch pumper nozzle, five and one-fourth inch barrel and painted a color choice
of the Village.
   (H)   Gate valves and boxes shall be provided to adequately valve the water
system. Gate valves shall be Mueller Co. resilient wedge gate valves, Model No.
2360. Boxes shall be by Tyler with a five and one-fourth inch inside diameter,
Model No. 564S.
   (I)   The water mains shall be located generally on the south and west sides
of streets, between the sidewalk and curb with a minimum cover of four feet
zero inches.
   (J)   All street crossings shall be backfilled with CA-6 gravel and
mechanically compacted in eight inch lifts to a point five feet behind the
curb.
   (K)   All water main construction shall be performed in accordance with the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois,
latest edition.
   (L)   An individual water service shall be installed for each lot or parcel
in the subdivision. The meter pit shall be installed three feet from the
sidewalk, on the residential property side. Single service water meter pits
shall be 18-inch diameter PVC and 24-inch diameter PVC for double service meter
pits. Each meter box shall have a cover labeled “WATER METER” on the lid and
shall be Model No. H-10810 by Mueller Co. Meter connections shall be Mueller
Co. B-2404 R2-583415 Yoke with H-14227 compression connections at each end.
Service saddles shall be bronze, Model No. H-13441-6 by Mueller Co. Ball
corporation valves shall be Model B-25008 by Mueller Co. “U” branch connections
shall be Model H-15363 by Mueller Co. Meters are to be provided and installed
by the village.
(2009 Code, § 35-5-6)  (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 05-08, passed 11-14-
2005; Ord. 21-19, passed 7-12-2021)
§ 155.096 STREET CLASSIFICATION AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The right-of-way width for all streets (residential local, residential
collector streets and minor arterial streets), shall be in accordance with
division (L) below.
   (A)   (1)   Streets shall be constructed in accordance with requirements of
this chapter and other construction standards of the village.
      (2)   If streets larger than that required for the subdivision are
necessary and appropriate, the village may participate in accordance with any
such policies in effect at the time the subdivision is considered.
   (B)   All street construction shall be done in accordance with the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the state, latest edition,
and in accordance with the approved construction plans.
   (C)   All underground utilities that lie or cross under the proposed
pavement shall be constructed prior to any street construction. Trenches shall
be backfilled in accordance with the Illinois Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition) and
Supplemental and Recurring Special Provisions gradation FA-6 and compacted by
approved methods to a point five feet behind the curb. All underground
utilities that cross under existing pavement shall be backfilled with Illinois
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction (latest edition) and Supplemental and Recurring Special Provisions
gradation FA-6 and the disturbed pavement restored with an equal or greater
strength pavement cross-section.
   (D)   Streets with an aggregate base course shall be constructed so that the
aggregate base course can be exposed through one winter season prior to being
surfaced.
   (E)   Sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement concrete and shall
be at least five feet wide and four inches thick. Sidewalks may be waived by
Planning and Zoning Commission, but only after specific exception as outlined
in the table Street Classification and Design Standards set forth in division
(L) below.
   (F)   (1)   The standard curb and gutter required adjacent to flexible
pavement shall be a mountable type constructed of portland cement concrete with
the following dimensions: 24 inches wide, eight inches thick on the front face
pavement side, ten inches thick on the back face, seven inches thick at
centerline (flow line) and a ten-inch radius in the flow line. The curb and
gutter adjacent to concrete pavement, if poured monolithically, may be limited
to the thickness of the pavement. When poured separately, D-form, tie bars
shall be placed in the pavement in accordance with the state’s Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and shall be poured to full
thickness as described above.
      (2)   In subdivisions proposed to have streets with an anticipated daily
traffic volume of 2,500 or more, a barrier-type curb and gutter similar to Type
B6.18 as described in the State Department of Transportation Highway Standards
shall be used. Other locations where a barrier-type curb and gutter are
required shall be determined by the engineer for the subdivision and Village
Engineer.
   (G)   If the pavement subbase is unstable, as indicated by the proof roll
(s), lime stabilized soil mixture shall be utilized. The lime stabilized soil
mixture shall be prepared in accordance with the Illinois Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest
version and supplemental and recurring special provisions.
   (H)   Street improvements shall be in accordance with the Illinois
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest version, supplemental and recurring special provisions and
the Street Classification and Design Standards table. All street construction
shall be subject to final inspection and recommendation for acceptance by the
Village Engineer and Trustee in charge of streets.
   (I)   Before pavement construction can begin, the entire subgrade shall be
compacted to not less than 95% of the standard laboratory density. Densities
shall be determined as provided in the latest revised edition of the state’s
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. The number of density
tests required shall be determined by the Village Engineer. Proof rolling may
also be required by the Village Engineer.
   (J)   If it is found that the subgrade cannot be compacted, it shall be
removed and replaced with suitable materials. The depth to which this
unsuitable material is replaced shall be determined by the Village Engineer.
   (K)   Portland cement concrete pavement construction shall be completed
without delay and shall be closed to traffic for 14 days after placement or
seven days with a modulus of rupture of 650 pounds per square inch. The density
of the compacted bituminous mixture shall be determined as outlined in the
state’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
   (L)   The minimum crown used on all pavements shall be one quarter inch per
foot measured from the edge of the pavement to the centerline of the street.
The right-of-way width for all streets (residential. local, residential
collector streets and minor arterial streets) shall be in accordance with the
table below.
Street Classification and Design Standards
Street         ROW Width Pavement Width Aggregate Base HMA Surface PCC Pavement
Classification
Street Classification and Design Standards
Street         ROW Width Pavement Width Aggregate Base HMA Surface PCC Pavement
Classification
Minor arterial 80 ft.    30 ft.         8 in.          7 in.       10 in.
Residential    60 ft.    27 ft.         8 in.          6 in.       8 in.
collector
Residential    60 ft.    27 ft.         6 in.          6 in.       7 in.
local
Note 1: Curb and gutter required on all streets. Pavement width shown is edge
of pavement to edge of pavement
Note 2: Sidewalks required on both sides of all residential streets unless a
specific exception is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, where in
its opinion that due to the unusual and unique situation in the proposed
subdivision, sidewalks are not required, and the lack of such sidewalks would
not compromise the safety of the future residents. Requirements for sidewalks
on other than residential streets is dependent on conditions. Sidewalks shall
be a minimum width of 5 feet
Note 3: Standards are for local streets. Street construction of state or county
jurisdiction will be to state and county standards, except that streets
constructed by other jurisdictions will be expected to provide sidewalks within
the village
Note 4: Aggregate base course shall be Type A
Note 5: PCC pavement shall be IDOT Class PV
Note 6: PCC pavement joint spacing shall be 12.5 feet maximum for the 7 inches
thickness and 15 feet maximum for the 8 in. thickness
Note 7: Pavement designs not using typical thicknesses may be used, however, an
IDOT Bureau of Local Road (BLR) 20 year pavement design must be submitted for
review and approval
Note 8: All pavement thickness and construction shall conform to the latest
version of the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
 
(2009 Code, § 35-5-7) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 05-08, passed 11-14-
2005; Ord. 14-05, passed 5-12-2014; Ord. 18-03, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 155.097 STREET LIGHTS.
   (A)   The subdivision shall be provided with a complete street lighting
system in accordance with the American National Standard Institute Practice for
Roadway Lighting -ANSI/IES RP-8 (current edition).
   (B)   The street lighting system shall provide for a light at each
intersection and lights along streets to maintain recommended luminance and
illuminance values for roadways, at a maximum spacing of 350 feet between
poles.
   (C)   All street light fixtures shall be as approved by the Ameren - Central
Illinois Light Company for complete serviceability. Fixtures shall include
lamp, ballast, photocell, socket, lens, reflector and mounting bracket. Each
street light shall include luminaire fusing sized as required by the luminaire
manufacturer and shall be installed in double pole in-line fuse holder, Buss
Hey or equivalent so that each pole can be serviced independently. Fusing shall
be located in a handhole at the base of each pole.
   (D)   Light poles in residential areas shall be either metal, concrete or
fiberglass construction, unless otherwise approved by the Trustee in charge of
streets.
   (E)   Mounting height shall, in general, be 30 feet for residential streets
and 45 feet for commercial/industrial streets, as is appropriate for the
luminaire.
   (F)   Luminaires for residential streets shall be a minimum of 150 watt
metal halide with a built-in regulator ballast and photocell or LED lamp source
and driver(s) with Kelvin temperature of 3000K or pre-approved Kelvin
temperature. A type II or type III distribution pattern shall be used to
provide proper coverage.
   (G)   Luminaires for commercial/industrial streets shall be a minimum of 150
watt metal halide with a built-in regulator ballast and photocell or LED lamp
source and driver(s) with Kelvin temperature of 3000K or pre-approved Kelvin
temperature. Luminaires on major streets shall be 250 watt metal halide with
built-in regulator ballast and photocell or LED lamp source and driver(s) with
Kelvin temperature of 3000K or pre-approved Kelvin temperature. A type II or
type III distribution pattern shall be used to provide proper coverage.
(2009 Code, § 35-5-8) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 05-08, passed 11-14-
2005; Ord. 17-37, passed 11-13-2017)
§ 155.098 MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Monuments shall be set at all accessible lot corners and at angle
points and points of curvature, after the subdivision has been final graded.
   (B)   Monuments shall be set by or under the direction of a state registered
land surveyor and shall be iron pipe, three-fourths inch by 24 inches or equal.
   (C)   The subdivider shall install village right-of-way markers, as directed
by the Village Engineer.
   (D)   (1)   At least one permanent benchmark shall be set within the
subdivision by a state professional land surveyor, regardless of the number of
additions, provided the additions are contiguous, in the form of a permanent
marker.
      (2)   The permanent marker shall meet the following requirements.
         (a)   The permanent marker shall be located in the public right-of-
way, be easily accessible and not impede other surrounding infrastructure.
Location of the permanent marker shall be approved by the Village Engineer.
         (b)   The datum of the permanent marker shall be the following:
vertical datum shall be North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988 (U.S. survey
feet) and Horizontal datum shall be North American Datum (NAD) 1983 (U.S.
survey feet).
         (c)   The vertical attributes of the permanent marker shall be
determined by conventional surveying methods (i.e., level and rod) and
utilizing a closed loop level traverse. The vertical attributes for each
permanent marker shall be documented by the state professional land surveyor
with proof that it is tied to another monument by submission of field notes
signed by the state professional land surveyor. The horizontal attributes of
the permanent marker may be determined by conventional surveying methods or
through the use of global positioning system (GPS) equipment. The horizontal
attributes of each permanent marker shall be documented by the state
professional land surveyor with proof that it is tied to another monument by
submission of field notes signed and sealed by the state professional land
surveyor for attributes obtained through the use of conventional surveying
methods. For horizontal attributes obtained through the use of GPS equipment,
the state professional land surveyor shall provide surveying files that
document the number of sites occupied, the respective coordinates of the sites
and the length of time the sites were occupied. All vertical and horizontal
attribute documentation shall be submitted to the Village Engineer. A minimum
of three monument ties (to the nearest tenth of a foot), such as street lights,
fire hydrants, manholes, valve boxes and the like shall also be provided by the
state professional land surveyor. The permanent marker shall be documented on
the final plat and its inclusion shall be a condition for approval of the final
plat and recorded with the county.
         (d)   Permanent markers shall be either bronze or aluminum, four
inches in diameter and suitable for embedment in concrete. Permanent markers
shall be item C4D or C4DB by Berntsen International, Inc. or equivalent
approved by the Village Engineer. Permanent markers shall be embedded in
concrete that is a minimum of 12 inches in diameter and four feet in depth.
Each permanent marker shall be detectable by standard metal detecting
equipment. The permanent marker attributes of marker number, state plane
coordinates and NAVD 1988 elevation shall be engraved on the marker.
         (e)   The Village Engineer shall assign a unique number to each
permanent marker set in concrete and this number shall be included on the
monument and on the record drawings and final plat.
         (f)   Any person or persons who damage or deface a permanent marker
shall be subject to the penalties as outlined in §
155.999.
(2009 Code, § 35-5-9) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 06-04, passed 7-10-
2006) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.099 CERTIFICATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Upon completion of all improvements, the subdivider’s engineer shall
certify, in writing, to the village that all improvements have been constructed
substantially in accordance with the approved construction plans.
(2009 Code, § 35-5-10) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
PROCEDURE FOR MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
§ 155.110 PURPOSE OF MINOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE; DEFINITION OF MINOR
SUBDIVISION.
   The purpose of the minor subdivision procedure is to simplify the
requirements and review procedure of a subdivision fronting a public road and
not requiring construction of any public improvements for which a guarantee is
required. For the purpose of this regulation, a MINOR SUBDIVISION shall be
deemed to be a division of a tract of land along an existing street into not
more than five single-family residential lots including any remainder of the
original tract from which the lots were divided and not requiring any street or
utility construction.
(2009 Code, § 35-6-1) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.111 PRE-APPLICATION REQUIREMENT AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Preapplication map requirements.
      (1)   Three weeks prior to the next regularly scheduled Planning and
Zoning Commission meeting, the subdivider shall submit as preapplication
material to the Plat Officer, a map (21 copies) on which is indicated required
information. The map can be an existing township map, United States Geological
Survey map or other map at a scale suitable to show the tract to be subdivided
and one mile radius from the tract.
      (2)   Information required to be indicated on the map is as follows:
         (a)   Description.
               1.   Name of proposed subdivision;
               2.   Outline of total property of owner with approximate
boundary dimensions and acreage;
               3.   Name and address of owner and developer;
               4.   Name and address of engineer; and
               5.   Scale, north point and date. Scale to be not more than 100
feet to one inch.
         (b)   Existing conditions.
            1.   Existing streets and roads expected to serve the area to be
subdivided;
            3.   Existing utility lines expected to serve the area to be
subdivided;
            3.   Existing zoning classification of land proposed to be
subdivided and adjacent surrounding lands;
            4.   Fire protection district; and
            5.   School district.
         (c)   Proposed conditions.
            1.   Method of water supply, sewage disposal; and
            2.   Proposed lotting with approximate dimensions and lot area.
   (B)   Distribution of preapplication material for review. Upon receipt of
the preapplication map, copies shall be immediately directed by the Plat
Officer to the following persons for review and comment:
      (1)   Two copies to the Village Engineer;
      (2)   One copy to the Director of Building and Zoning;
      (3)   Two copies to the County Superintendent of Highways for transmittal
of one copy to the appropriate Highway Commissioner;
      (4)   One copy to the County Soil and Water Conservation District;
      (5)   One copy to the District Superintendent of Schools;
      (6)   One copy to be retained by the Plat Officer for his or her records;
      (7)   Two copies to be used for certifying Planning and Zoning Commission
recommendations for approval. After certification, one to be retained by
Village Clerk and one to be returned to subdivider;
      (8)   One copy each to telephone, gas, electric and cable companies to
serve the area; and
      (9)   Seven copies to the Planning and Zoning Commission members.
   (C)   Planning and Zoning Commission action.
      (1)   The Plat Officer shall distribute to the Planning and Zoning
Commission members at least seven days prior to the next scheduled meeting of
the Planning and Zoning Commission, six copies of the preapplication map along
with any written recommendations or comments of the Plat Officer, Village
Engineer, Building Inspector, Soil and Water Conservation District, county and
township highway officials and District Superintendent of Schools. If no
comments are received within ten days of distribution of such maps for comment
and review, it shall be deemed to be a favorable comment by that agency or
person.
      (2)   At its next scheduled meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall review the suitability of the site for the proposed subdivision based on
comments received and upon considerations of §
155.008.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend approval or
disapproval of the preapplication map. If recommendation is for approval, the
Planning and Zoning Commission Chairperson shall so certify affixing his or her
signature to two copies of the preapplication map. The certification shall read
“Recommendation for Approval of Minor Subdivision Preapplication Map” with
appropriate signature and date. One copy of the certified map shall be filed
with the Village Clerk and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider. If the
preapplication map is recommended for disapproval the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall furnish to the subdivider within 30 days, a written statement
setting forth the reasons for disapproval.
      (4)   The Village Board shall accept or reject said preapplication map
within 30 days after the next regularly scheduled meeting following the action
of the Planning and Zoning Commission provided the Planning and Zoning
Commission action is at least 15 days prior to the next Village Board meeting
and that eight copies of the preapplication map are promptly provided by the
subdivider to be distributed to the Village Board. If approved, the Village
Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the resolution of approval to two copies
of the preapplication map, one copy to be filed with the Village Clerk and one
copy to be returned to the subdivider. Approval of the preapplication map
constitutes authorization to proceed with the final plat.
   (D)   Final plat requirements. The final plat requirements and procedure for
a minor subdivision shall be as outlined in §
155.049 for the normal subdivision final plat except:
      (1)   No construction plans are required;
      (2)   No guarantee of improvements is required; and
      (3)   No construction inspection is required.
(2009 Code, § 35-6-2) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
FEES
§ 155.125 PRELIMINARY PLAT FEE.
   (A)   (1)   All preliminary plats filed with the Village Clerk and
distributed for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be subject to:
         (a)   Preliminary plat review by a consulting engineering firm
authorized by the Village Board to make such review;
         (b)   Any other review, study or analysis as may be deemed necessary
due to the specific impact of the proposed preliminary plat on the village by
the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Village Board of Trustees; and
         (c)   Payment of all expenses incurred by the village in relation to
the requirements for consideration of the preliminary plat. The subdivider
shall deposit with the Village Clerk at the time of submission of such
preliminary plat, a cash amount of $1,500 toward payment of all expenses to be
incurred by the village related to the preliminary plat.
      (2)   The consulting engineering firm shall be compensated by the village
for one preliminary plat review cycle as outlined in §
155.047, to be provided in accordance with the regular rates charged to the
village by the consulting engineer for such services. Any other expense
incurred by the village shall be charged to the subdivider at the actual
amount. If the aggregate of all expenses incurred by the village in relation to
the preliminary plat, including consulting engineering service fees for the one
preliminary plat review cycle, are less than $1,500, the difference shall be
refunded to the subdivider upon the village’s approval of the preliminary plat.
If the aggregate of all expenses are greater than $1,500, the difference shall
be paid by the subdivider upon the village’s submission of the final invoices
for all such expenses. The subdivider shall remit to the village an amount
equal to the difference between the actual total expenses incurred by the
village and the amount deposited with the village prior to approval of the
preliminary plat.
   (B)   All pre-application maps for minor subdivisions filed with the Village
Clerk and distributed for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission under
the provisions of this subchapter shall be subject to:
      (1)   Pre-application map review by a consulting engineering firm
authorized by the Village Board to make such review;
      (2)   Any other review, study or analysis as may be deemed necessary due
to the specific impact of the proposed pre-application map on the village by
the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Village Board of Trustees; and
      (3)   Payment of all expenses incurred by the village in relation to the
requirements for consideration of the pre-application map.
   (C)   The subdivider shall deposit with the Village Clerk at the time of
submission of such pre-application map, a cash amount of $500 toward payment of
all expenses to be incurred by the village related to the pre-application map.
The consulting engineering firm shall be compensated by the village for one
pre-application map review cycle as outlined in §
155.111, to be provided in accordance with the regular rates charged by the
consulting engineer to the village for such services. Any other expense
incurred by the village shall be charged to the subdivider at the actual
amount. If the aggregate of all expenses incurred by the village in relation to
the pre-application map, including consulting engineering service fees for the
one map review cycle, are less than $500, the difference shall be refunded to
the subdivider upon the village’s final approval of the pre-application map. If
the aggregate of all expenses are greater than $500, the difference shall be
paid by the subdivider upon the village’s submission of the final invoices for
all such expenses. The subdivider shall remit to the village an amount equal to
the difference between the actual total expenses incurred by the village and
the amount deposited with the village prior to approval of the preliminary
plat.
   (D)   Should the subdivider decide to pursue approval of the preliminary
plat or pre-application map review from the Planning and Zoning Commission and
additional reviews are necessary, or other issues related to the preliminary
plat or pre-application map arise that require review and/or comment, the
subdivider shall deposit with the Village Clerk an additional cash amount as
determined by the Village Board of Trustees through a proposal by the Village
Engineer or any other designated party to provide these review services.
(2009 Code, § 35-8-1) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-8-2016)
§ 155.126 CONSTRUCTION REVIEW AND INSPECTIONS AT SUBDIVIDED EXPENSE.
   (A)   All required improvements to be constructed under the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to both construction plan review and inspections
during construction on behalf of the village by a consulting engineering firm
authorized by the Village Board to make such reviews and inspections. The
subdivider shall deposit with the Village Clerk at the time of submission of
construction drawings, a cash amount equal to 3% of the estimated cost of
construction. The consulting engineering firm shall be compensated by the
village for construction plan review and inspection services, as outlined in §
155.051, provided in accordance with the regular rates charged by the
consulting engineer for such services.
   (B)   Any fees paid to the consulting engineer by the village for inspection
shall be deducted from the 3% cash deposit made by the subdivider. If the cost
of construction plan review and inspection services exceeds the amount of the
deposit, the excess amount shall be paid to the village by the developer prior
to final acceptance of the improvements by the village. If the cost of
inspection services is less than the 3% cash deposit, the unused balance shall
be refunded to the developer by the village when all improvements have been
accepted by the village and final billing rendered by the consulting engineer.
(2009 Code, § 35-8-2) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 17-25, passed 4-10-
2017)
§ 155.127 FINAL PLAT FEE.
   There shall be no additional fee or expense at the time the final plat is
submitted for approval unless the subdivider shall request any amendment or
revision to the preliminary plat that has not been previously reviewed or
approved by the village.
(2009 Code, § 35-8-3) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 08-02, passed 4-14-
2008)
§ 155.128 RECORDING FEES.
   The subdivider shall pay the sum of $25 plus actual recording fees to the
Village Clerk at such time as the final plat is recorded.
(2009 Code, § 35-8-4) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.129 MINOR SUBDIVISION FEES.
   For the pre-application map review, there shall be no additional fee or
expense at the time the final plat is submitted for approval unless the
subdivider shall request any amendment or revision to the preliminary plat that
has not been previously reviewed or approved by the village. Final plat and
recording fees for minor subdivisions are on the same basis as provided in §§
155.127 and
155.128.
(2009 Code, § 35-8-5) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 08-02, passed 4-14-
2008)
§ 155.130 FAIR SHARE ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The village’s comprehensive plan adopted May 6 and
effective May 31, 1991. It contains information on household and population
projections to the year 2010. The numbers are relevant to planning for and
meeting new growth demands.
      FACILITIES PLAN SECOND AMENDMENT. The village report dated May 1990 on
the existing municipal sanitary sewer system and needed capital improvements to
meet new growth.
      FAIR SHARE ASSESSMENT. A monetary charge imposed on developers by the
village through the subdivision process. It is designed to permit the village
to provide for and to cover the proportional costs of utility improvements that
are specifically and uniquely attributable to the development activity. The
developer being assessed pays only a proportional share of the cost of capital
improvements to permit development activity.
      HOUSEHOLDS. The number of residential units of any type in the village as
identified by the U.S. Bureau of Census in 2000. The census totaled 1,075
households.
      INTERIOR PLUMBED FIXTURE. Devices located within a building structure
that have the capability of regularly receiving water and discharging it into
the sewer system. This shall include, but not be limited to, sinks, toilets,
washing machines and stub end plumbing installations. A STUB END PLUMBING
INSTALLATION is a device designed to take water or waste water and discharge it
into the sewer system, but is not yet in service and may be capable of use in
the future. This shall not include floor drains and fire prevention devices.
      QUANTIFIABLE CONTRIBUTION. A capital improvement, land or other
measurable item of value offered to the village that may be deemed by the
village to be beneficial.
      QUANTIFIED BENEFIT. A quantifiable contribution accepted by the village.
The monetary value of the benefit can be off-set against the per interior
plumbed fixture fair share assessment.
      SPECIFICALLY AND UNIQUELY ATTRIBUTABLE. An identifiable portion of the
need for additional public facilities or capital improvement projects resulting
from proposed subdivision development. The need has been identified as
improvements to the water and sewer system to accommodate new growth. The cost
is proportionally assessed by use of a fair share formula.
      SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE. The village’s subdivision chapter adopted on May 6
and effective on May 31, 1991, as amended from time to time.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Rochester or the President and Board of Trustees;
depending upon the context.
      WATER DISTRIBUTION ANALYSIS, REPORT ON. The village report dated March
1990 on the existing municipal water system and needed capital improvements to
meet new growth.
      ZONING ORDINANCE. The village’s zoning chapter adopted May 6 and
effective May 31, 1991, as amended from time to time. This is the source for
the development types referenced in this section.
   (B)   Establish fair share assessment. As a condition of approval of a final
plat of subdivision, each subdivider or developer will be required to
compensate the village in accordance with the criteria and formula stipulated
in the following divisions.
(Ord. 17-01, passed 1-9-2017)
   (C)   Utility improvement cost factors.
      (1)   The engineering report entitled Report on Water Distribution
Analysis concerning the water supply and distribution system identified needed
capital improvements to serve existing and new growth areas. The engineering
report entitled Facilities Plan Second Amendment concerns sanitary sewage
distribution and treatment identified needed capital improvements to serve
existing and new growth areas. The report recommended and the village selected
the treatment destination to be the Springfield, Metropolitan Sanitary District
Sugar Creek Plant.
      (2)   Phase IA and IB water capital improvements and Phase I and II
sanitary sewage capital improvements were approved with a current engineering
cost estimate of $2,897,000. It is estimated that $661,000 of that amount can
be attributed to meeting Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) mandates to
improve the system serving the existing developed areas of the village. The
remaining $2,236,000 estimate represents the cost of serving new subdivisions
and developments in accordance with EPA standards. The $2,236,000 figure shall
serve as the cost factor base for the formula enumerated in this section.
Appendix A in this section identifies the pertinent engineering studies and
updates on capital improvement costs. The figures exclude legal, administrative
or financing costs.
   (D)   Formula factors. Residential and industrial/business properties are
included within the scope of this section. Appendix A delineates the factors on
interior plumbed fixtures for residential, school and commercial types used as
the baseline for the fair share assessment formula.
   (E)   Formula. The formula is set forth in
Appendix B in this section.
   (F)   Fees. The fair share assessment for each interior plumbed fixture is
$231. See
Appendix B in this section for a sampling of fees based upon the number of
interior plumbed fixtures.
   (G)   Payment. A fair share assessment imposed pursuant to this section
shall be charged to the developer and collected in full from the developer, as
follows:
      (1)   Residential. Assessments shall be paid in full prior to the
issuance of the building permit;
      (2)   Business/industrial. Assessments shall be paid in full prior to the
issuance of the building permit;
      (3)   Payment at other times. Payment of any assessments may at the sole
discretion of the Village Board for good cause shown, be authorized at some
time other than as specified in divisions (G)(1) and (G)(2) above. This is
permissible provided that the village receives security ensuring such later
payment of assessment. Security may be in the form of a cash bond, an
irrevocable letter of credit, or other acceptable method. Nothing contained in
this section shall preclude the payment of the fair share assessment at the
time when the building permit is issued or at an earlier stage of development
if agreed to by the village and the person paying the assessment;
      (4)   Written condition. In any event, payment of the fair share
assessment shall be a written condition of final plat approval; and
      (5)   Payment. Any person desiring to pre-pay the fair share assessment
in full for an entire subdivision within the village shall make the payment as
calculated under the formula set forth in
Appendix C in this section as a condition of approval of a final plat of
subdivision.
   (H)   Modified assessment and quantifiable contributions. The Village Board
may consider alternative forms of contribution that may modify the final
assessment. This may occur when a developer offers a quantifiable contribution
or cash. After sufficient review of the offer, the village may determine that
it should be accepted. Upon formal acceptance, the quantified benefit may be
off-set against the per interior plumbed fixture assessment.
   (I)   Water and sewer systems assessment account. Assessments collected
pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a special interest bearing
account entitled Water and Sewer Systems Assessment Account. Deposits into that
account shall be solely dedicated to pay for, or to retire any loans and bonds
issued to facilitate, water and sewer system improvements for new subdivisions/
developments.
   (J)   Application of the fair share assessment. The fair share assessment
shall be imposed only when improvements are specifically and uniquely
attributable to new growth as regulated by the village through the subdivision
regulations and as otherwise defined by the Village Board.
(Ord. 17-01, passed 1-9-2017)
   (K)   Annexation. The fair share assessment shall be required as a condition
to the annexation of property to the village. The village may, at its sole
discretion, require additional quantifiable contributions as it may deem
necessary and desirable.
   (L)   Evaluation of fair share assessment. The assessment factors, formula
and fee payment shall be evaluated in conjunction with an evaluation of the
water system, sewer system, comprehensive plan and capital improvement plan.
This shall be done at least once every four years following the effective date
of this section. Factors to consider may include, but are not limited to,
actual development activity, infrastructure constructed, changing land use,
interest rates, debt retirement revisions and updated cost figures.
   (M)   Severability. In the event that any portion or division of this
section is determined to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall in no manner affect the remaining
portions or divisions of this section which shall remain in full force and
effect.
   (N)   Sanctions.
      (1)   The Village President may authorize the Building Code Inspector to
withhold the issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy on a
30-day basis for violation of the provisions of this section.
      (2)   The Village President and Board of Trustees may vote to impose a
moratorium on the issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy
for persons violating this section until payment is rendered.
      (3)   The Village President and Board of Trustees may authorize the
Village Attorney to prosecute violators of this section to the full extent of
the law. This includes, but is not limited to, the general penalty provisions
of the village code for ordinance violations.
   (O)   Appendices. 
Appendices A,
B and
C are at the end of this section.
   (P)   Subdivision chapter and village code. This section shall be and is
hereby made a part of the subdivision chapter and the village code of
ordinances. The Village Clerk is authorized to include the provisions of this
section in said documents.
   (Q)   Impact of fair share assessment on zoning and subdivision regulations.
This section shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property,
density of development, design and improvement standards and requirements. It
shall not affect any other aspect of development of land or provision of public
improvements subject to zoning and subdivision regulations or other regulations
of the village, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect
without limitation.
   (R)   Fair share assessment as additional and supplemental requirement. Fair
share assessments are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution
of, any other requirements imposed by the village on the development of land or
the issuance of building permits. In no event shall a property owner be
obligated to pay to public facilities in an amount in excess of the amount
calculated pursuant to this section.
   (S)   Effectiveness. Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees and execution by
the President, this section shall apply to any subdivision or portion of any
subdivision that has not received final plat approval.
   (T)   Exemptions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall have the
option, at its sole discretion, to exempt from the fair share requirements of
this section any parcel or parcels of property, subdivision or portion of any
subdivision that is located within a tax increment financing area established
by the village pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1.
APPENDIX A: FAIR SHARE ASSESSMENT FACTORS
Total improvement costs:
Infrastructure           Phases Cost
Total improvement costs:
Infrastructure            Phases       Cost
   Water utility       IA, IB       $779,000
   Sanitary sewer utiliI, II        $2,118,000
                                     $2,897,000
Existing developed areas:              
Infrastructure            Phases       Cost
   Water utility       IA, IB       $461,000
   Sanitary sewer utiliI, II        $200,000
                                     $661,000
New subdivisions/                      
developments:
Infrastructure            Phases       Cost
   Water utility       IA, IB       $318,000
   Sanitary sewer utiliI, II        $1,918,000
                                     $2,236,00
Sources:
   Village of Rochester, Illinois, Report on Water Distribution Analysis,
Crawford, Murphy and Tilly, Inc. Consulting Engineers, March 1990
   Village of Rochester, Illinois, Facilities Plan Second Amendment,
Crawford, Murphy and Tilly, Inc. Consulting Engineers, May 1990
   Village of Rochester Comprehensive Plan, Comprehensive Plan Committee,
Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Scruggs and Hammond, Inc.
Planning Consultants, May 1991
   Water Distribution System Analysis Report Cost Update, letter to
Rochester Village President Jim Finley from Engineer Alan Stuemke of CMT,
February 22, 1993
   Water and Sewer System Improvements Cost Update, letter to Rochester
Municipal Management Consultant Brad Townsend from Engineer Steven Schroll
of CMT, August 2, 1993
   Water and Sewer System Improvements Fair Share Cost Analysis, letter to
Rochester Village Trustee Bryan Martindale from Engineer Steven Schroll of
CMT, November 17, 1993. Also, appendix letter dated November 29, 1993
Formula Factors:                       
Type (A)                  Fixtures (B) Notes
Commercial                66           Per Metro Sanitary District
Residential               9,220        Estimate 10/Household
School                    381          Per Metro Sanitary District
      Total         9,667
(A) Development types
(B) Interior plumbed fixtures
 
APPENDIX B: FAIR SHARE ASSESSMENT FACTORS
Formula:
# of Interior Plumbed Fixtures/New Building X Improvement $
# of Interior Plumbed Fixtures in village
Example:
   1 (fixtures)  X $2,236,000 (Improvement $)
   9668 (existing plus one)
   .0001034 X $2,236,000
   $231.00 fair share assessment per fixture
Sample Assessments or Fees:
Fixture # Assessment % of Costs
1         $231       0.01%
8         $1,850     0.08%
10        $2,312     0.10%
12        $2,775     0.12%
15        $3,469     0.15%
20        $4,624     0.21%
25        $5,782     0.26%
50        $11,564    0.52%
 
APPENDIX C: PRE-PAYMENT OF FAIR SHARE ASSESSMENT
The formula for calculating the pre-payment of the fair share assessment
shall be as follows:
1.    The owner and the village shall establish the number of lots within
any subdivision for each zoning area
2.    The aggregate fair share assessment for the subdivision shall be
determined based upon the estimated number of interior plumbed fixtures as
follows:
Zoning Area                  No. of Fixtures
R-S                          13
R-1                          11
R-2                          20 (10 per side)
R-5                          As established by the village
Any commercial or industrial As established by the village
area
3.    The time for the build out of the subdivision shall be agreed to by
the village and the owner
4.    The village shall calculate the net present value of the expected
fair share assessment payments to be received over the development period
using an interest rate of the prime rate, as published in a business
periodical having a nationwide circulation on the day on which the pre-
payment is to be received, less 1%
5.    The fair share assessment shall be paid on the date of approval of
the final plat of the subdivision
 
(2009 Code, § 35-8-7) (Ord. 06-02, passed 3-13-2006; Ord. 10-01, passed 4-12-
2010; Ord. 11-13, passed 10-11-2011; Ord. 17-01, passed 1-9-2017)
PLAT OFFICER
§ 155.145 ESTABLISHMENT AND APPOINTMENT OF PLAT OFFICER.
   (A)   The office of Plat Officer is hereby established in which is vested
the duty of administration of these regulations as specified herein and such
other related regulations as specified herein and such other related
regulations as are assigned to that office by the Board.
   (B)   The Plat Officer to be appointed by the President of the village with
the approval of the Village Board shall be a person who is qualified by
professional or practical training and experience to conduct the affairs of
that office.
(2009 Code, § 35-9-1) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
OFFICIAL MAP
§ 155.160 OFFICIAL MAP ESTABLISHMENT.
   A village official map is hereby established and adopted by reference as
part of this regulation, for the village, which official map is on file in the
Village Clerk’s office.
(2009 Code, § 35-10-1) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
§ 155.161 AMENDMENTS OR ADDITIONS TO OFFICIAL MAP.
   Subsequent additions or amendments to the official map, including the
indication of additional public sites to be shown on the map, shall be
considered amendments to this regulation and shall be made as specified in §
155.033. Any agency requesting the establishment on the official map of a
future public site or easement shall indicate to the Planning and Zoning
Commission the need for the site in the precise location specified and
identified. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in making a favorable
recommendation for the inclusion on the official map of such site by the Board,
shall find that the public site location is consistent and not in conflict with
the comprehensive plan of the community and shall so indicate in its minutes.
(2009 Code, § 35-10-2) (Ord. 91-4, passed 5-6-1991)
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
§ 155.175 INTRODUCTION/PURPOSE.
   (A)   During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion
by wind and water. Erosion of soil endangers water resources by reducing water
quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
desirable species. Sedimentation necessitates repair of sewers and ditches and
the dredging of lakes. In addition, clearing and grading during construction
cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic
habitat.
   (B)   As a result, the purpose of this local regulation is to safeguard
persons, protect property and prevent damage to the environment in the Village
of Rochester, hereinafter called the village. This subchapter will also promote
the public welfare by guiding, regulating and controlling the design,
construction, use and maintenance of ay development or other activity that
disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land
within the corporate limits of the village.
(2009 Code, § 35-11-1) (Ord. 04-07, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 155.176 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR IN RESPONSIBLE CHARGE. Person or persons performing and
supervising the development work on behalf of the owner, owner’s agent, tenant
or owner’s tenant’s agent.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to real estate or property, including:
      (1)   The division or subdivision of any duly recorded parcel of
property;
      (2)   Construction, reconstruction, demolition or placement of a building
or any addition to a building;
      (3)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site or preparing a site
for a manufactured home;
      (4)   Construction of roads, bridges or similar projects;
      (5)   Redevelopment of a site;
      (6)   Filling, dredging, grading, stripping, excavating, paving or other
non-agricultural alterations of a ground surface;
      (7)   Storage of or deposit of solid or liquid waste; and
      (8)   Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency,
direction or velocity of storm water flows from a property.
   DRAINAGE WAY. Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site.
   EROSION. The general process whereby soil or earth is moved by rainfall,
flowing water, wind or wave action.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A set of plans prepared by or under the
direction of a licensed professional engineer in the state, indicating the
specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on
a development site during and after construction, to the maximum extent
practicable.
   EROSION CONTROL. A measure that prevents erosion.
   EXCAVATION. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other similar materials is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, re-located or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
from such actions.
   GRADING. Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions
thereof.
   PERIMETER CONTROL. A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by
filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
governmental entity, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting
as either the owner, the tenant or as the owner’s or tenant’s agent.
   PHASING. Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the
stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next.
   SEDIMENT CONTROL. Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the
site.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process that deposits soils, debris and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or storm drainage
systems.
   SITE. A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading
work is performed as a single unified operation.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. An approval issued by the municipality for the
construction or alteration of ground, as well as improvements and structures
for the control of erosion, runoff and grading.
   STABILIZATION. The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The first land-disturbing activity associated with a
development, including land preparation such as stripping, grading and filling;
installation of streets and walkways; excavation for utilities, basements,
footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation
of accessory buildings such as garages.
   STRIPPING. Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover, including
tree removal, by spraying or clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff or drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   VILLAGE STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned or privately-owned facilities
by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited
to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets,
piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural
and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, drainage easements
granted to the village and other drainage structures within the corporate
limits of the village.
   WATERCOURSE. Any body of water, including, but not limited to lakes, ponds,
wetlands, rivers, streams, creeks, and bodies of water delineated by the
village.
   WATERWAY. A channel or swale that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or
to the village storm drainage system.
(2009 Code, § 35-11-2) (Ord. 04-07, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 155.177 PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall be granted a site development approval for land-
disturbing activity that would require the uncovering of one acre (43,450
square feet) or more or any land disturbing activity within 50 feet, in any
direction, of a watercourse without an erosion and sediment control plan
approved by the village.
   (B)   No site development approval is required for the following activities:
      (1)   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources; and
      (2)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted main or accessory use.
   (C)   Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner
or developer of the site, and of any consulting engineering firm retained by
the applicant together with the name of the applicant’s principal contact at
such firm. Construction plans that include an erosion and sediment control plan
with the aforementioned information cited or as included as a part of the storm
water pollution prevention plan will satisfy the application requirements.
   (D)   Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing,
construction or development involving the movement of earth shall be in
accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan and that the contractor
in responsible charge or his or her designated representative shall be on site
on all days when construction or grading activity takes place.
   (E)   The applicant will be required to file with the village a letter of
credit in an amount deemed sufficient by the village to cover 125% of all costs
of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements and engineering and
inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements
installed on the site for a period of two years after the date of conditional
acceptance by the village or final completion as determined by the village. If
the applicant is going through the residential, business or commercial
subdivision development process, the letter of credit approved for the
development will satisfy these requirements.
(2009 Code, § 35-11-3) (Ord. 04-07, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 155.178 REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   The village will review each application for a site development approval to
determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation. The Village
Board of Trustees shall have final approval of all construction plans as
recommended by the Village Engineer.
(2009 Code, § 35-11-4) (Ord. 04-07, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 155.179 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN.
   (A)   The erosion and sediment control plan shall include the following:
      (1)   A natural resources map identifying soils, forest cover, wetlands
and natural resources protected under other sections of this subchapter. This
map should be at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet;
      (2)   A sequence of construction of the development site, including
stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing
shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated
duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of
temporary erosion and sediment control measures and establishment of permanent
vegetation;
      (3)   All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the
objectives of this local regulation throughout all phases of construction and
after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of
the project, the preparation of intermediate plans may be required at the close
of each season;
      (4)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures; and
      (5)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
   (B)   Modifications to the plan shall be processed and approved in the same
manner as §
155.178, may be authorized by the village by written authorization to the
permittee, and shall include:
      (1)   Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan submitted
to the village; and
      (2)   Field modifications of a minor nature.
   (C)   As required by federal and state laws, the contractor in responsible
charge shall prepare and submit the notice of intent and other forms required
to the State Environmental Protection Agency for review and comment. Any
modifications or revisions made to the erosion and sediment control plan as
required by the State Environmental Protection Agency shall be forwarded to the
village.
(2009 Code, § 35-11-5) (Ord. 04-07, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 155.180 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices and
waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent
version of the Illinois Urban Manual: A Technical Manual Designed for Urban
Ecosystem Protection and Enhancement and shall be adequate to prevent
transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the village.
Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than two to one (horizontal to
vertical), except as approved by the village to meet other community or
environmental objectives.
   (B)   Stripping and grading of natural resources, such as forests and
wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other
federal, state and local laws, regulations and ordinances. Stripping techniques
that retain natural vegetation and drainage patterns, as described in the
Illinois Urban Manual - A Technical Manual Designed for Urban Ecosystem
Protection and Enhancement shall be used to the satisfaction of the village.
   (C)   Stripping, except that necessary to establish sediment control
devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed
and have been stabilized.
   (D)   Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than 30
acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as
approved by the village.
   (E)   Erosion control requirements shall include the following.
      (1)   Erosion and sediment control barriers shall be installed within two
calendar days of stripping activity.
      (2)   Soil stabilization shall be completed within five calendar days of
stripping or inactivity in construction.
      (3)   If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, it
shall become established within 14 calendar days or the village may require the
site to be reseeded or a non-vegetative option employed.
      (4)   Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the
Illinois Urban Manual: A Technical Manual Designed for Urban Ecosystem
Protection and Enhancement on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to
ensure stabilization.
      (5)   Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each
workday.
      (6)   The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or
another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the
close of the construction season.
      (7)   Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or
sediment from the site.
      (8)   Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be
employed.
   (F)   Sediment control requirements shall include:
      (1)   Settling basins, sediment traps or tanks and perimeter controls;
      (2)   Settling basins that are designed in a manner that allows
adaptation to provide long-term storm water management, as required by the
village; and
      (3)   Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer
strip in combination with perimeter controls.
   (G)   Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include:
      (1)   A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by the State
Environmental Protection Agency, State Department of Natural Resources and/or
the United States Army Corps of Engineers if a wet watercourse will be crossed
regularly during construction;
      (2)   Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during and after
any in-channel work;
      (3)   All on-site storm water conveyance channels designed according to
the criteria outlined in the Illinois Urban Manual: A Technical Manual Designed
for Urban Ecosystem Protection and Enhancement; and
      (4)   Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of
all pipes and paved channels.
   (H)   Construction site access requirements shall include:
      (1)   A temporary access road provided at all sites; and
      (2)   Other measures required by the village in order to ensure that
construction vehicles do not track sediment onto public streets or washed into
the village storm drainage system.
(2009 Code, § 35-11-6) (Ord. 04-07, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 155.181 INSPECTION.
   (A)   (1)   The village or its designated agent shall make inspections as
hereinafter required and either shall approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with
the erosion and sediment control plan as approved. Plans for grading,
stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the
village shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work.
      (2)   To obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the village at
least two working days before the start of the following activities:
         (1)   Start of construction;
         (2)   Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
         (3)   Completion of site stripping;
         (4)   Completion of rough grading;
         (5)   Completion of final grading;
         (6)   Close of the construction season; and
         (7)   Completion of final landscaping.
   (B)   The permittee or his or her agent shall make regular inspections of
all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the
approved erosion and sediment control plan(s). The purpose of such inspections
will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need
for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written
form and submitted to the village at the time interval specified in the
approved permit. The permittee or its designated agent shall inspect the
control measures within 24 hours of a precipitation event equal to or exceeding
one-half inch of rainfall in 24 hours at the site, as measured by the nearest
recording rain gauge.
   (C)   The village or its designated agent shall enter the property of the
permittee as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the
validity of the reports filed under division (B) above.
(2009 Code, § 35-11-7) (Ord. 04-07, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 155.182 ENFORCEMENT.
   In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to
this subchapter violates the terms of the permit or implements site development
in such a manner as to materially aversely affect the health, welfare or safety
of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to
be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to private
property, public property or improvements in the area, the village may suspend
or revoke the site development permit.
(2009 Code, § 35-11-8) (Ord. 04-07, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 155.183 SEPARABILITY.
   The provisions and sections of this subchapter shall be deemed to be
separable, and the invalidity of any portion of this subchapter shall not
affect the validity of the remainder.
(2009 Code, § 35-11-9) (Ord. 04-07, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to the penalty provision of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 35-2-10)
   (B)   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any terms of §§
155.175 through
155.183. Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
155.175 through
155.183 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each day during which any
violation of any of the provisions of §§
155.175 through
155.183 is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate
offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership,
corporation or governmental unit shall be punished by a fine in the amount of
no less than $100 per violation and no more than $1,000 for each day said
violation continues to occur. In addition to any other penalty authorized by
this division (B), any person, partnership, corporation or governmental unit
convicted of violating any of the provisions of §§
155.175 through
155.183 shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration,
infrastructure cleaning, administrative, legal and engineering costs incurred
by the village.
(2009 Code, § 35-11-8)
(Ord. 04-07, passed 6-14-2004)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Title
   
156.002   Intent and purpose
Definitions
   
156.015   Rules for construction
   
156.016   Definitions
General Provisions
   
156.030   Allowable uses of land or buildings
   
156.031   Control over use
   
156.032   Control over bulk
   
156.033   Accessory buildings, structures and uses
   
156.034   Yards, general
   
156.035   Permitted obstructions in required yards
   
156.036   Required yards for lots adjoining residential districts
   
156.037   Landscaped buffers or screening required for lots between certain
zoning districts
   
156.038   Fences
   
156.039   Satellite dish antennas
   
156.040   Flood plain area
   
156.041   Annexations; procedure for zoning
   
156.042   Petitions for annexation; filing fee
   
156.043   Exceptions
   
156.044   Incorporation of zoning map
   
156.045   Wind and solar renewable energy systems
   
156.046   Recreational vehicles
Zoning Districts
   
156.060   Establishment of districts
   
156.061   Zoning map
   
156.062   Zoning of streets, alleys, public ways
   
156.063   Interpretation of zoning boundary lines
Agricultural and Residential Districts
   
156.075   A-1 Agricultural District
   
156.076   R-S Residential Suburban District
   
156.077   R-1 Medium Density Residential District
   
156.078   R-2 Duplex Housing District
   
156.079   R-4 Multiple-Family Housing District
   
156.080   R-5 Multiple-Family Housing District
   
156.081   Zoning requirements summary table
Business Districts
   
156.095   B-1 General Business District
   
156.096   B-2 Highway and Service Business District
Industrial Districts and Performance Standards
   
156.110   I-1 Light Industrial District
   
156.111   I-2 Heavy Industrial District
   
156.112   Performances
Nonconforming Uses
   
156.125   Intent
   
156.126   Nonconforming lots of record
   
156.127   Nonconforming uses of land
   
156.128   Nonconforming structures
   
156.129   Nonconforming uses of structures
   
156.130   Repairs and maintenance
   
156.131   Uses under special exception provisions
Sign Regulations
   
156.165   Purpose
   
156.166   Legal sign installation and general standards
   
156.167   General sign specifications
   
156.168   No sign permit required
   
156.169   Temporary sign permit required
   
156.170   Permanent sign permit required
   
156.171   Sign regulations within residential districts
   
156.172   Sign regulations within business districts
   
156.173   Business sign within industrial districts
   
156.174   Penalties and fines for violations
   
156.175   Non-conforming signs
Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
156.185   Purpose
   
156.186   Procedure
   
156.187   General requirements applying to both off-street parking and loading
   
156.188   Additional regulations applying to off-street parking only
   
156.189   Location of required off-street parking
   
156.190   Schedule of parking requirements
   
156.191   Additional regulations applying to off-street loading only
   
156.192   Schedule of off-street loading requirements
Administration and Enforcement
   
156.205   Responsibility for zoning administration
   
156.206   Procedure for zoning administration
   
156.207   Interpretation and relation to other ordinances and restrictions
   
156.208   Repeal of prior zoning regulations
   
156.209   Fees
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “Zoning Code for
the Village of Rochester, Illinois”.
(2009 Code, § 40-1-1) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.002 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of:
      (1)   Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity, morals and general welfare of the people;
      (2)   Securing adequate light, pure air and safety from fire and other
dangers; and
      (3)   Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
village.
   (B)   To these ends this chapter is designed to set up and accomplish
certain standards and objectives by:
      (1)   Organizing the village into districts regulating and restricting
therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of any
buildings, structures or land, whether for residence, office, business,
manufacturing or other specific uses;
      (2)   Regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings and other
structures;
      (3)   Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines
along streets, alleys or property lines;
      (4)   Establishing the planned residential development for an area of
land controlled by a landowner to be developed as a single entity for a number
of dwelling units, the plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk or
type of dwelling unit, density, lot coverage or required open space to the
regulations in any one residential district established by any other provisions
of this chapter;
      (5)   Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of the lot area
and determining the area of open spaces within and surrounding such buildings;
      (6)   Providing for certain conditional permitted uses;
      (7)   Regulating the size, type and location of signs;
      (8)   Requiring accessory off-street parking and loading facilities;
      (9)   Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided herein;
      (10)   Providing for the change and amendment of such regulations and
boundaries of the respective districts;
      (11)   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
chapter or of any amendment thereto; and
      (12)   Providing zoning regulations to guide the installation and
operation of wind and solar renewable energy systems to be used primarily on
site and to accommodate sustainable energy production from renewable energy
sources.
(2009 Code, § 40-1-2) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015; Ord. 18-19, passed 6-11-
2018)
DEFINITIONS
§ 156.015 RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION.
   The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules for construction.
   (A)   The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
   (B)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future,
the present.
   (C)   The word “shall” is mandatory, while the word “may” is permissive.
   (D)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter.
   (E)   All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a
fraction is one-half or less, the integral foot next below shall be taken.
   (F)   Whenever a word, a phrase or a term defined hereinafter appears in the
text of this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the
definition thereof. The word “lot” shall include the words “piece” and
“parcel”; the word “building” shall include all other structures of every kind
regardless of similarity to buildings; and, the phrase “use for” shall include
the phrases “arranged for”, “intended for”, “maintained for”, “designed for”
and “occupied for”. Synonym, in common usage, of certain words, phrases or
terms are shown parenthetically.
(2009 Code, § 40-2-1) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.016 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING. A use or building customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with
such principal use or building.
   AGRICULTURE. Land, including necessary buildings and structures which shall
be used for agriculture including, but not limited to, farming, dairying,
pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, silviculture, viticulture
and animal and poultry husbandry, as well as the necessary accessory uses;
provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be
secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities, and providing further
that the above uses shall not include the commercial feeding of garbage or
offal to swine or other animals.
   ALLEY. A public way with a width not exceeding 20 feet in right-of-way used
primarily as a service access to the rear or side of a property which abuts on
a street.
   ALTERNATE FENCE DESIGNS. Designed fences that do not fall clearly under the
listed fence types or definitions in this section shall be submitted for
approval by the Planning/Zoning Committee.
   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION. Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil,
grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and
dispensed at retail. Uses permissible at an AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION do not
include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting,
welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work
involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent
greater than normally found IN AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATIONS. An AUTOMOTIVE
SERVICE STATION is not a repair garage nor a body shop. (See GARAGE.)
   BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly underground, but having
less than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height above the average grade
of the adjoining ground. (See CELLAR.)
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A structure having historical or architectural
character occupied as a residence by the property owner and providing overnight
accommodations and in some instances, a meal or meals to occupants. The BED AND
BREAKFAST INN provides guest accommodations of not more than three bedrooms to
guests with occupancy of one week or less. (See ROOMING HOUSE.)
   BUILDABLE AREA. The total area of the parcel minus the area within the
required front, rear and side yards.
   BUILDING. Any structure which is built for the support, shelter or enclosure
of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land. (See STRUCTURE.)
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A subordinate building or a portion of a principal
building, the use of which is incidental and customary to that of the principal
building.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory building in which the principal use of
the lot on which it is located, is conducted.
   BUILDING, TEMPORARY. A building not designed to be permanently located in
the place where it is or where it is intended to be placed or affixed.
   BULK. The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and the location of same with respect to one another, and including
the following:
      (1)   Size and height of buildings;
      (2)   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
street or to other buildings;
      (3)   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area
ratio);
      (4)   All open spaces allocated to buildings; and
      (5)   Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
   CELLAR. The portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and
having one-half or more than one-half, of its clear floor-to-ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground. (See BASEMENT.)
   CHAIN LINK FENCE. A fence constructed of chain link material and support
posts and top horizontal support piping with a height of no more than four foot
and no screening or infill material installed.
   CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE. A non-profit association of persons who are bona
fide members paying dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or portion
thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street, either residential or commercial/industrial,
intended to carry through traffic and to which several minor streets are
connected.
   CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb in front of a building or
structure measured at the center of such front. Where no CURB LEVEL has been
established, it shall be deemed to be the established level of the centerline
of the street surface in front of a building or structure, measured at the
centerline of such front.
   DAY CARE, COMMERCIAL. Any child care facilities receiving more than eight
children for day-time care during all or part of any day, or facility at which
the proprietor does not reside and which receives more than three children for
care during all or any part of a day for hire.
   DAY CARE, FAMILY. A family home in which not more than eight children are
received for day-time care during all or part of the day for hire.
   DISTRICT. A section or part of the incorporated or unincorporated portion of
the village for which the use regulations are uniform.
   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment which accommodates patrons’
automobiles on the immediate premises allowing service to the patrons in their
automobiles and/or self-service by the patrons.
   DWELLING. A residential building, or portion thereof, but not including
hotels, motels, rest homes, rooming houses, recreational vehicles, tourist
homes, or trailers.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY (APARTMENT). A detached residential building,
surrounded on all sides by open space on the same lot, designed for and
occupied by three or more families, with a number of families in residence not
exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached dwelling unit other than a mobile home,
designed for and occupied by one family only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX). A residential building containing two
dwelling units including detached and semi-detached and attached dwelling
units, designed for and occupied by two families.
      (1)   ATTACHED. A dwelling unit joint to one other dwelling unit by a
party wall.
      (2)   DETACHED. A dwelling unit in a two-family structure where both
units share a common outside entrance and interior common foyer or entry
hallway.
      (3)   SEMI-DETACHED. A dwelling unit with its own individual outside
entrance in a two-family structure where one unit is above the other.
   DWELLING UNIT. One room, or rooms connected together, constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental
or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis and, physically separated from
any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and
containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities. DWELLING UNITS are
intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one family and not more
than an aggregate of two roomers.
   FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a
group of not more than five adults not so related.
   FAMILY CARE HOME. A home housing a group of not more than eight unrelated
persons with handicap or impairment, who with assistance or supervision, reside
together in a family-type environment as a single housekeeping unit. Excluded
from this definition are current or former criminal offenders and persons whose
disability arises from current use or addiction to a controlled substance. The
persons in supervision shall be considered in addition to the handicapped or
impaired persons in determining number of occupants permitted.
   FENCE MATERIAL. Material used in the construction of a fence systems shall
be treated wood, cedar, PVC, wrought iron, aluminum, concrete, steel, vinyl,
bamboo, chain link, composite or preapproved alternative material.
   FENCE, ORNAMENTAL. A fence more than 50% open and of a decorative style.
ORNAMENTAL FENCES may not be chain link or wire construction.
   FENCE, PRIVACY. A solid fence primarily for providing privacy or visual
screening.
   FLOOD PLAIN AREA. That continuous area, adjacent to a stream or stream bed
or other natural drainage channels or areas, whose elevation is equal to or
lower than the 100-year flood elevation as established by the flood plain code
of the village.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. For the purpose of determining floor area ratio, the
floor area of a building or buildings shall be the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several floors of such building or buildings, measured from the
exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls
separating two buildings. In particular, GROSS FLOOR AREA shall include:
      (1)   Basement space, if at least one-half of the basement story height
is above the average grade of the adjoining ground;
      (2)   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
      (3)   Floor space used for mechanical equipment where the structural
headroom exceeds seven and one-half feet; except equipment, open or enclosed,
located on the roof, i.e., bulkheads, water tanks and cooling towers;
      (4)   Attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds seven and
one-half feet;
      (5)   Interior balconies and mezzanines; and
      (6)   Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breezeways.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross
floor area of a building or buildings by the total area of the lot or parcel of
land on which such building or buildings are located.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building where automotive vehicles are painted,
repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed and/or stored for compensation. (See
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION.)
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit; provided, that:
      (1)   No person other than members of a family residing on the premises
shall be engaged in such occupation;
      (2)   The use of the dwelling unit for the HOME OCCUPATION shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall
be used in the conduct of the HOME OCCUPATION;
      (3)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such HOME OCCUPATION
other than one sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, non-illuminated and
mounted flat against the wall of the principal building;
      (4)   No HOME OCCUPATION shall be conducted in any accessory building;
      (5)   There shall be no direct sales and/or rentals of products off
display shelves or racks;
      (6)   No traffic shall be generated by such HOME OCCUPATION in greater
volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any
need for parking generated by the conduct of such HOME OCCUPATION shall be met
off the street and other than in a required front yard; and
      (7)   No equipment or process shall be used in such HOME OCCUPATION which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in
a single-family residence or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other
than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no
equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference
in any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in
line voltage off the premises.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. A building or buildings designed to accommodate individual
sleeping units with no provision for cooking facilities and occupied primarily
by transient travelers. The term HOTEL includes inn and lodge. The term MOTEL
includes motor hotel, motor lodge, tourist court and similar terms.
   JUNK YARD. An open area or fenced-in enclosure where used or secondhand
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or
handled including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper,
rags, rubber tires and bottles. A JUNK YARD includes an auto-wrecking yard, but
does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.
   LANDOWNER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land. The holder of an
option or contract to purchase, a lessee having a remaining term of not less
than 40 years or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in
such land, shall be deemed to be a LANDOWNER for the purpose of this zoning
chapter.
   LODGING ROOM. A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without
cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of
rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping
accommodations shall be counted as one LODGING ROOM. In no event shall a
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE be considered a lodging room.
   LOT.
      (1)   For purposes of this chapter, a LOT is a parcel of land of at least
sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area,
and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required.
      (2)   Provided, that in no case of division or combination shall any
residual LOT or parcel be created which does not meet the requirement of this
chapter, such LOT shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an
approved private street, and may consist of:
         (a)   A single lot of record;
         (b)   A portion of a lot of record;
         (c)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; and
         (d)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds.
   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes
through front, side and rear lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
single street, the interior angle of which is 135 degrees or less.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
   LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership; except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting
street or alley, the LOT LINE shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-
of-way line.
   LOT, MOBILE HOME. The area assigned to a mobile home in a mobile home park.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office
of the County Recorder of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
   LOT, REVERSED. A lot on which the frontage is at right angles or
approximately right angles (interior angle less than 135 degrees) to the
general pattern in the area.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot defined as a lot other than a corner lot with frontage
on more than one street. THROUGH LOTS abutting two streets may be referred to
as DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot
lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front
yard; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost
points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than 80%
of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of
cul-de-sacs, where the 80% requirement shall not apply.
   MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle or similar portable structure originally
constructed with wheels, whether or not the wheels are still contained thereon,
and designed and constructed to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping
purposes.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any plot of ground upon which two or more independent
trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless
of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
   MOTEL. See HOTEL.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or premises in which freight is received
or dispatched by motor vehicle.
   NET METERING. An arrangement by which excess energy generated by a renewable
energy system is distributed back to the electrical utility grid.
   OFF-STREET LOADING. A space, accessible from a street, alley or way, in a
building or on a lot for the use of trucks while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
   PLAN. The proposal for development, including a plat of subdivision, all
covenants, grants of easement and other conditions relating to use, location
and bulk of buildings, density of development, common open space and public
facilities. That PLAN shall include such information as required by this zoning
chapter. The phrase PROVISIONS OF THE PLAN where used in this chapter shall
mean those documents, verbal or graphic, referred to in this definition.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The Rochester Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   PUBLIC SERVICE AREA. An area including such uses as fire and police
stations, telephone exchanges, radio and television transmitting and relay
stations and towers, filter plans and pumping stations and similar uses.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any camping trailer, motor home, mini-motor home,
travel trailer, truck camper, or van camper which is designed primarily not for
use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REFUSE. All waste products resulting from human habitation, except sewage.
   RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM. A system that generates energy from natural
resources such as sunlight, wind and geothermal heat. As used herein, the term
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM refers to wind energy systems and solar energy systems
only.
   REPAIR GARAGE. See GARAGE, PUBLIC.
   REST HOME (NURSING HOME). A private home for the care of children or the
aged or infirmed, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such
a home does not contain equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease
or injury, nor does it include maternity care nor care for mental illness or
mental infirmities.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY(S). The area of land between the side of the sidewalk closest
to the home on one (1) side of the street continuous to the house side of the
sidewalk on the opposite side of the street. Right-of-way may also be referred
to as “ROWS” within this chapter.
   ROOMING HOUSE (TOURIST HOME). A building, or portion thereof, containing
lodging rooms which accommodate three or more persons who are not members of
the keeper’s family, and where lodging rooms or meals, or both, are provided
for compensation.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A method of disposing of refuse by spreading and covering
with earth. Where SANITARY LANDFILL is referred to in this chapter, it shall be
construed to be a landfill meeting the regulations of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois Pollution Control Board.
   SEMI-DETACHED. See DWELLING UNIT.
   SETBACK, FRONT YARD. The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the
front line or side line of the building and nearest the street line,
disregarding steps and unroofed porches.
   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building or
other outdoor surface or piece of land; and which directs attention to an
object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business. However, a SIGN shall not include any display of official court or
public office notices nor shall it include a sign located completely within an
enclosed building unless the context shall be exposed to view from a street.
   SIGN, ADVERTISING. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment not necessarily sold upon the premises where such sign
is located or to which it is affixed.
   SIGN, BUSINESS. A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted, or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered, upon
the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
   SIGN, FLASHING. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and color at all times when
such sign is in use. For the purpose of this chapter, any moving, illuminated
sign shall be considered a FLASHING SIGN.
   SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF. The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in no case passing
through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such perimeter shall
not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of such sign and
not forming an integral part of the display.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A system that uses the power of the sun to capture,
distribute and/or store energy for on-site consumption of utility power.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-INTEGRATED. A solar energy system that is an
integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate
mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural
component of a building.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-MOUNTED. A solar energy system affixed to
either the principal or accessory structure.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED. A solar energy system that is not
attached to another structure and is affixed to the ground, or that is attached
to an antenna, light pole or other utility facility.
   SOLAR FARM ENERGY SYSTEM. A commercial solar energy system that is used to
convert sunlight to electricity for on-site or off-site use with the primary
purpose being to provide or sell wholesale or retail electricity.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above.
   STREET (AVENUE, DRIVE, PLACE, ROAD, TERRACE, PARKWAY, BOULEVARD or COURT). A
right-of-way of a required width, which affords a primary means of access to
abutting property.
   STREET LINE. The dividing line between a lot and a contiguous street.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders; or any substantial change in the roof or
exterior walls.
   STRUCTURE. Anything erected, the use of which requires a fixed location on
the ground, or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.
A sign, billboard, other advertising medium, accessory shed, residential
swimming pools with any ancillary decks and fencing, tool room or other similar
building (whether fixed in location or placed on skids) detached or projecting,
shall be construed to be a STRUCTURE.
   UNRELATED GROUP FAMILY HOME. Home for a group of not more than five
unrelated adults living together as a common household.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A subordinate use which is clearly and customarily
incidental to the principal use of a building or premises and which is located
on the same lot as the principal building or use except or such accessory
parking facilities as are specifically authorized to be located elsewhere.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Rochester.
   VILLAGE BOARD. The Village Board of Rochester.
   VILLAGE CLERK. The Village Clerk of Rochester.
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind
turbine, a tower or mounting, and associated control or conversion electronics,
which is intended primarily to reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
   YARD. An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by
building structures from ground level to the sky. A YARD extends along a line
and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line
between side lot lines.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side
yard lines. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be no REAR
YARDS, but only front and side yards.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard
to the rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to
the point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved
with the public street. In the case of through lots, SIDE YARDS shall extend
from the rear lines of front yards required. In the case of corner lots, the
yard upon which the building fronts shall be considered the front yard. The
yard facing the other street shall be considered the SIDE STREET YARD and the
yards between the corner yard and adjoining properties shall be INTERIOR SIDE
YARDS.
(2009 Code, § 40-2-2) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015; Ord. 17-24, passed 6-12-
2017; Ord. 18-19, passed 6-11-2018; Ord. 25-04, passed 1-21-2025)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.030 ALLOWABLE USES OF LAND OR BUILDINGS.
   The following uses of land or buildings listed below are allowed in the
district indicated hereinafter under the conditions specified in this chapter.
   (A)   Uses lawfully established on the effective date hereof;
   (B)   Permitted uses as designated in the regulations for each district; and
   (C)   Special uses as designated in the regulations for each district.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-1) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.031 CONTROL OVER USE.
   (A)   In all districts, after the effective date hereof, and subject to the
provisions as set out in §§
156.125 through
156.131 of this chapter on nonconforming uses:
      (1)   Any tract of land may be used;
      (2)   Any lawfully existing or new building or other structure may be
used, relocated, enlarged, converted, extended, reconstructed or altered within
the limits set forth below; and
      (3)   The use of any lawfully established existing building or other
structure or tract of land may be continued, changed, extended or enlarged.
   (B)   The above shall apply for any use of or special use allowed by the
regulations for the district in which such building or other structure, or
tract of land is located, and for no other purpose, and shall conform to all
other regulations set forth in the regulations for that district, and to all
other applicable regulations of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-2) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.032 CONTROL OVER BULK.
   All new buildings shall conform to the regulations established herein for
the district in which each building is located. Further, no existing buildings
shall be enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or relocated
in such manner as to conflict, or further conflict, with the bulk regulations
of this chapter for the district in which such building shall be located.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-3) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.033 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be compatible with the
principal uses and shall not be established prior to the establishment of the
principal use.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-4) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.034 YARDS, GENERAL.
   (A)   All yards and other open spaces allocated to a building (or group of
buildings comprising one principal use) shall be located on the same lot as
such building. The maintenance of yards and other open space and minimum lot
area legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the
owner of such building or of the property on which it is located, as long as
the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, other
open space or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of
change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, other
open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
   (B)   No improved lot shall hereafter be divided into two or more lots and
no portion of any improved lot shall be sold, unless all improved lots
resulting from each such subdivision or sale shall conform with all the
applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is
located.
   (C)   No yards, now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the
effective date of this chapter, shall subsequently be reduced below, or further
reduced if already less than the minimum yard requirements of this chapter for
equivalent new construction.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-5) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.035 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS.
   (A)   The following shall not be considered obstructions when located within
a required yard. However, on a corner lot, no permitted obstruction to
visibility is allowed within 30 feet of a zoning lot corner formed by the
intersection of any two street lines. Obstructions within 20 feet of a zoning
lot corner may be permitted where the obstruction is less than three feet high
and no less than ten feet high. Any portion of such a permitted obstruction on
a corner lot which is between three feet and ten feet in height above the
ground shall not be greater than 14 inches in diameter.
   (B)   In no case shall the following list of permitted obstructions in yards
validate permanent construction where otherwise prohibited.
      (1)   In any yard.
         (a)   Air conditioning unit;
         (b)   Arbors or trellises;
         (c)   Chimneys projecting not more than two feet into the yards;
         (d)   Fences complying with §
156.038;
         (e)   Flagpoles, not exceeding 35 feet in height;
         (f)   Ornamental light standards not over six feet in height;
         (g)   Outdoor coin telephones and booths (where permitted);
         (h)   Signs in conformance with §§
156.165 through  156.175 ;
         (i)   Steps;
         (j)   Terraces;
         (k)   Trees and shrubs; and
         (l)   Accent walls as an extension of a building, not exceeding three
feet in height.
      (2)   In any rear yard.
         (a)   Accessory noncommercial greenhouses, providing not over 150
square feet;
         (b)   Accessory off-street parking space, open or enclosed garage;
         (c)   Single accessory shed, tool room or other similar building or
structure for domestic or agricultural storage providing not over 150 square
feet;
         (d)   Children’s play equipment;
         (e)   Recreational or drying clothes yard equipment;
         (f)   Satellite dish antennas meeting the requirements of §
156.039;
         (g)   Swimming pools, private;
         (h)   Television antennas; and
         (i)   Ornamental windmills and garden furniture.
      (3)   In any front yard.
         (a)   Driveways leading to garages or accessory off-street parking
spaces located beyond the required front yard; and
         (b)   Parking for single-family or duplex residence on a driveway
leading directly to a garage or other approved accessory or off-street parking
spaces.
      (4)   In any side yards.
         (a)   Noncommercial radio and television towers and antennas;
         (b)   Open accessory off-street parking spaces, excluding carports;
and
         (c)   Satellite dish antennas meeting the requirements of §
156.039.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-6) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015; Ord. 17-24, passed 6-12-
2017)
§ 156.036 REQUIRED YARDS FOR LOTS ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   In any commercial or industrial district, where a side lot line
coincides with a side lot line or rear lot in an adjacent residential district,
a side yard shall be provided with at least the width set forth in the
following table, and in any commercial or industrial district where a rear lot
line coincides with a side lot line or rear lot line in an adjacent residential
district, a rear yard shall be provided with at least the depth set forth in
the following table:
 
District Minimum Width of Side Yard  Minimum Depth of Rear Yard
         (In Feet)                   (In Feet)
B-1      10                          25
B-2      10                          25
I-1      20                          30
I-2      20                          30
 
   (B)   No yard required by this section shall be used for storage or
processing of any kind. No side yard required by this section shall be used for
accessory off-street loading.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-7) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.037 LANDSCAPED BUFFERS OR SCREENING REQUIRED FOR LOTS BETWEEN CERTAIN
ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Newly established industrial uses adjacent or backing on residential
or business districts, or newly established business use adjacent or backing on
residential districts, or newly established multi-family uses adjacent or
backing on single-family uses shall provide and continuously maintain on that
property line a dense hedge, tree row or other similar landscape device
suitable to visually screen the differing types of adjacent uses from one
another. Failure to maintain landscaped buffers or screening shall be
considered a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Plant materials for landscaped screening shall be of general
type and size at the time of planting as follows.
      (2)   Where landscape screening is required, a plan shall be provided at
the time of submission of the zoning permit indicating the type, size, location
and spacing of plant materials to form the landscape screen:
         (a)   Evergreen trees. Juniper, fir, spruce, pine, Douglas fir. At
time of planting, evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet in height
with 20-foot spacing;
         (b)   Narrow evergreen trees. Columnar Hinoki cypress, pyramidal red
cedar, pyramidal white pine, Douglas arborvitae, columnar, juniper, Swiss stone
pine, Hatfield or Hicks yews, columnar giant, arborvitae. At time of planting,
narrow evergreens shall be a minimum of three feet in height with six-foot
spacing;
         (c)   Small trees. Flowering crab, redbud, hornbeam, magnolia,
dogwood, hawthorn, hop hornbeam. At time of planting, small trees shall be a
minimum of four feet in height with ten-foot spacing;
         (d)   Large deciduous shrubs. Honeysuckle, mock-orange, lilac,
cotoneaster, euonymus, viburnum, forsythia, rose of Sharon, privet, sumac. At
time of planting, large deciduous shrubs shall be a minimum of five feet in
height with five-foot spacing; and
         (e)   Large deciduous trees. Oak, hackberry, planetree (sycamore),
ginkgo, linden, hard maple, birch, beech, honeylocust. At time of planting,
large deciduous trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height with 30-foot
spacing.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-8) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.038 FENCES.
   (A)   Requirements in agricultural, residential districts, business and
industrial districts. All fences shall comply with the following.
      (1)   Front yard fences on interior lots. Ornamental fences not exceeding
four feet in height are permitted in front yards. Privacy fences are not
permitted.
      (2)   Side yard fences on interior and corner lots. Ornamental and
privacy side yard fences are permitted in the required side yards of interior
lots. For corner lots, ornamental and privacy side yard fences are permitted in
the required side yard on the interior lot line side. Ornamental fences not
exceeding four feet in height are permitted in the required street side yard of
a corner lot. Privacy fences are permitted on the side street side of a corner
lot providing they comply with the required yard on that street side or if no
yards are required, a setback from the side street equal to one-half the
required front yard.
      (3)   Rear yard fences. Fences not over six feet in height plus a ground
clearance at the base of the fence of three inches are permitted in the
required rear yard.
      (4)   Electrified fence. No fence may be electrified, except for
agricultural uses involving containment of livestock in properly zones areas.
      (5)   Barbed wire fence. It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct
any fence composed in whole or in part of barbed wire, or with any similar
material designed to cause injury to persons, or any wire charged with
electrical current, anywhere within a residential area or subdivision.
Industrial property may apply for a variance to allow usage of barbed wire for
security purposes to protect property. In an industrial development, if
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, a fencing system with barbed
wiring that is used for security purposes, the barbed wire system shall be a
minimum of three feet away from any public street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way or place with in commercial zoned property.
   (B)   Recognized variations of fence requirements. Application for a
variation of divisions (A)(1) to (A)(5) above shall be made in the same manner
as provided for other variations of this chapter, provided, however, that
variations shall not be entertained by the Planning and Zoning Commission or
granted by the Village Board from the requirements of divisions (C) and (D)
below, requiring fences around the enumerated sports or recreation facilities
or areas and around private outdoor pools, hot tubs and spas.
   (C)   Sports and recreational fencing. Fences erected for purposes of
providing fencing around sports or recreation facilities or areas as listed
below shall be subject to the height limitations indicated below providing the
fence is 75% open and that the fence is not within 20 feet of a zoning lot
corner formed by the intersection of any two street lines:
 
Uses                                                    Maximum Height (Feet)
Baseball diamond backstop (public or private)           16
School recreation and sports areas (public and private) 8
Swimming pools (public)                                 8
Tennis court (public or private)                        12
 
   (D)   Private outdoor pools, hot tubs and spas. Fences built around pools,
hot tubs and spas containing more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth shall be
completely surrounded by a fence. Such fence shall be at least 48 inches in
height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away
from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-
latching. Where the self-latching device is less than 42 inches (1,372 mm)
above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the
pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained
such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open
position of six inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure
shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its
effectiveness as a safety barrier.
   (E)   Outdoor liquor sales. The holder of a liquor license outdoor permit
must surround its outdoor premises with a fence meeting the following
conditions.
      (1)   A permanent privacy fence made of wood or other approved and
similar material, and when erected not less than six feet in height from the
sidewalk or ground level shall be erected.
      (2)   The fence shall be designed in such a manner so that the vision of
a person on either side of the fence is obscured when viewing through the
fence. The fence shall be constructed in accordance with this section of the
village code.
      (3)   The fencing shall be positioned between the area in which alcoholic
liquor can be consumed outside and any adjoining residential, village or
commercial property.
   (F)   Protective treatment. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-
resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or
other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint
shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All metal surfaces subject to rust
or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all
surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit
future rust and corrosion.
   (G)   Permits. Permits must be issued for all fences. The village shall
create a permit application for fences. The village reserves the right, in its
sole discretion, to rescind the permit and remove any fence that is blocking or
impacting the drainage and utility access through a village easement. If a
permit is denied, the denial may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning
Commission as provided in the village code. The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall present their recommendation whether to reverse or uphold the permit
denial to the Village Board of Trustees for their final decision in accordance
with existing village code.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-9) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015; Ord. 17-24, passed 6-12-
2017; Ord. 23-22, passed 9-11-2023)
§ 156.039 SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS.
   (A)   In any residential zoning district, ground-mounted satellite dish
antennas up to 12 feet in diameter may be permitted subject to the following
criteria.
      (1)   All installations may be located within the buildable area of the
lot, or as a permitted obstruction in side or rear yards according to §
156.035.
      (2)   All possible effort shall be made in setting location antennas to
prevent obstruction of the antenna’s reception window from potential permitted
development on adjoining properties.
      (3)   All installations shall employ (to the extent possible) materials
and colors that blend with the surroundings.
      (4)   All installations shall include landscape screening treatments
located along the antenna’s non-reception window axes and low-level ornamental
landscape treatments along the reception window axes of the antenna’s base.
Such treatments shall completely enclose the antenna.
   (B)   In any rural or residential zoning district, roof-mounted satellite
dish antennas up to 12 feet in diameter may be permitted by special use,
subject to the following criteria.
      (1)   Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with division (A)(1)
and (A)(2) above would result in the obstruction of the antenna’s reception
window; furthermore, such obstruction involves factors beyond the control of
the applicant.
      (2)   The height of the proposed installation does not exceed the maximum
height restriction imposed upon primary uses within the district.
      (3)   All applications must include certification by a licensed engineer
that the proposed method of roof-mounted installation meets engineering
criteria and that the buildings support structure is adequate to sustain
resulting loads and that all applicable codes are met.
   (C)   In any commercial or industrial zoning district, ground-mounted
satellite dish antennas up to 12 meters in diameter may be permitted subject to
the following criteria.
      (1)   All installations shall comply with the maximum height restrictions
imposed upon primary uses.
      (2)   All installations exceeding 12 feet in diameter shall be screened
with landscape screening from any adjoining residentially zoned land. Such
screening can be waived if the antenna is set back a distance at least five
times its diameter from the residentially zones parcel.
      (3)   All applications for building permits must include certification by
a licensed engineer that the proposed installation meet engineering criteria
and all applicable codes.
      (4)   All accessory-use installations may be located as a permitted
obstruction to any required yards as indicated in §
156.035.
   (D)   In any commercial or industrial zoning district, roof-mounted
satellite dish antennas up to 12 meters in diameter may be permitted by special
exception subject to the following criteria.
      (1)   Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with the applicable
yard, setback and height restrictions would result in the obstruction of the
antenna’s reception window; furthermore, such obstruction involves factors
beyond the applicant’s control.
      (2)   The height of the proposed installation does not exceed the maximum
height restriction imposed for primary uses within the district.
      (3)   All application must include certification by a licensed engineer
that the proposed method of roof-mounted installation meets engineering
criteria so that the building support structure is adequate to sustain
resulting loads and that all applicable codes are met. Furthermore, written
documentation of such compliance including load distributions within the
building’s support structure, shall be furnished.
      (4)   Those criteria relating to all special uses listed in §§
156.205 through
156.209 shall apply.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-10) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.040 FLOOD PLAIN AREA.
   No building or structure shall be erected or no fill placed in the flood
plain area, except in compliance with the village flood plain regulations in
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-11) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.041 ANNEXATIONS; PROCEDURE FOR ZONING.
   All land which may hereafter become a part of the village as a result of
annexation shall be classified and placed in the R-S Zoning District, after
which it can, after review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, be reclassified following the procedures for hearing and approving
amendments to this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-12) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.042 PETITIONS FOR ANNEXATION; FILING FEE.
   A filing fee in the amount of $75 shall be paid by a petitioner or
petitioners, whichever the case may be, on each and every petition for
annexation to the village, under the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/7-1-8, and any
amendments thereto. Said annexation filing fee in the amount of $75 shall be
paid by the petitioner or petitioners at the time that the original petition
for annexation is filed with the Village Clerk. No petition for annexation
shall be considered by the Board of Trustees of the village under the
provisions of the above referred to state statute, until said filing fee has
been paid to the Village Clerk pursuant to this section.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-13) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.043 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Exception to use regulations. The following uses are exempted by this
chapter and permitted by easement in any district: poles; wires; cables;
conduits; vaults; laterals; pipes; mains; valves or any other similar
distributing equipment for telephone; or other communication and electric
power, gas, water and sewer lines.
   (B)   Exceptions to height regulations. The height limitations of this
chapter shall not apply to the following structures: cooling towers; church
spires; or any portion of the church structure not intended for human
occupancy; belfries; cupolas; elevator bulkheads; and domes; or other
structures or portions thereof not intended for human occupancy, monuments,
water towers, derricks, conveyors.
   (C)   Fences.
      (1)   In accordance with §
156.038, zoning permits may be issued for fences, whether ornamental or
privacy, and any portable or moveable building in any easement owned or
utilized by the village, including for drainage, utilities or any other purpose
provided such fence or building does not block, impede, or negatively impact
drainage and utility access through the easement and such use is otherwise
allowed and in compliance with the provisions of the zoning code and any other
applicable village ordinance.
      (2)   The village reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to rescind
the zoning certificate and remove any fence and any portable or moveable
building that is blocking or impacting the drainage and utility access through
a village easement. The village shall be responsible for the costs of removing
the fence or building, but no compensation or other reimbursement shall be owed
or paid by the village.
      (3)   If a zoning certificate is denied, the denial may be appealed to
the Planning and Zoning Commission as provided in this subchapter. A decision
to reverse the denial of a zoning certificate shall be based on whether the
applicant proves the construction of the fence or moveable building will not
impair or negatively impact the village’s need to access or utilize the
easement.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall present its recommendation
whether to reverse or uphold the zoning certificate denial to the Village Board
of Trustees for its final decision in accordance with existing village code.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-14) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015; Ord. 17-24, passed 6-12-
2017)
§ 156.044 INCORPORATION OF ZONING MAP.
   The location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are
set forth on the zoning district map, which is hereby incorporated as part of
this chapter by reference. The zoning map, including all amendments thereto,
shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described
herein. Said map shall be filed with the office of the Village Clerk and shall
be made available to public reference at all times during which those offices
are open.
(2009 Code, § 40-3-15)
§ 156.045 WIND AND SOLAR RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A) General requirements. The requirements set forth in this section shall
govern the construction and/or installation of all renewable energy systems
governed by this chapter.
      (1)   Applicability. The provisions of this section are intended to
establish parameters by which solar energy systems may be installed in the
village. Wind energy systems and solar farm energy systems are not permitted.
Additional renewable energy installations not addressed explicitly herein may
be authorized, subject to compliance with the applicable building codes and
standards of the village.
      (2)   Use. Except as authorized by the Board of Trustees for public
utility purposes, a renewable energy system shall be accessory to the principal
permitted use of a site.
      (3)   Approvals. Approval granted to an individual property owner for a
renewable energy system under the provisions of this section shall not be
construed to bar owners or tenants of any adjacent property from ordinary or
permitted building, landscaping or other accessory improvements, even if such
improvements may diminish the function of said renewable energy system.
      (4)   Permitting and installation.
         (a)   A village building permit is required prior to the installation
of any renewable energy system.
         (b)   Before a building permit is issued, the following shall be
submitted to the village for review:
            1.   A site plan showing:
               a.   Name, address and phone number of the property owner;
               b.   Property lines;
               c.   All structures;
               d.   Septic field;
               e.   Setback lines;
               f.   Location of all solar panels and associated equipment; and
               g.   Location of the electrical disconnect for the solar energy
system.
            2.   Evidence that the local electric utility has been informed of
the customer’s intent to install a customer-owned solar energy system;
            3.   Evidence that the site plan has been submitted to the local
fire protection district; and
            4.   Evidence that proper warning signage has been located to
inform utilities of solar panels that are present on site.
         (c)   The owner of a renewable energy system shall ensure that it is
installed and maintained in compliance with applicable building and safety
codes adopted by the village and any other state or federal agency of
applicable jurisdiction.
         (d)   All wiring associated with a renewable energy system shall be
underground or contained within a raceway that complements the building
materials of the principal structure.
      (5)   Interconnection with public utilities - electric.
         (a)   Energy produced by a renewable energy system shall be utilized
on site, except for net metering as authorized by the village and other
applicable regulatory agencies required by law.
         (b)   The interconnection of any renewable energy system to the
electric distribution grid shall be in accordance with applicable regulatory
agencies required by law.
      (6)   Illumination of a renewable energy system. Illumination of a
renewable energy system shall be prohibited.
      (7)   Signage. No signage or attention-getting device is permitted on any
renewable energy system.
      (8)   Screening. There shall be no required physical screening for
renewable energy systems installed on roofs.
      (9)   Screening. There shall be required physical screening for renewable
energy systems installed on grade. Screening shall comply with privacy fence
regulations in §
156.038.
   (B)   Solar energy systems.
      (1)   Authorization of use.
         (a)   Building-integrated, building-mounted and ground-mounted solar
energy systems may be authorized administratively in all zoning districts in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and subject to approval by the
village or it designees.
      (2)   Height.
         (a)   Building-mounted solar energy system. A building-mounted solar
energy system may not extend above the peak roof height of the building to
which the solar energy systems is affixed.
         (b)   Ground-mounted solar energy system. The maximum height of a
ground-mounted solar energy system shall be six feet as measured from the
average grade at the base of the pole to the highest edge of the system.
      (3)   Location.
         (a)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be located within
the required front yard or corner side yard or in any utility, water, sewer or
other type of public easement.
         (b)   All parts of any ground-mounted solar energy system shall be set
back at least ten feet from the interior side and rear property lines.
         (c)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 20% of the
required rear or backyard.
   (C)   Maintenance and removal of renewable energy systems.
      (1)   Renewable energy systems must be maintained in good repair and
operable condition at all times, including compliance with all standards in
applicable building and technical codes to ensure structural and technical
integrity of such facilities, except for maintenance and repair outages. If a
system becomes inoperable or damaged, operations must cease and be promptly
remedied.
      (2)   If the village determines that a renewable energy system fails to
comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter, the village shall
provide written notification to the property owner. The property owner shall
have a period of 90 days from the date of notification to either restore the
renewable energy system to operation or remove the system.
      (3)   In the event such renewable energy system is not brought into
compliance with this chapter within the specified time period, the village may
remove or cause the removal of said facility at the property owner’s expense.
      (4)   The village may pursue any and all available legal remedies to
ensure that a renewable energy system which fails to comply with this chapter.
      (5)   Any delay by the village in taking enforcement action against the
owner of a renewable energy system and the owner of the property if such owner
is different from the owner of such facility, shall not waive the village’s
right to take any action at a later time.
      (6)   The village may seek to have the renewable energy system removed
regardless of the owner’s or operator’s intent for said facility, and
regardless of any permits that may have been issued or granted.
      (7)   After the renewable energy system is removed, the owner of the
subject property shall promptly restore the subject property to a condition
consistent with the property’s condition prior to the installation of the
system. Installation shall comply subject to current codes.
   (D)   Severability. If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this section is held invalid or unconstitutional for any reason by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such judgment shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.
   (E)   Conflicts resolved. This section supersedes all chapters or parts of
ordinances adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
(Ord. 18-19, passed 6-11-2018)
§ 156.046 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Nuisance Declared; Penalties Adopted. The use, parking, or storage of
recreational vehicles in a manner that does not conform with this section is
hereby declared a nuisance, and is subject to the fines and penalties outlined
in section 156.999 of this code.
   (B)   Use of Recreational Vehicles Limited.
      (1)   Recreational Vehicles shall not be used for living, sleeping, or
housekeeping purposes while located within village boundaries.
      (2)   Recreational vehicles shall not be connected to sewer, water, or
other utilities for any period, except for temporary service connections for
basic maintenance.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to serve as an Accessory
Use for any Lot within the village.
   (C)   Storage of Recreational Vehicles Limited.
      (1)   Recreational Vehicles shall be owned, leased, or rented by the
occupant of the property on which the recreational vehicles are parked and/or
stored.
      (2)   Recreational Vehicles, including attachments and appurtenances,
shall not encroach into Public Property.
      (3)   No more than one (1) Recreational Vehicle may be parked and/or
stored on a lot.
      (4)   Recreational Vehicles shall not be permitted on a lot that does not
contain a Principal Building.
      (5)   Recreational Vehicles may be kept within an enclosed Accessory
Building, provided that the Accessory Building is in conformity with the
requirements of
156.033 (Accessory Building Structures and Uses).
      (6)   Recreational Vehicles parking or storage is allowed on a Side Yard
and/or Rear Yard, provided no portion of the Recreation Vehicles extends beyond
the Front Yard Setback and said parking or storage is in an area that complies
with the requirements of section 156.046(C)(8), below. Recreational Vehicle
parking or storage is not allowed on a Side Street Yard.
      (7)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary.
Recreational Vehicle parking or storage is not allowed on any portion of the
Lot such that any portion of the Recreational Vehicle extends beyond a Street
Line or into a Right-of-Way.
      (8)   Recreational Vehicles must be parked and/or stored on an improved
subgrade that is equal in length and width to the Recreational Vehicle being
parked and/or stored.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary,
Recreational Vehicle parking or storage is not allowed on the portion of any
driveway between the Right-of-Way and the Front Yard Setback for a period
exceeding seven (7) calendar days.
(Ord. 25-04, passed 1-21-2025)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 156.060 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, the following zoning
districts are hereby established:
District Designation
District                              Designation
Agricultural District                 A-1
Residential Suburban District         R-S
Medium Density Residential District   R-1
Duplex Housing Residential District   R-2
Multi-Family Residential District     R-4
Multi-Family Residential District     R-5
General Business District             B-1
Highway and Service Business District B-2
Light Industrial District             I-1
Heavy Industrial District             I-2
 
(2009 Code, § 40-4-1) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.061 ZONING MAP.
   The location and boundaries of such districts established by this chapter
are shown on the zoning district map, which map is hereby incorporated and by
reference made a part hereof, a copy of which is on file at the Village Clerk’s
office.
(2009 Code, § 40-4-2) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015 ; Ord. 20-07, passed 4-13-
2020 )
§ 156.062 ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS.
   Unless otherwise specified, all streets, alleys and public ways shall be
considered as being in the same zoning district as is abutting land. If a
street, alley or public way which has served as the zoning line shall be
vacated, such zoning boundary shall remain in the center of the vacation.
(2009 Code, § 40-4-3) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.063 INTERPRETATION OF ZONING BOUNDARY LINES.
   Where uncertainty arises as to the location of zoning district lines, as
indicated on the zoning maps, the following shall apply.
   (A)   Zoning district lines generally following streets, alleys or public
ways shall be construed as being on the centerline of such ways unless
otherwise indicated.
   (B)   Zoning district lines generally following lot lines shall be construed
as being located on lot lines.
   (C)   Zoning district lines generally following village limit lines shall be
construed as the village limit line.
   (D)   Zoning district lines generally following streams or watercourses
shall be construed as the centerline of that stream or watercourse.
   (E)   Where a subdivided lot held in single ownership and being a lot of
record of the date of adoption of this chapter is indicated as being divided by
a zoning boundary, the entirety of such lot shall be in the district with the
most intensive permitted types of uses. The order of intensity of types of
permitted uses from the least intensive to the most intensive shall be in the
same order as §
156.060.
   (F)   Where unsubdivided property is indicated as being divided by a zoning
boundary, the actual location of the boundary shall be determined by use of the
scale contained on the map.
   (G)   Where physical or natural features at the site are at variance with
the zoning map, or in cases where the location of the zoning district line is
not clarified by the foregoing, the Board of Appeals shall interpret the
location of the zoning district line.
(2009 Code, § 40-4-4) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 156.075 A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   The A-1 Agricultural District is designed to accommodate and protect
agricultural and related uses as well as other uses commonly found in
agricultural or rural areas.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Agricultural uses;
      (2)   Agricultural produce sales including auction and wholesale
establishments for produce;
      (3)   Single-family detached dwellings;
      (4)   Churches;
      (5)   Day care, family;
      (6)   Electric and telephone substations;
      (7)   Elementary and high schools;
      (8)   Grain elevators and storage;
      (9)   Nurseries, non-retail greenhouses;
      (10)   Parks and recreation areas, public and private;
      (11)   Public service areas;
      (12)   Riding stables; and
      (13)   Wildlife game preserves.
   (B)   Special uses. Following are permitted as special uses subject to the
public hearing and other special use procedure requirements outlined in §§
156.205 through
156.209:
      (1)   Airports and landing fields;
      (2)   Bed and breakfast inns;
      (3)   Boarding house;
      (4)   Cemeteries including mausoleums or crematories;
      (5)   Colleges, junior colleges, universities;
      (6)   Day care, commercial;
      (7)   Fairgrounds;
      (8)   Family care homes;
      (9)   Golf courses;
      (10)   Hospitals and sanitariums;
      (11)   Nursing and rest homes;
      (12)   Religious institutions other than churches;
      (13)   Sanitary landfills;
      (14)   Slaughter houses;
      (15)   Telephone, radio, television transmitters or radio stations; and
      (16)   Unrelated group family homes.
   (C)   Required lot area and width. All new buildings erected or structurally
enlarged shall be on a lot of not less than one acre and a lot width at the
building line of not less than 200 feet. This requirement may be varied for
nonconforming lots of record as outlined in §
156.126.
   (D)   Required yard areas. Every building hereafter erected or structurally
enlarged within the A-1 Agricultural District shall provide or maintain the
following yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard. Thirty feet.
      (2)   Side yard.
         (a)   No side yard of less than eight feet; and
         (b)   For the side street side of a corner lot, a minimum yard of not
less than 30 feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. One hundred feet. Corner lots will not be considered to
have rear yards, but only front and side yards.
   (E)   Building height. No limits are imposed on a building height within the
A-1 Agricultural District.
   (F)   Floor area ratio. No building shall be erected or structurally
enlarged to provide a floor area ratio exceeding twenty one-hundredths.
   (G)   Required off-street parking. Required off-street parking shall be as
provided in §§
156.185 through
156.192.
(2009 Code, § 40-5-1) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.076 R-S RESIDENTIAL SUBURBAN DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-S Residential Suburban District is to provide for a
low-density single-family residential district.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached structures;
      (2)   Churches;
      (3)   Day care, family;
      (4)   Home occupation;
      (5)   Public open space including customary public parks;
      (6)   Schools, public, denominational or private accommodating nursery,
elementary, or high school grades with adjacent playgrounds and athletic
fields, dormitories and other accessory uses required for operation;
      (7)   Seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious
institutions including dormitories and other accessory uses required for
operation;
      (8)   Temporary buildings or trailers at construction site but only
during period of construction; and
      (9)   Accessory uses.
   (B)   Special uses. Following are permitted as special uses subject to the
public hearing and other special use procedure requirements outlined in §§
156.205 through
156.209:
      (1)   Agricultural uses;
      (2)   Bed and breakfast inns;
      (3)   Boarding house;
      (4)   Cemeteries including mausoleums or crematories;
      (5)   Colleges or universities;
      (6)   Day care, commercial;
      (7)   Electric and telephone substations;
      (8)   Family care homes;
      (9)   Filtration plants, sewage treatment plants, dumping stations and
water reservoirs;
      (10)   Libraries;
      (11)   Nurseries, not including greenhouses;
      (12)   Police and fire stations;
      (13)   Public and private outdoor recreation centers including accessory
buildings and structures for administration, operation and maintenance, and
club house or pavilion facilities including sale of food and soft drinks; and
      (14)   Unrelated group family homes.
   (C)   Required lot area and width. All buildings erected or structurally
enlarged in the R-S Residential Suburban District shall be on a lot of not less
than 14,500 square feet and have a lot width at the building line of not less
than 90 feet.
   (D)   Required yard areas. All buildings erected or structurally enlarged in
the R-S Residential Suburban District shall provide or maintain the following
minimum yards.
      (1)   Front yard. Thirty feet.
      (2)   Side yard.
         (a)   No side yard of less than eight feet; and
         (b)   For the side street side of a corner lot, a minimum yard of not
less than 30 feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. Fifteen feet. Corner lots will not be considered to have
rear yards, but only front and side yards.
   (E)   Building heights. No building hereafter erected or structurally
enlarged shall exceed 35 feet in height.
   (F)   Floor area ratio. No building shall hereafter be erected or
structurally enlarged to provide a floor area ratio exceeding thirty-one-
hundredths.
   (G)   Required off-street parking. Required off-street parking shall be as
provided in §§
156.185 through
156.192.
(2009 Code, § 40-5-2) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.077 R-1 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-1 Residential District is to accommodate single-family
detached residential structures at a medium density, primarily in the developed
portions of the community existing at the date of this chapter.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
         (1)   Single-family detached structures;
         (2)   Churches;
         (3)   Day care, family;
         (4)   Home occupation;
         (5)   Public open space including customary public parks;
         (6)   Schools, public, denominational or private accommodating
nursery, elementary, or high school grades with adjacent playgrounds and
athletic fields, dormitories and other accessory uses required for operations;
         (7)   Seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious
institutions including dormitories and other accessory uses required for
operation;
         (8)   Temporary buildings or trailers at construction site but only
during period of construction; and
      (9)   Accessory uses.
   (B)   Special uses. Following are permitted as special uses subject to the
public hearing and other special use procedure requirements outlined in §§
156.205 through
156.209:
      (1)   Bed and breakfast inns;
      (2)   Boarding houses;
      (3)   Cemeteries including mausoleums or crematories;
      (4)   Colleges or universities;
      (5)   Day care, commercial;
      (6)   Electric and telephone substations;
      (7)   Family care homes;
      (8)   Filtration plants, sewage treatment plants, dumping stations and
water reservoirs;
      (9)   Libraries;
      (10)   Nurseries, not including greenhouses;
      (11)   Police and fire stations;
      (12)   Public and private outdoor recreation centers including accessory
buildings and structures for administration, operation, and maintenance, and
club house or pavilion facilities including sale of food and soft drinks; and
      (13)   Unrelated group family homes.
   (C)   Required lot area and width. All buildings erected or structurally
enlarged in the R-1 Medium Density Residential District shall have the
following minimum lot areas and lot widths at the building line:
         (1)   Interior lots. Minimum lot area of not less than 10,200 square
feet and a width at the building line of not less than 85 feet; and
         (2)   Corner lots. Minimum lot area of not less than 12,000 square
feet and a width at the building line of not less than 100 feet.
   (D)   Required yard areas. All buildings erected or structurally enlarged in
the R-1 Medium Density Residential District shall provide or maintain the
following minimum yards.
         (1)   Front yard. Twenty-five feet.
         (2)   Side yard.
            (a)   No side yard of less than eight feet; and
            (b)   For the side street side of a corner lot, a minimum yard of
not less than 25 feet.
         (3)   Rear yard. Ten feet. Corner lots will not be considered to have
rear yards, but only front and side yards.
   (E)   Building height. No building hereafter erected or structurally
enlarged shall exceed 35 feet in height.
   (F)   Floor area ratio. No building shall hereafter be erected or
structurally enlarged to provide a floor area ratio exceeding thirty one-
hundredths.
   (G)   Required off-street parking. Required off-street parking shall be as
provided in §§
156.185 through
156.192.
(2009 Code, § 40-5-3) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.078 R-2 DUPLEX HOUSING DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-2 Duplex Housing District is to accommodate a variety
of housing types including detached and duplex structures.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached structures;
      (2)   Two-family dwelling units;
      (3)   Two-family attached dwelling units either with common ownership, or
fee ownership of the land and building severed to constitute two individually
owned units;
      (4)   Churches;
      (5)   Home occupation;
      (6)   Libraries;
      (7)   Public open space including customary public parks;
      (8)   Schools, public, denominational or private accommodating nursery,
elementary or high school grades with adjacent playgrounds and athletic fields,
dormitories and other accessory uses required for operation;
      (9)   Seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious
institutions including dormitories and other accessory uses required for
operation;
      (10)   Temporary buildings or trailers at construction site but only
during period of construction; and
      (11)   Accessory uses.
   (B)   Special uses. Following are permitted as special uses subject to the
public hearing and other special use procedure requirements outlined in §§
156.205 through
156.209:
      (1)   Bed and breakfast inns;
      (2)   Boarding houses;
      (3)   Cemeteries including mausoleums or crematories;
      (4)   Colleges or universities;
      (5)   Day care, commercial;
      (6)   Day care, family;
      (7)   Electric and telephone substations;
      (8)   Family care homes;
      (9)   Filtration plants, sewage treatment plants, dumping stations, and
water reservoirs;
      (10)   Police and fire stations;
      (11)   Public and private outdoor recreation centers including accessory
buildings and structures for administration, operation and maintenance, and
club house or pavilion facilities including sale of food and soft drinks; and
      (12)   Unrelated group family homes.
   (C)      Required lot area and width. All buildings erected or structurally
enlarged in the R-2 Duplex Housing District shall have the following minimum
lot areas and lot widths at the building line:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings on the interior lot. Lot area of not less
than 10,200 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less
than 85 feet;
      (2)   Single-family dwelling on corner lot. Lot area of not less than
12,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than
100 feet;
      (3)   Two-family dwelling on interior lot. Lot area of not less than
12,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than
100 feet. Each lot, if ownership is to be severed, to occupy an area of not
less than 5,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not
less than 35 feet;
      (4)   Two-family dwelling on corner lot. Lot area of not less than 14,400
square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than 120 feet.
Each lot, if ownership is to be severed, to occupy an area of not less than
5,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than 35
feet;
      (5)   Two-family dwelling on corner lot. Lot area of not less than 14,400
square feet and a lot width of not less than 120 feet; and
      (6)   Two-family attached individual dwelling unit on corner lot
qualified for separate ownership. Each dwelling unit, if ownership is to be
severed, to occupy an area of not less than 8,400 square feet and a lot width
at the building line of not less than 70 feet.
   (D)   Required yard areas. All buildings erected or structurally enlarged in
the R-2 Duplex Housing District shall provide or maintain the following minimum
yards.
      (1)   Front yard. Twenty-five feet.
      (2)   Side yard.
         (a)   No side yard of less than eight feet;
         (b)   For the side street side of a corner lot, a minimum yard of not
less than 25 feet; and
         (c)   Two-family attached individual dwelling unit: no required side
yard on attached side of individual dwelling unit.
      (3)   Rear yard. Twenty feet. Corner lots will not be considered to have
rear yards but only front and side yards.
   (E)      Building height. No building hereafter erected or structurally
enlarged shall exceed 35 feet in height.
   (F)      Floor area ratio. No building shall be erected or structurally
enlarged to provide a floor area ratio exceeding four-tenths.
   (G)      Required off-street parking. Required off-street parking shall be
as provided in §§
156.185 through
156.192.
(2009 Code, § 40-5-4) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.079 R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY HOUSING DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-4 Multiple-Family Housing District is to accommodate
housing types including detached and multiple-family structures of no more than
four dwelling units in a single structure.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached structures;
      (2)   Two-family attached dwelling units either with common ownership, or
fee ownership of the land and building severed to constitute two individually
owned units;
      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings of no more than four dwelling units in a
single structure with the number of families in residence not to exceed the
number of dwelling units provided;
      (4)   Churches;
      (5)   Home occupations;
      (6)   Libraries;
      (7)   Public open spaces including customary public parks;
      (8)   Schools, public, denominational or private accommodating nursery,
elementary or high school grades with adjacent playgrounds and athletic fields,
dormitories and other accessory uses required for operation;
      (9)   Seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious
institutions including dormitories and other accessory uses required for
operation;
      (10)   Temporary buildings or trailers at construction site but only
during period of construction; and
      (11)   Accessory uses.
   (B)   Special uses.
      (1)   Bed and breakfast inns;
      (2)   Boarding houses;
      (3)   Cemeteries including mausoleums or crematories;
      (4)   Colleges or universities;
      (5)   Day care, commercial;
      (6)   Day care, family;
      (7)   Electric and telephone substations;
      (8)   Family care homes;
      (9)   Filtration plants, sewage treatment plants, dumping stations and
water reservoirs;
      (10)   Nurseries, not including greenhouses;
      (11)   Nursing homes and rest homes;
      (12)   Police and fire stations;
      (13)   Public and private outdoor recreation centers, including accessory
buildings and structures for administration, operation, and maintenance, and
club house or pavilion facilities including sale of food and soft drinks; and
      (14)   Unrelated group family homes.
   (C)      Required lot area and width. All buildings erected or structurally
enlarged in the R-4 Multiple-Family Housing District shall have the following
minimum lot areas and lot widths at the building line:
      (1)      Single-family dwelling on interior lot. Lot area of not less
than 10,200 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less
than 85 feet;
      (2)      Single-family dwelling on corner lot. Lot area of not less than
12,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than
100 feet;
      (3)      Two-family dwelling on interior lot. Lot area of not less than
12,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than
100 feet. Each lot, if ownership is to be severed, to occupy an area of not
less than 5,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not
less than 35 feet;
      (4)      Two-family dwelling on corner lot. Lot area of not less than
14,400 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than
120 feet. Each lot, if ownership is to be severed, to occupy an area of not
less than 5,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not
less than 35 feet;
      (5)      Two-family dwelling on corner lot. Lot area of not less than
14,400 square feet and a lot width at the building line of not less than 120
feet;
      (6)      Two-family attached individual dwelling unit on corner lot
qualified for separate ownership. Each dwelling unit, if ownership is to be
severed, to occupy an area of not less than 8,400 square feet and a lot width
at the building line of not less than 70 feet;
      (7)      Multiple-family dwelling on interior lot. Lot area of not less
than 12,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less
than 100 feet; and
      (8)      Multiple-family dwelling on corner lot. Lot area of not less
than 14,400 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less
than 120 feet.
   (D)      Required yard areas. All buildings erected or structurally enlarged
in the R-4 Multiple-Family Housing District shall provide or maintain the
following minimum yards.
      (1)   Front yard. Twenty-five feet.
      (2)   Side yard.
         (a)   No side yard of less than eight feet;
         (b)   For the side street side of a corner lot, a minimum yard of not
less than 25 feet;
         (c)   Two-family attached individual dwelling unit: no required side
yard on attached side of individual dwelling unit; and
         (d)   Multiple-family dwelling: no side yard of less than ten feet.
For a street side yard of a corner lot, a minimum side yard of 25 feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. Twenty feet. Corner lots will not be considered to have
rear yards but only front and side yards.
   (E)      Building height. No building for a two-family dwelling unit with
severed ownership shall be erected or structurally enlarged shall exceed 35
feet in height.
   (F)      Floor area ratio. No building shall be erected or structurally
enlarged to provide a floor area ratio exceeding 0.75. No building for a two-
family dwelling unit with severed ownership shall be erected or structurally
enlarged to provide a floor ratio exceeding 0:4.
   (G)      Required off-street parking. Required off-street parking shall be
as provided in §§
156.185 through
156.192.
(2009 Code, § 40-5-5) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.080 R-5 MULTIPLE-FAMILY HOUSING DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the R-5 Multiple-Family Housing District is to accommodate
housing types including detached, duplex and multiple-family structures.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached structures;
      (2)   Two-family dwelling units either with common ownership, or fee
ownership of the land and building severed to constitute two individually owned
units;
      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings;
      (4)   Churches;
      (5)   Home occupations;
      (6)   Libraries;
      (7)   Public open spaces including customary public parks;
      (8)   Schools, public, denominational or private accommodating nursery,
elementary or high school grades with adjacent playgrounds and athletic fields,
dormitories and other accessory uses required for operation;
      (9)   Seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious
institutions including dormitories and other accessory uses required for
operation;
      (10)   Temporary buildings or trailers at construction site but only
during period of construction; and
      (11)   Accessory uses.
   (B)   Special uses.
      (1)   Bed and breakfast inns;
      (2)   Boarding houses;
      (3)   Cemeteries including mausoleums or crematories;
      (4)   Colleges or universities;
      (5)   Day care, commercial;
      (6)   Day care, family;
      (7)   Electric and telephone substations;
      (8)   Family care homes;
      (9)   Filtration plants, sewage treatment plants, dumping stations and
water reservoirs;
      (10)   Nurseries, not including greenhouses;
      (11)   Nursing homes and rest homes;
      (12)   Police and fire stations; and
      (13)   Public and private outdoor recreation centers, including accessory
buildings and structures for administration, operation and maintenance, and
club house or pavilion facilities including sale of food and soft drinks.
   (C)   Required lot area and width. All buildings erected or structurally
enlarged in the R-5 Multiple-Family Housing District shall have the following
minimum lot areas and lot widths at the building line:
      (1)   Single-family dwelling on interior lot. Lot area of not less than
10,200 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than 85
feet;
      (2)   Single-family dwelling on corner lot. Lot area of not less than
12,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than
100 feet;
      (3)   Two-family dwelling on interior lot. Lot area of not less than
12,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than
100 feet. Each lot, if ownership is to be severed, to occupy an area of not
less than 5,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not
less than 35 feet;
      (4)   Two-family dwelling on corner lot. Lot area of not less than 14,400
square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than 120 feet.
Each lot, if ownership is to be severed, to occupy an area of not less than
5,000 square feet and a minimum width at the building line of not less than 35
feet;
      (5)   Two-family dwelling on corner lot. Lot area of not less than 14,400
square feet and a lot width at the building line of not less than 120 feet;
      (6)   Two-family attached individual dwelling unit on corner lot
qualified for separate ownership. Each dwelling unit, if ownership is to be
severed, to occupy an area of not less than 8,400 square feet and a lot width
at the building line of not less than 70 feet;
      (7)   Multiple-family dwelling of four dwelling units or less on interior
lot. Lot area of not less than 12,000 square feet and a minimum width at the
building line of not less than 100 feet;
      (8)   Multiple-family dwelling of four dwelling units or less on corner
lot. Lot area of not less than 14,400 square feet and a minimum width at the
building line of not less than 120 feet;
      (9)   Multiple-family dwelling of greater than four dwelling units on
interior lot. Lot area of not less than 15,000 square feet or 3,000 square feet
per dwelling unit, whichever is greater, and a minimum width at the building
line of not less than 100 feet; and
      (10)   Multiple-family dwelling of greater than four dwelling units on
corner lot. Lot area of not less than 18,000 square feet or 3,000 square feet
per dwelling unit, whichever is greater, and a minimum width at the building
line of not less than 120 feet.
   (D)   Required yard areas. All buildings erected or structurally enlarged in
the R-5 Multiple-Family Housing District shall provide or maintain the
following minimum yards.
      (1)   Front yard. Twenty-five feet.
      (2)   Side yard.
         (a)   No side yard of less than eight feet;
         (b)   For the side street side of a corner lot, a minimum yard of not
less than 25 feet;
         (c)   Two-family attached individual dwelling unit on interior lot: no
required side yard on attached side of individual dwelling unit; and
         (d)   Multiple-family dwelling of three or more dwelling units: no
side yard of less than ten feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. Twenty feet. Corner lots will not be considered to have
rear yards but only front and side yards.
   (E)   Building height. No buildings erected or structurally enlarged shall
exceed 45 feet in height. No building for a two-family dwelling unit with
severed ownership shall be erected or structurally enlarged shall exceed 35
feet in height.
   (F)   Floor area ratio. No building shall be erected or structurally
enlarged to provide a floor area ratio exceeding 1.0. No building for a two-
family dwelling unit with severed ownership shall be erected or structurally
enlarged to provide a floor ratio exceeding 0:4.
   (G)   Required off-street parking. Required off-street parking shall be as
provided in §§
156.185 through
156.192.
(2009 Code, § 40-5-6) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.081 ZONING REQUIREMENTS SUMMARY TABLE.
   The zoning requirements summary table is located at the end of this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 40-5-7) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
§ 156.095 B-1 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the B-1 General Business District is to accommodate a wide
range of retail stores, offices and service establishments compatible to a
central location within the community as the community’s primary business
center.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Residential uses as permitted in R-2 District. Special uses
permitted in the R-2 District shall only be permitted as special uses in the B-
1 District;
      (2)   Retail stores and shops including florist, gift, china and
glassware shops, jewelry stores, appliance, hardware, paint and wallpaper
stores, furniture stores and similar uses;
      (3)   Offices of doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers and
similar professions;
      (4)   Automobile parking lots;
      (5)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (6)   Barber and beauty shops;
      (7)   Candy and ice cream stores, including stores making commodities for
sale only on premises;
      (8)   Drug stores;
      (9)   Governmental offices, police and fire stations;
      (10)   Hobby stores;
      (11)   Hotels;
      (12)   Libraries and reading rooms;
      (13)   Laundromats with not more than three employees;
      (14)   Medical and dental clinics;
      (15)   Motels;
      (16)   Musical instrument sales and repair;
      (17)   Pet stores, but not including outdoor runways or kennels;
      (18)   Photography studios, camera and photo supplies sales, including
photo processing as part of the retail business;
      (19)   Post offices;
      (20)   Public meeting halls, clubs, lodges;
      (21)   Real estate and insurance sales offices;
      (22)   Restaurants, but not drive-in restaurants where food is provided
to customers in cars;
      (23)   Supermarkets, grocery stores, meat markets, bakeries where goods
produced are sold only on premises;
      (24)   Swimming pools;
      (25)   Tailor and dress making shops;
      (26)   Telephone or other utility office; and
      (27)   Video rental and sales.
   (B)      Special uses. Following are permitted as special uses subject to
the public hearing and other special use procedure requirements outlined in §§
156.205 through
156.209:
      (1)   Automobile sales, service and rental;
      (2)   Day care, commercial;
      (3)   Drive-in restaurants where food is provided to customers in cars;
      (4)   Funeral homes, mortuaries, crematories;
      (5)   Living quarters above or adjoining business;
      (6)   Outdoor amusement enterprises, such as miniature golf, golf driving
ranges and similar activities;
      (7)   Radio and television broadcasting studios excluding transmitting
towers;
      (8)   Service, cleaning or repair shops for personal, household or garden
equipment;
      (9)   Veterinarian or animals hospitals, but not including outdoor
runways or kennels; and
      (10)   Contractors or developer’s administrative offices, including
offices with interior display and storage areas, but not including any related
outdoor storage areas.
   (C)      Required lot area and width. No requirements are imposed on minimum
lot area and lot width within the B-1 General Business District.
   (D)      Required yards. Every building erected or structurally enlarged
within the B-1 General Business District shall provide or maintain the
following minimum yards, except for certain lots adjoining residential
districts which shall conform to §
156.036.
      (1)   Front yard. None.
      (2)   Side yards. None.
      (3)   Rear yard. Twenty feet.
   (E)      Building height. No building hereafter erected or structurally
enlarged shall exceed 65 feet in height.
   (F)      Floor area ratio. No building shall be erected or structurally
enlarged to provide a floor area ratio exceeding two and five-tenths.
   (G)      Required off-street parking and loading. Required off-street
parking and loading shall be as provided in §§
156.185 through
156.192.
(2009 Code, § 40-6-1) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.096 B-2 HIGHWAY AND SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the B-2 Highway and Service Business District is to
accommodate those businesses which because of their need for large sites, use
of outdoor storage or heavy dependence on trucking large material, equipment or
supplies are not generally compatible with the uses in the B-1 General
Commercial District.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   All uses permitted as “permitted uses” in the B-1 General Business
District;
      (2)   Automotive service stations;
      (3)   Boat sales;
      (4)   Bowling alleys;
      (5)   Catering establishments;
      (6)   Clubs, lodges, fraternal and business organization meeting halls
and recreation facilities;
      (7)   Drive-in food, refreshment and other business establishments
servicing customers in cars;
      (8)   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments;
      (9)   Exterminating shops;
      (10)   Farm supplies but not to include outdoor storage of farm
equipment;
      (11)   Feed stores;
      (12)   Fuel sales, but not bulk plants;
      (13)   Garages for repair and servicing of automobiles and trucks, but
not to include outdoor storage of other than vehicles awaiting repair or pick-
up;
      (14)   Hotels and motels;
      (15)   Machinery sales, but not to include outdoor storage of machinery;
      (16)   Miniature golf courses;
      (17)   Roller rinks and ice skating rinks;
      (18)   Service, cleaning or repair shops for personal, household or
garden equipment;
      (19)   Storage, warehousing and wholesale establishments provided within
enclosed buildings;
      (20)   Swimming pools;
      (21)   Veterinarian or animal hospital without outdoor kennels or
runways; and
      (22)   Welding shops.
   (B)   Special uses. Following are permitted as special uses subject to the
public hearing and other special use procedure requirements outlined in §§
156.205 through
156.209:
      (1)   Any of the foregoing operations where outdoor storage of products
used or sold on premises is a necessary part of the operation;
      (2)   Automobile sales, including lots for outdoor display or storage of
new or used automobiles;
      (3)   Building material establishments allowed by right providing no
manufacturing of materials is done on premises;
      (4)   Cartage and express facilities including storage of goods, motor
trucks and other equipment;
      (5)   Contractors or construction offices and shops such as building,
concrete, electrical, masonry, plumbing, refrigeration and roofing, including
any related outdoor storage areas;
      (6)   Sheet metal shops;
      (7)   Farm machinery and supplies sales including lots for the outdoor
display of storage of new or used farm equipment;
      (8)   Landscaping and garden services, nurseries and horticultural uses;
      (9)   Mobile home and recreational vehicle sales and storage, not however
to include storage or parking of occupied mobile homes or recreational
vehicles;
      (10)   Monument sales, including outdoor display and storage of
monuments; and
      (11)   Storage and warehousing involving outdoor storage.
   (C)   Required lot area and width. No requirements are imposed on minimum
lot area and lot width within the B-2 Highway and Service Business District.
   (D)   Required yards. Every building erected or structurally altered within
the B-2 Highway and Service Business District shall provide or maintain the
following minimum yards, except for certain lots adjoining residential
districts which shall conform to §
156.036.
      (1)   Front yard. None.
      (2)   Side yards. None.
      (3)   Rear yard. Twenty feet.
   (E)   Building height. No building hereafter erected or structurally
enlarged shall exceed 65 feet.
   (F)   Floor area ratio. No building hereafter erected or structurally
enlarged shall exceed a floor area ratio of two and five-tenths.
   (G)   Required off-street parking and loading. Required off-street parking
and loading shall be as provided in §§
156.185 through
156.192.
(2009 Code, § 40-6-2) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015; Ord. 23-14, passed 6-12-
2023)
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 156.110 I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the Light Industrial District is to accommodate a wide range
of manufacturing and similar industrial facilities which can conform to a high
level of performance standards.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Light manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, packaging, repairing,
servicing and processing of materials, goods and products provided entirely
within enclosed buildings and conforming with the performance standards
contained herein. Outdoor storage of materials is not allowed except where such
materials are enclosed by a solid fence or wall;
      (2)   Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, kennels with outdoor runways;
      (3)   Agriculture implement sales and service;
      (4)   Bottling plants, creameries, dairies;
      (5)   Bowling alleys;
      (6)   Dry cleaning and laundry plants;
      (7)   Greenhouses - wholesale;
      (8)   Lumber yards;
      (9)   Mail order houses;
      (10)   Medical and dental clinics;
      (11)   Offices;
      (12)   Printing facilities;
      (13)   Public utility stations, distribution centers and regulator
stations;
      (14)   Radio and television studios;
      (15)   Research and testing laboratories;
      (16)   Restaurants;
      (17)   Trade schools;
      (18)   Transmitting towers and antennas in conjunction with the principal
use on the premises; and
      (19)   Wholesale outlets, storage and warehousing.
   (B)   Special uses. Following are permitted as special uses subject to the
public hearing and other special use procedure requirements outlined in §§
156.205 through
156.209:
      (1)   Airports, private and commercial;
      (2)   Storage, sale or distribution or primary usage of explosive, highly
flammable, highly toxic or radioactive materials;
      (3)   Penal and correctional institutions;
      (4)   Planned development for industrial districts;
      (5)   Sewage treatment plants; and
      (6)   Bus or truck garages and storage yards.
   (C)   Required lot area and width. No requirements are imposed on minimum
lot area and lot width within the I-1 Light Industrial District.
   (D)   Required yards. No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally
enlarged within the I-1 Light Industrial District without providing or
maintaining the following minimum required yards.
      (1)   Front yard. Thirty feet.
      (2)   Side yards. Twenty feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. Twenty feet.
   (E)   Building height. Maximum building height of 65 feet in the I-1 Light
Industrial District.
   (F)   Floor area ratio. No building shall be erected or structurally
enlarged which exceeds a floor area ratio of eighty one-hundredths.
   (G)   Required off-street parking and loading. Required off-street parking
and loading shall be as provided in §§
156.185 through
156.192.
(2009 Code, § 40-7-1) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015; Ord. 17-24, passed 6-12-
2017)
§ 156.111 I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   The purpose of the I-2 Heavy Industrial District is to provide for and
accommodate heavy industrial uses in a manner which minimizes adverse effects.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   All uses permitted as “permitted uses” in the I-1 Light Industrial
District;
      (2)   Any manufacturing, fabricating, assembly and processing of
materials and products not allowed as “permitted uses” in the I-1 District
except that uses permitted in the I-1 District as “special uses” shall be
permitted in the I-2 District only as special uses; and
      (3)   Cartage and express facilities including storage of goods, motor
trucks and other equipment.
   (B)   Special uses. Following are permitted as special uses subject to the
public hearing and other special use procedure requirements outlined in §§
156.205 through
156.209:
      (1)   Uses permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial District as “special
uses”;
      (2)   Manufacturing or processing requiring large quantities of water,
producing large quantities of waste materials or producing any quantity of
toxic, noxious, corrosive or explosive or otherwise hazardous material either
as a primary or side product;
      (3)   Extraction and processing of stone, sand and gravel including the
necessary processing and loading equipment and structures;
      (4)   Processing of animal and vegetable products such as tanneries,
distilleries, breweries, rendering plants and plants for the production of
glue, soap, paint or varnish; and
      (5)   Manufacturing of coal, tar, petroleum and asphalt products.
   (C)   Required lot area and lot width. No requirements are imposed on
minimum lot area and minimum lot width in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District.
   (D)   Required yards. No building shall hereafter be erected or enlarged
within the I-2 Heavy Industrial District without providing or maintaining the
following minimum required yards.
      (1)   Front yard. Thirty feet.
      (2)   Side yards. Twenty feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. Twenty feet.
   (E)   Building height. Maximum building height of 65 feet in the I-2 Heavy
Industrial District.
   (F)   Floor area ratio. No building shall be erected or structurally
enlarged which exceeds a floor area ratio of eighty one-hundredths.
   (G)   Required off-street parking and loading. Required off-street parking
and loading shall be as provided in §§
156.185 through
156.192.
(2009 Code, § 40-7-2) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.112 PERFORMANCES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Any new use established in I-1 and I-2 Districts after the
effective date of this chapter shall be so operated as to comply with the
performance standards governing:
         (a)   Noise;
         (b)   Vibration;
         (c)   Toxic and noxious matter;
         (d)   Odorous matter;
         (e)   Fire and explosive hazards; and
         (f)   Glare and heat, as set forth hereinafter for the district in
which such use shall be located.
      (2)   No use already established on the effective date hereof shall be so
altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the
applicable performance standards established hereinafter for the district in
which such use is located. No emission or by-product of any industrial use
shall violate or exceed state regulations. It shall be the responsibility of
all industrial uses to adhere to such regulations, including the obtaining of
necessary permits.
      (3)   Certification from an engineer or scientific testing laboratory
approved by the village, indicating that the use of the land and all processing
either does or will comply with the applicable performance standards, shall
accompany application for a zoning certificate. Where standards indicated here
differ from those of state agencies, the more restrictive shall apply.
   (B)   Noise; I-1 and I-2 Districts.
      (1)   Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by
the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat
network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the
performance standards hereinafter prescribed; provided, that such noises shall
be capable of being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises capable of
being so measured, for the purpose of this subchapter, shall be those noises
which cause rapid fluctuation of the needle of the sound level meter with a
variation of no more than plus or minus two decibels. Noises incapable of being
so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature, shall be
controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
      (2)   At no point on the boundary of a residence or business district
shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant (other than background
noises not directly under the control of the manufacturer) exceed the decibel
limits in the octave bands designated below:
Octave Band Frequency Along Residence District Along Business District
(Cycles per Second)   Boundaries               Boundaries
Octave Band Frequency Along Residence District Along Business District
(Cycles per Second)   Boundaries               Boundaries
0 to 75               72                       79
75 to 150             67                       74
150 to 300            59                       66
300 to 600            52                       59
600 to 1,200          46                       53
1,200 to 2,400        40                       47
2,400 to 4,800        34                       41
Over 4,800            32                       39
 
   (C)   Vibrations; I-1 and I-2 Districts.
      (1)   Vibrations within a district shall be controlled so as not to
become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
      (2)   No industrial operation or activity (except those not under the
direct control of the manufacturer) shall cause at any time ground transmitted
vibrations in excess of the limits set forth below. Vibrations shall be
measured at any point along a residence district boundary line with a three
component measuring instrument approved by the Zoning Administrator and shall
be expressed as displacement in inches:
 
Frequency (Cycles per Second) Maximum Permitted Displacement along Residence
                              District Boundaries (Inches)
0 to 10                       0.0008
10 to 20                      0.0005
20 to 30                      0.0002
30 to 40                      0.0002
40 and over                   0.0001
 
   (D)   Toxic and noxious matter; I-1 and I-2 Districts. No activity or
operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of toxic or noxious matter
across lot lines in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort or welfare or cause injury or damage to the
environment, property or business. Determination of such adverse effects shall
be made by the Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission or duly
appointed agent.
   (E)   Odorous matter; I-1 and I-2 Districts.
      (1)   The emission of odorous matter in such manner or quantity as to be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful.
      (2)   No activity or operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of
odorous matter in such concentrations as to be detectable without the use of
instruments at any point along lot lines.
   (F)   Fire and explosive hazards; I-1 and I-2 Districts.
      (1)   The manufacture, utilization or storage of pyrophoric and explosive
dusts shall be in accordance with the safety codes of the National Fire
Protection Association. Such dusts include, but are not limited to: aluminum,
bronze and magnesium powder, powdered coal, powdered plastics, flour and feed,
spices, starches, sugar, cocoa, sulphur, grain (storage) and wood flour.
      (2)   In the I-1 District the following additional regulations shall
apply.
         (a)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from incombustible to subject to moderate burning is
permitted.
         (b)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted
provided the following condition is met. Said materials shall be stored,
utilized or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having
incombustible exterior walls or protected throughout by an automatic fire
extinguishing system, or said materials may be stored outdoors and such storage
shall have 50 feet clearance from all property lines.
      (3)   In the I-2 District, the following additional regulations shall
apply.
         (a)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials,
ranging from incombustible to subject to intense burning is permitted, subject
to all applicable rules and regulations.
         (b)   The storage and utilization of flammable liquids or materials,
which produce flammable or explosive vapors or bases, shall be permitted in
accordance with the regulations of the office of the State Fire Marshal, or any
successor agency.
   (G)   Glare and heat; I-1 and I-2 Districts.
      (1)   Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed
within a completely enclosed building in such manner as not to create a public
nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
      (2)   Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so as not to create a
nuisance across lot lines.
      (3)   Determination of the nuisance factor in regard to glare or heat
intensity shall be made by the Village Manager or duly appointed agent.
(2009 Code, § 40-7-3) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015) Penalty, see §
156.999
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 156.125 INTENT.
   Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may
later be adopted there exist:
   (A)   Lots, structures, uses of land and structures and characteristics of
use, which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but which
would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or
future amendments. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their
survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall
not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding
other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district;
   (B)   Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a
structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and
land in combination may be contained but shall not be extended or enlarged
after the effective date hereof, shall not have attached on a building or
premises, additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or shall
not have the addition of other uses, of a nature which would be prohibited
generally in the district involved;
   (C)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building
construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby
defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner; and
   (D)   Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has
been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that
work shall be carried on diligently.
(2009 Code, § 40-8-1) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.126 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of this chapter or amendment
thereof, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
chapter. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage
with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though
such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are
generally applicable in the district; provided, that yard dimensions and
requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot
shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (B)   If two or more lots or combinations of lots or portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be
considered to be undivided parcels for the purposes of this chapter, and no
portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes
compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter,
nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot width or area
below the requirements stated in this chapter.
(2009 Code, § 40-8-2) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.127 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Where at the time of passage of this chapter lawful use of land exists which
would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, and where
such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding
$1,000, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
provided:
   (A)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter;
   (B)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
   (C)   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than six months, any subsequent uses of such land shall conform
to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such
land is located; and
   (D)   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
(2009 Code, § 40-8-3) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.128 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date hereof of amendment of
this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason
of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot
or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued
so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its nonconformity;
   (B)   Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its
replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter; and
   (C)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(2009 Code, § 40-8-4) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.129 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES.
   If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of
$1,000 or more, of structure and premises in combination, exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, that would not be
allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located;
   (B)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building;
   (C)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may as a special exception be changed to
another nonconforming use provided that the Planning and Zoning Commission,
either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find
that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the
district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may require appropriate conditions and
safeguards in accord with the provisions of this chapter;
   (D)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18
months during any three-year period (except when government action impedes
access to the premises), the structure, or structures and premises in
combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which it is located; and
   (E)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land. DESTRUCTION for the purpose of this division
(E) is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50% of the replacement cost
at time of destruction.
(2009 Code, § 40-8-5) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.130 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on
ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures,
wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 10% of the current replacement
cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure
as the case may be; provided, that the cubic content existing when it became
nonconforming shall not be increased.
   (B)   If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs
and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe
or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be
restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
(2009 Code, § 40-8-6) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.131 USES UNDER SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROVISIONS.
   Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the
terms of this chapter (other than a change through Planning and Zoning
Commission action from a nonconforming use to another use not generally
permitted in the district) shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such
district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use.
(2009 Code, § 40-8-7) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 156.165 PURPOSE.
   In order to serve sign owners' needs and respect their rights to
identification, while balancing the aesthetic and safety interests of the
community, the regulation of signs within the Village of Rochester is necessary
and in the public interest. These regulations are intended to address:
   (A)   Aesthetics.
      (1)   Maintain and enhance the beauty, orderliness, unique character,
aesthetic environment, and quality of the Village of Rochester in ways that
will attract commerce, businesses, economic development, new residents and
visitors;
      (2)   Exercise reasonable controls over the physical characteristics and
structural design of signs in a manner that promotes and enhances the
aesthetics of all Village zoning districts and that complements the natural
surroundings of the village in such a way as to retain economic advantage for
this community; and
      (3)   Reduce visual clutter that may otherwise be caused by the
proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation, excessive height,
and excessive sign area (size) of signs that compete for the attention of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (B)   Traffic and Pedestrian Safety.
      (1)   Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare through
reasonable, consistent, and non-discriminatory standards for signs;
      (2)   Maintain and improve traffic and pedestrian safety through properly
located signs;
      (3)   Regulate signs in a manner so as to not obstruct the vision of, or
distract motorists, bicyclists, or pedestrians; and
      (4)   Allow for those traffic-control devices that are consistent with
national standards and whose purpose is to promote roadway safety and
efficiency by providing for the orderly movement of road users on streets and
roadways, that notify users of regulations, and that provide warning and
guidance necessary for the safe, uniform and efficient operation of all
elements of the traffic stream.
   (C)   Economic Development.
      (1)   Promote economic development and the value of nonresidential
properties through sensitivity to surrounding land uses and maintenance of an
attractive community appearance.
      (2)   Assist the public and private sectors to identify the location of
goods, properties and services.
   (D)   Effective Communication.
      (1)   Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication;
and
      (2)   Encourage signs that are clear and legible.
   (E)   Historical Character. Emphasize the village' s small-town historical
character by promoting pedestrian-oriented and appropriately scaled signage.
   (F)   Compatibility with Surroundings.
      (1)   Allow signs compatible with their surroundings and aid orientation;
      (2)   Preclude the placement of signs concealing or obstructing adjacent
land uses or signs;
      (3)   Preclude signs from conflicting with the principal permitted use of
the site and adjoining sites; and
      (4)   Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and
private property.
   (G)   Zoning District Considerations. Encourage signs appropriate to the
zoning district in which they are located.
   (H)   Scale, Integration and Design.
      (1)   Relate signage to the basic principles of good architectural and
landscape design;
      (2)   Establish sizing of signs in relationship to the scale of the lot
and/or building on which a sign is to be placed or to which it pertains;
      (3)   Provide flexibility and encourage variety in signage.
   (I)   Maintenance and Safety. Protect the public from unsafe signs by
encouraging signs to be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and
satisfactory manner, except as may be expressly preempted by state or Federal
law.
   (J)   Property Values.
      (1)   Protect neighborhood property values by precluding, to the maximum
extent possible, sign types that create a nuisance to the occupancy or use of
other properties as a result of their number and physical characteristics such
as sign area (size), height, illumination, and movement; and
      (2)   Protect property values by ensuring that the number of signs are in
harmony with buildings, neighborhoods, and conforming signs in the area and to
avoid the adverse effects and visual blight caused by temporary signs.
   (K)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
regulations;
      (2)   Provide standards regarding the non-communicative aspects of signs
that are consistent with local, county, state, and Federal law.
   (L)   The regulations in this subchapter are not intended to
      (1)   Censor speech or regulate viewpoints;
      (2)   Extend, for purpose of regulation, the ordinance as it relates to
objects that are not traditionally considered signs.
(Ord. 20-19, passed 10-13-2020)
§ 156.166 LEGAL SIGN INSTALLATION AND GENERAL STANDARDS.
   All legal signs shall be categorized and regulated in accordance with the
following:
   (A)   General sign specifications;
   (B)   No sign permit required;
   (C)   Temporary sign permit required; and
   (D)   Permanent sign permit required.
(Ord. 20-19, passed 10-13-2020)
§ 156.167 GENERAL SIGN SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Sign. Shall mean any identification, description, illustration,
object, or device, whether illuminated or non-illuminated, that is visible from
any public place or is located on private property and exposed to the public
and that directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person,
institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or
situated merchandise, or any logo, painting, banner, pennant, streamer, placard
or temporary sign designated to advertise, identify or convey information, with
the exception of window displays and flags. "Signs" shall also include the sign
structure. The term "sign" does not include an official traffic-control signal,
an official governmental marker, a national, state, city, or educational
institution flag, or governmental signs.
      (1)   Sign area. Shall mean the total square footage of the combined
message, or display surface and shall include all letters and designs that are
part of the sign. This area does not include structural supports for a sign,
whether they be columns, pylons, or a building, or a part thereof. On a multi-
sided sign, only one face is counted in computing the sign's total surface
area. The term "sign area" and "gross sign area" may be used interchangeably.
      (2)   Sign structure. Shall mean anything built or constructed, whether
or not permanently attached to a building, another structure, the ground, or
other surface, which supports, or is capable of supporting a sign, and
includes, without limitation, poles, cabinets, and decorative covers.
      (3)   Signs shall only be permitted in the districts defined by the
village definitions.
      (4)   Signs are permitted by permission of owner of property. Signs shall
not be placed on any right-of-way, with exception for traffic or village signs.
Signs placed in the village right-of-way will be removed without notification.
      (5)   No sign shall be placed on utility pole, street sign, or public
owned structure.
      (6)   No streamers or banners or other such sign devices shall be
permitted with the exception of village approval.
      (7)   Business signs are permitted only in business zones, off premises
signs are not permitted for a business.
      (8)   No trespassing or signs indicating the private nature of a driveway
and/or premises are permitted in all zones.
      (9)   Ground signs are permitted in all zones.
      (10)   Wall signs are only permitted in the business and industrial zoned
areas.
      (11)   Non-illuminated signs are permitted in all zones.
      (12)   Flashing signs shall not be permitted in any zone. No sign shall
display intermittent lights resembling lights customarily used in traffic
signals or those used by police, fire, ambulance or other emergency vehicles.
No sign shall contain the word ‘stop,’ ‘danger,’ or any word, phrase, symbol or
character which might be misconstrued to be a public safety warning or official
traffic control signal.
      (13)   Signs with illuminated displays shall be permitted only in
business and industrial zones.
      (14)   Electronic changing message signs shall only be located in
business or industrial zones, or for a non-residential use in a residential
zoning district such as a church or school. For electronic changing messages
signs in non-residential areas, no more than half of the sign area may change.
The rate of change of the sign shall be no less than five seconds per change.
This is to specifically exclude signs displaying video or any type of
animation.
      (15)   Signs not to obstruct motorist's view. No business sign or sign
structure shall be located in such a manner as to materially impede the
motorist's view at any street or highway intersection.
      (16)   Portable signs mounted on wheels or a chassis so as to be readily
moved from place to place are prohibited.
      (17)   Any sign defined to be illegal in other sections of this document
is not permitted in any zone.
      (18)   Any sign considered illegal may be removed by the village.
      (19)   Billboards are limited to 150 square feet in area within the
village per side.
   (B)   Comprehensive statement to apply to all signs within the village.
      (1)   No sign greater that 150 square feet in area, on each side, will be
allowed in any section of village zoning.
      (2)   Any sign placed in any section which is permitted by the ordinance
shall contain who erected the sign and the permit number referenced on the
sign.
      (3)   No attached or free-standing sign shall project higher than 25 feet
above the existing grade, and in no case above the roof line.
(Ord. 20-19, passed 10-13-2020)
§ 156.168 NO SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Governmental signs. Signs used exclusively for the posting or display
of official notices by a public agency or official, or by a person giving legal
notice, and signs erected or maintained by a public agency or official, or
required by law to be displayed by a public utility for directional warning or
informational purposes.
   (B)   Commercial real estate property for sale/rent. Signs placed on site to
advertise the property on premises. The size of the sign shall not exceed 16
square foot, and the top of the sign be no higher than eight (8) foot above the
ground,
   (C)   Residential real estate property for sale/rent. Signs placed on site
to advertise the property on premises. The size of any sign shall not exceed
eight square foot, and the top of the sign be no higher than six foot above the
ground, and not illuminated. Up to two auxiliary signs related to an existing
residential property for sale sign may be placed on nearby streets to identify
directions to a property, this includes signs for ‘Open House’ events.
   (D)   Identification/resident name. Sign identifying resident name(s) and
number and street. Size of sign should not exceed two square foot, and on
premises.
   (E)   No trespassing/private drive signs. Size of sign shall not exceed two
square foot, and on premises, and not illuminated.
   (F)   Residential garage/tag/yard sales. Signs advertising residential sales
of personal items. Size of sign shall not exceed six square feet, not
illuminated, and shall not be allowed for greater than 72 hours.
   (G)   Residential contractor service signs. Signs identifying work being
done at a premise by a contractor shall not exceed eight square feet in size,
not illuminated, only on premise and shall be displayed while work is in
progress and for up to 72 hours after work is complete. At no time may sign be
displayed for greater than 14 days.
   (H)   Non-profit (schools, charitable, religious) signs. Small temporary
signs related to local schools, churches, or charities may post small signs
denoting messages about items of local interest, such as student achievement,
teacher recognition, church themes, charity recognition, shall not be greater
than eight square feet in size, placed on private property. No direct or
indirect illumination is permitted.
   (I)   Non-profit (school, charitable, religious) Event signs. Temporary
signs denoting events open to the public advertising events, no greater than 20
square feet in size, may be posted on the premises where the event will be
held, and limited to 30 days prior to event and removed within seven days after
the event. No direct or indirect illumination is permitted.
   (J)   Interior glass mounted signs. Signs may be used by retail, restaurant,
or other businesses to provide hours, whether open/closed, or name of business/
owner. Signs may be illuminated either directly or indirectly, and shall not
exceed eight square feet in size, and in total signs may not exceed 25% of the
total window size of the business.
   (K)   Replacement/repair of existing signs. Signs replacing existing signs
of the same type, shape, illumination, size, height and location as the sign
being replaced/removed shall not be considered a new sign, and not require a
permit.
   (L)   Campaign/election signs. shall apply to signs promoting a candidate
for office, referendums or issues appearing on a ballot during an election. It
is the intent of the village to follow Illinois law regarding campaign signs.
Persons responsible for the sign(s) should ensure those signs follow the
current state laws regarding any signs posted, and the size and area of the
sign is consistent with zoning for where the sign is placed.
   (M)   Business signs of temporary or permanent basis are not defined in this
section.
   (N)   Questions regarding those signs which may be permissible should be
directed to the Village Manager, in writing, for clarification.
(Ord. 20-19, passed 10-13-2020)
§ 156.169 TEMPORARY SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The village shall allow banners, public informational signs, or
seasonal signs on a temporary sign permit basis. The request shall be submitted
to the Village Manager and based on the usage and content may approve, or
request the Village Board to consider the request for placing the temporary
sign.
   (B)   Temporary signs shall be limited to 14 days of presentation. An
application for extension shall allow for an additional 14 days, with no
extension allowing a temporary sign for greater than 28 days.
   (C)   All other rules of §
156.167 shall apply to temporary signs.
(Ord. 20-19, passed 10-13-2020)
§ 156.170 PERMANENT SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No sign, outdoor advertising structure or display of any character shall be
permitted except in conformity with the following regulations. A sign permit is
required for erection, construction, placement (including painting) or
replacement of any sign to be permanently attached to a building or to be
permanently erected as a free-standing sign.
   (A)   Civic organization signs on entry roads. Signs indicating the time and
place of meetings of civic organizations are permitted on the main entry roads
into town provided only one sign structure is utilized to accommodate all such
notices on each major entry road.
   (B)   Business signs. Shall mean a sign, including any supporting or framing
structure, which directs attention to a business or profession conducted upon
the premises, or to a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered upon
the premises on which the sign is located. All Business signs shall adhere to §
156.175 regarding Signs in Business Districts.
   (C)   Signs to be placed only with consent of property owner. No sign or
part thereof shall be located on any property without the consent of the owner,
holder, lessee, agent or trustee.
(Ord. 20-19, passed 10-13-2020)
§ 156.171 SIGN REGULATIONS WITHIN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The following sign regulations shall pertain to all residential districts:
   (A)   Residential signs within residential districts.
      (1)   Building identification signs for single building, multiple-family
dwellings. For each multiple-family dwelling, identification signs indicating
only the name and address of the building and the name of the management, not
exceeding a total of 16 square feet in area. Such signs may not be closer than
eight feet to any other zoning lot. On a corner lot, identification signs shall
be permitted on each street.
      (2)   Project identification sign for multi-building residential
projects. A residential project having a number of buildings shall be permitted
one additional sign at the major entry with the name of the project only. Such
sign shall be not greater than 32 square feet in area and located not closer
than 16 feet to any other zoning lot.
      (3)   Sign height and projection. No attached sign shall project higher
than one story or ten feet,
whichever is lower, above the existing grade. No free-standing sign shall
project higher than seven feet above the existing grade. No attached sign shall
project more than twelve inches from the wall to which it is attached.
   (B)   Nonresidential signs within residential districts.
      (1)   Church bulletins, cemetery signs, educational institutions, social
facilities and other similar uses. A single identification sign not exceeding
nine square feet except that on corner lots, two nine-square-foot signs will be
permitted, one facing each street.
      (2)   Nonconforming business signs. Nonconforming business uses may have
exterior signs not exceeding 12 square feet.
      (3)   Parking area signs. Signs designating parking area entrances or
exits are limited to one sign for each entrance or exit of no more than three
square feet each. One additional sign shall be permitted designating the
conditions of use and name of business served by the parking provided the sign
does not exceed nine square feet. No advertising is permitted on parking area
signs.
      (4)   Sign height and protection. No attached sign shall project more
than one story or ten feet above the existing grade and no more than twelve
inches from the wall to which it is attached. No freestanding sign shall
project higher than seven feet.
      (5)   Property Developers may erect a sign identifying lots for sale with
a restriction of no sign greater than 64 square feet of area.
(Ord. 20-19, passed 10-13-2020)
§ 156.172 SIGN REGULATIONS WITHIN BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
   The following sign regulations shall pertain to all business districts:
   (A)   Sign uses permitted. Sign uses permitted in residential districts
shall also be permitted in business districts. The regulations covering
permitted uses in residential districts shall also apply in business districts.
   (B)   Business signs in the B-1 Districts. In the B-l Business District,
business signs are permitted subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Area of attached and free-standing business signs. The gross area
in square feet of all signs attached to the wall of a building shall not exceed
15% of the wall area to which it is attached or of which it is a part. The
gross area of all free-standing signs shall not exceed one square foot of area
per each lineal foot of frontage on the zoning lot.
      (2)   Height and projection of signs. No attached or free-standing sign
shall project higher than 25 feet above the existing grade, and in no case
above the roof line. No attached building sign shall project more than twelve
inches from the wall to which it is attached.
      (3)   Integrated shopping and office centers. For integrated shopping and
office centers in single ownership or under unified control, one additional
free-standing sign other than those provided for in the B-1 District above,
shall be permitted subject to the following:
         (a)   Sign content. Such signs shall indicate only the name and
location of such center and the name and type of business of each occupant of
the center.
         (b)   Sign area. The gross area in square feet of such additional sign
of the zoning lot shall not exceed one times the lineal feet of frontage of
such lot.
   (C)   Business signs in the B-2 District. In the B-2 District, business
signs are permitted subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Sign area for attached business signs. The gross area in square
feet of all attached signs shall not exceed 25% of the wall area to which it is
attached or of which it is a part. In addition, where a protective canopy
exists over a pedestrian area, under canopy business signs are permitted
provided the sign is no closer than nine feet to the sidewalk.
      (2)   Sign area for free-standing business signs. The gross area in
square feet of all free-standing business signs shall not exceed one square
foot per each lineal foot of frontage of the zoning lot.
      (3)   Height of business signs. No attached business sign shall exceed 25
feet in height nor extend above the roofline.
      (4)   Additional free-standing business signs at integrated retail and
office building or complex. For integrated retail and office building complexes
with more than one building in single ownership or under unified control, one
additional free-standing business sign, other than those contained in B-
2 District above, shall be permitted subject to the following:
         (a)   Content. Such signs shall advertise only the name and location
of such center and the name and type of business of each occupant of the
center.
         (b)   Sign area. The gross area in square feet of such additional sign
of the zoning lot shall not exceed one times the lineal feet of frontage of
such lot.
(Ord. 20-19, passed 10-13-2020)
§ 156.173 BUSINESS SIGN WITHIN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
The following sign regulations shall pertain to business and advertising signs
within industrial districts:
   (A)   Business signs are permitted in the I-1 and I-2 Industrial Districts
area subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Sign area for attached business signs. The gross area in square
feet of all attached business signs shall not exceed 25% of the wall area to
which it is attached or of which it is a part.
      (2)   Sign area. The gross area in square feet of such additional sign of
the zoning lot shall not exceed one times the lineal feet of frontage of such
lot.
      (3)   Height of business signs. No attached business sign shall extend
above the roofline. No free-standing business sign shall project.
(Ord. 20-19, passed 10-13-2020)
§ 156.174 PENALTIES AND FINES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon written
notice thereof, be fined as provided in Section 1-1-20 of this Code.
(Ord. 20-19, passed 10-13-2020)
§ 156.175 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   It is reasonable that special conditions be placed upon the continuance of
existing non-conforming signs. This special non-conforming program permits the
current owner to continue using the non-conforming sign while at the same time
assuring that the district in which the non-conforming sign exists will
eventually comply:
   (A)   Continuance of non-conforming signs. 
      (1)   A non-conforming sign is any sign which was lawfully erected and
maintained prior to such time as it came within the purview of this section and
any amendments hereto, and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations
and restrictions contained in this section.
      (2)   Subject to the termination provisions of this section, any non-
conforming sign may be continued in operation and maintained after the
effective date of this subchapter provided, however, that no such sign shall be
changed in any manner; and, provided further, that the burden of establishing a
sign to be non-conforming under this section rests entirely upon the person or
persons, firm or corporation claiming a non-conforming status for a sign.
   (B)   Termination of non-conforming signs.
      (1)   By abandonment. Abandonment or cessation for a period of 90 days or
the change of the principal use to which the non-conforming sign is accessory
shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such sign.
      (2)   By violation of the subchapter. Any violation of the provisions of
this section shall terminate immediately the right to maintain a non-conforming
sign.
      (3)   By destruction, damage, or obsolescence. The right to maintain any
non-conforming sign shall terminate whenever the sign:
         (a)   Is damaged or destroyed, from any cause whatsoever, to the
extent that its repair or replacement cost exceeds 50% of its replacement cost
as of the date it became non-conforming; or
         (b)   Becomes a hazard or a danger to the safety or welfare of the
general public.
      (4)   By new ownership or change in tenant or use. Transfer of ownership
or change in the use or tenant shall terminate immediately the right to
maintain a non-conforming sign. The new owner has 180 days from close of sale
within which to bring the non-conforming sign into compliance.
      (5)   By new development on the zoning lot. Where new construction occurs
on a zoning lot, any non-conforming sign which may exist on said lot shall be
removed or modified as necessary to conform to the requirements of this
section. This shall occur before permits are issued for site development and
building construction on the premises.
      (6)   By redevelopment. Non-conforming signs which are moved or affected
by the redevelopment of a property; facade improvement program; or roadway
widening shall not be reinstalled but shall instead be brought into conformance
with all elements of this code.
   (C)   Notification to remove.
      (1)   If the village finds that any sign is unsafe or insecure, or is a
menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained
in violation of the provisions of this section, the village shall issue written
notice of such condition or violation to the person to whom the permit for said
sign has been issued.
      (2)   All notices issued by the village shall describe the sign and its
location and shall specify the manner in which the sign is in violation of the
ordinance(s) of the Village of Rochester. All notices issued by the village
shall be sent by certified mail and regular mail to the current owner. Any time
period provided for in this section shall be deemed to commence on the postmark
on the notice of violation of the certified mail.
      (3)   If the party to whom such notice is issued fails to remove or alter
the sign so as to comply with the provisions of this section, within 15 days of
the postmark on the notice of violation of the certified mail, the village may
remove or alter the sign at the expense of the owner.
      (4)   The cost of removing the sign may be recovered by the Village of
Rochester through any appropriate legal proceeding or by assessment against the
property. The cost of removal shall be deemed to include any and all incidental
expenses, as well as all direct and indirect costs, incurred by the village in
connection with removal of the sign.
      (5)   The village may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to
persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
      (6)   The village shall not issue any sign permit to any person who
refuses to pay costs or expenses incurred by the village in removing or
altering any sign for which they have previously obtained a permit, regardless
of whether legal proceedings have been initiated for the purpose of recovering
such costs.
(Ord. 20-19, passed 10-13-2020)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 156.185 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the
public streets by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking and
loading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to be made of the
property.
(2009 Code, § 40-11-1) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.186 PROCEDURE.
   For all uses except one- and two-family residential structures, an
application for a building permit for a new or enlarged building, structure or
use shall include a plot plan drawn to scale and fully dimensioned showing any
parking or loading facilities to be provided to meet the requirements specified
herein.
(2009 Code, § 40-11-2) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.187 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS APPLYING TO BOTH OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   General application. No buildings or structures shall be erected or
land uses initiated after the effective date of this subchapter without
providing accessory off-street parking and loading as required herein.
   (B)   Buildings under construction. Buildings lawfully under construction or
approved for construction prior to the adoption of this subchapter shall not be
required to modify or change the approved plans for off-street parking and
loading; provided, that such construction is completed within one year from the
date of passage of this subchapter.
   (C)   Reduction in parking or loading need. When a building or structure
shall undergo any decrease in number of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity, number of employees or other unit of measurement specified
hereinafter for required parking or loading facilities, and further, when said
decrease would result in a requirement for fewer total parking or loading
spaces through application of the provisions of this subchapter, parking and
loading facilities may be reduced accordingly; provided, that existing parking
or loading facilities remaining would at least equal the parking or loading
requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this subchapter to
the entire building or structure as modified.
   (D)   Increase in parking or loading need. When a building or structure
shall undergo any increase in the number of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity or other unit of measurement specified hereinafter for
required parking or loading facilities, and further, when said increase would
result in a measurement for additional parking or loading spaces through
application of the provisions of this subchapter thereto, parking and loading
facilities shall be increased to accommodate only the additional need as a
result of such change.
   (E)   Existing parking or loading not to be reduced. Accessory off-street
parking and loading spaces in existence on the effective date of this
subchapter may not be reduced in number unless already exceeding the
requirements of this subchapter for equivalent new construction; in which
event, said spaces shall not be reduced below the number required herein for
such equivalent new construction.
   (F)   Parking and loading for reconstructed nonconforming uses. Any
nonconforming building, structure or use in existence on the effective date of
this subchapter shall, if partially destroyed by fire, collapse or other cause
and permitted to rebuild or reconstruct under appropriate provisions of this
subchapter, provide off-street parking and loading equivalent to those
maintained prior to such damage being sustained.
   (G)   Schedule of requirements for off-street parking and loading;
requirement for uses not specified. Schedule for requirements for the number of
off-street parking and loading spaces for various uses is provided in this
subchapter. The parking and loading requirements for any use not specified
shall be the same as the use in the schedule set forth in §
156.190, most closely approximating the proposed use.
(2009 Code, § 40-11-3) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.188 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS APPLYING TO OFF-STREET PARKING ONLY.
   (A)   Limitation of residential off-street parking. Residential off-street
parking accessory to residential uses and provided in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter shall be used solely for the parking of
vehicles of the owners, occupants or guests of the property to which said
parking is accessory.
   (B)   Joint or shared off-street parking. Off-street parking for different
buildings, structures or uses may be provided collectively provided the total
number of spaces will equal the total requirements for all such uses sharing
the parking facility.
   (C)   Guarantee of off-site parking. When required off-street parking is to
be provided elsewhere than on the lot on which the principal use is located,
the control and continuing availability of the off-site parking will be
guaranteed either by deed or long term lease, and the owner shall be bound by
covenants property recorded, requiring the owner, his or her heirs and assigns
to maintain the required number of parking spaces during the existence of the
principal use.
   (D)   Districts in which off-site parking is permitted. Accessory parking
facilities, when provided elsewhere than on the same zoning lot, shall adhere
to the following requirements: no parking facilities accessory to an apartment
use shall be located in an R-S, R-1 or R-2 Residential District.
   (E)   Location and layout of off-street parking.
      (1)   Plans for the layout of off-street parking for the purpose of
meeting parking requirements shall be in accordance with the following minimum
requirements:
 
                                                      Total Width Total Width
Parking                                               of One Tier of Two Tiers
Pattern        Maneuverin g Parking     Parking Space of Spaces   of Spaces
(In Degrees)   Lane Width   Space Width Length        plus        plus
                                                      Maneuvering Maneuvering
                                                      Lane        Lane
0 (parallel    12 ft.       8 ft.       23 ft.        20 ft.      28 ft.
parking)
90
(perpendicular 20 ft.       9 ft.       20 ft.        40 ft.      60 ft.
parking)
 
      (2)   Interpretation of fractional parking spaces resulting from the
application of the parking schedule shall be as follows: a fractional parking
space shall be considered as one parking space.
      (3)   All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of internal
maneuvering lanes. Backing onto a street shall be prohibited.
      (4)   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly
defined drives shall be provided. Parking lot entrances and exits shall be at
least 25 feet distant from any adjacent residential district.
      (5)   Parking is permitted in the required front, side or rear yards as
specified in permitted obstructions in yards as outlined in §§
156.030 through
156.045.
      (6)   For all newly established and expanding uses, all off-street
parking areas and drives are to be hard surfaced with bituminous concrete, A-
3 or equivalent.
      (7)   Landscaped buffers or screening is required to be provided and
continuously maintained for off-street parking areas for any business or
industrial use adjacent or backing on a residential district or for any
apartment use along any side adjoining an R-S, R-1 or R-2 District. Types and
sizes of plant material shall be as provided in §
156.037.
      (8)   Lighting to illuminate parking areas shall be so arranged as to
direct lighting away from adjoining properties.
   (F)   Handicapped parking required. For any parking area to be used by the
general public, oversized handicapped spaces, 16 feet in width and 20 feet in
length shall be provided according to the following schedule:
 
Required Handicapped                         Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
1—20                                       1
21—50                                      2
51—75                                      3
76—100                                     4
Each additional 50 spaces or portion thereof 1 additional space
 
(2009 Code, § 40-11-4) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.189 LOCATION OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   The off-street parking facilities required for the uses mentioned in
the schedule of parking requirements and for other similar uses, shall be on
the same lot or parcel of land as the use they are intended to serve, but in
case of nonresidential uses when practical difficulties prevent their
establishment upon the same lot, the required parking facilities shall be
provided within 300 feet of the premises to which they are appurtenant.
   (B)   Said distance shall be the walking distance between the nearest point
of the parking area to the nearest entrance of the building the parking is to
serve.
(2009 Code, § 40-11-5) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.190 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Parking required for residential uses.
      (1)   One-family dwelling. Two parking spaces. Garage and drive shall
each be considered as one parking space each for single-family residential uses
only.
      (2)   Two-family dwelling. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit. Garage
and drive shall be considered as one parking space each per dwelling unit.
      (3)   Multi-family residential. One and one-half parking spaces for each
dwelling unit having one bedroom. Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit
having two or more bedrooms.
      (4)   Elderly housing. One space for each three units, plus one space for
each employee.
      (5)   Mobile home parks. Two spaces for each mobile home site, plus one
space for each employee of the mobile home park.
      (6)   Lodging, boarding and rooming houses. One space for each three
guests at maximum capacity, plus one space for the owner or manager.
   (B)   Parking required for institutional uses.
      (1)   Churches or temples. One space for each four seats in the main
worship hall.
      (2)   Elementary and junior high schools. One space for each teacher,
employee or administer in addition to requirements of auditorium, as indicated
in division (B)(14) below.
      (3)   Fraternities, sororities and dormitories. One parking space for
each five active members, plus one additional space for the manager.
      (4)   Libraries. One parking space for each 200 square feet of floor
area.
      (5)   Medical and dental clinics. Five parking spaces per doctor plus one
space for each doctor and employee with offices at the clinic.
      (6)   Museums. One parking space, per each 400 square feet of floor area.
      (7)   Nursery schools, day nurseries or child care centers. One space for
each employee plus two additional visitor spaces.
      (8)   Nursing and convalescent homes and hospitals. One space for each
four beds, plus one space for each staff, doctor and visiting doctor, plus one
space for each three employees.
      (9)   Private clubs and lodges (without sleeping accommodations). One
parking space for each four members of the total membership or one space for
each 400 square feet of floor area in the building, whichever is larger.
      (10)   Private golf, swimming, tennis club or similar use. One space for
each four family or individual memberships, plus spaces required for accessory
uses such as bar and restaurant areas, as provided for in division (C)(5)
below.
      (11)   Public swimming pools. Three parking space for each eight persons
at maximum capacity.
      (12)   Public golf courses. Six spaces for each golf hole, plus spaces
required for accessory uses, as indicated in division (C)(5) below.
      (13)   Senior high school. One space for each teacher, employee or
administrator and one space for each ten students in addition to requirements
of auditorium, as indicated in division (B)(14) below.
      (14)   Stadium, sports arena, auditoriums and gymnasiums. One space for
each six seats or 12 feet of benches.
   (C)   Parking required for business and commercial uses.
      (1)   Planned commercial or shopping centers. One space for each 200
square feet of usable floor area or retail area.
      (2)   Beauty parlor or barber shop. One and one-half spaces for each
barber or beauty chair.
      (3)   Bowling alleys. Four spaces for each bowling lane, plus spaces
required for accessory uses such as bar and restaurant.
      (4)   Convention halls, dance halls, skating rinks, assembly or
exhibition halls or other similar places of assembly without fixed seats. One
parking space for each 100 square feet of usable floor area used for assembly.
      (5)   Establishments handling the sale and consumption on the premises of
alcoholic beverages, food or refreshments. One parking space for each 100
square feet of floor area.
      (6)   Furniture and appliance shops, household equipment and repair or
machinery shops. One parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area.
      (7)   Gasoline service stations. One space for each lubrication or
service stall, plus one space for each two serviced pumps.
      (8)   Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners. One space for each four
washing or cleaning machines.
      (9)   Miniature or “Par 3” golf courses. Three spaces for each hole, plus
one for each employee.
      (10)   Mortuaries. One space for each 100 square feet of floor area.
      (11)   Motel, hotel, bed and breakfast or other similar uses. One space
for each occupancy unit, plus one space for each owner and employee, plus for
motels and hotels, spaces as required herein for accessory uses such as bar and
restaurant.
      (12)   Motor vehicle sales and service. One space for each 400 square
feet of salesroom, plus one space for each auto service hall.
      (13)   Retail stores not specifically designated above. One parking space
for each 150 square feet of retail floor area.
      (14)   Theaters, indoor. One space for each six seats, plus one space for
each two employees.
   (D)   Parking required for offices and financial institutions.
      (1)   Banks, savings and loan. One space for each 400 square feet of
usable floor area or customer service area.
      (2)   Other business and professional offices. One space for each 250
square feet of floor area.
   (E)   Parking required for industrial uses.
      (1)   Manufacturing and industrial uses, research and testing
laboratories, dry cleaning, printing, binding, publishing, assembly of
materials and products and other similar uses. One parking space for every two
employees on the largest shift, including office workers.
      (2)   Warehouse and storage uses. One parking space for every employee in
the largest shift, including office workers.
(2009 Code, § 40-11-6) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.191 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS APPLYING TO OFF-STREET LOADING ONLY.
   (A)   Location and layout of off-street loading. Off-street loading spaces
shall be as provided in the schedule of off-street loading requirements. An
off-street loading berth shall be a hard-surfaced area of land open or
enclosed, other than a street or public way, used principally for the standing,
loading or unloading of motor trucks, tractors and trailers so as to avoid
undue interference with public streets and alleys. Loading spaces, where
required, shall be not less than ten feet in width, 45 feet in length and 14
feet in height, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.
   (B)   Minimum requirements. Plans for location and layout of off-street
loading areas shall meet the following minimum requirements.
      (1)   Loading berths shall be no closer than 100 feet to an adjoining
residential zoning district unless completely screened along that adjoining
side by a building wall not less than eight feet in height.
      (2)   Location of loading berths shall not obstruct the visibility at
intersections.
      (3)   Loading berths open to the sky may be located in any required side
or rear yard; provided, that loading berths within 100 feet of residential
districts are enclosed as specified above; loading berths shall not be located
in front yards.
      (4)   Fractional loading berths spaces resulting from the application of
the schedule of off-street loading requirements shall be considered an
additional loading berth.
      (5)   Off-street loading areas for office, commercial and industrial uses
shall be hard surfaced with bituminous concrete or concrete.
(2009 Code, § 40-11-7) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.192 SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   For all property uses where loading or unloading of materials and
merchandise is an essential part of such business, the following requirements
shall apply.
   (A)   Hospitals, sanitariums and clinics. One off-street loading space for
the first 40,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional space for
each 150,000 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 40,000 square feet.
   (B)   Retail shops, bowling alleys, taverns, restaurants. One off-street
loading space for each structure containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one additional space for each 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area in excess of 100,000 square feet.
   (C)   Office buildings, including banks, business and professional offices.
One off-street loading space for each structure containing 40,000 to 100,000
square feet of gross floor area plus one additional space for each 100,000
square feet of gross floor area in excess of 100,000 square feet.
   (D)   Furniture and appliance outlets, motor vehicle sales, wholesale
stores, household equipment or machinery sales. One off-street loading space
for each building of 8,000 to 25,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one
space for each 25,000 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 25,000
square feet.
   (E)   Manufacturing, research and testing laboratories, laundry and cleaning
plants, printing, binding and publishing, warehouse and storage, processing and
distribution of materials and products. One off-street loading space for each
10,000 to 40,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each
60,000 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 40,000 square feet.
(2009 Code, § 40-11-8) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.205 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ZONING ADMINISTRATION.
   The authority for administration of this subchapter is hereby vested in the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Village Board as outlined herein.
   (A)   Duties of the Village Board in administration of this chapter. The
Village Board, in its responsibilities under this chapter, shall carry out and
perform the following duties:
      (1)   Approve the appointment, by the Village Board President, of the
Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission;
      (2)   Take action, following procedures as outlined herein on the
following:
         (a)   Adopting zoning standards, including the zoning district map,
and take action on subsequent petitions for amendment of such standards;
         (b)   Special use applications; and
         (c)   Variation applications.
      (3)   Engage professional services as it deems advisable to assist the
Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Village Board in review of site
development plans and landscape and screening plans of proposed projects.
   (B)   Director of the Village Manager in administration of this chapter. The
Village Manager shall carry out and perform the following duties:
      (1)   Issue all zoning permits and maintain records of permits issued.
Issue all certificates of occupancy and maintain records of certificates
issued;
      (2)   Maintain necessary forms for permits, appeals, application for
zoning amendments, special uses, variances and other matters required to be
acted upon by the Planning and Zoning Commission;
      (3)   (a)   Inform persons in violation of this chapter of the provisions
of this chapter with which they are in noncompliance and the remedies available
to them.
         (b)   Notify the Village Board and Village Attorney by letter of
persons found in violation.
      (4)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, copies of zoning ordinance including district maps, all
maps, planned unit residential developments, amendments and special uses,
variations, appeals and applications therefor; and
      (5)   (a)   Receive, file and forward to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, applications for special uses, amendments and variations and
arrange for proper notice for public hearing.
         (b)   Receive, file and forward to the Planning and Zoning Commission
applications for planned developments and arrange for proper notice for public
hearing.
   (C)   Duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission in administration of this
chapter. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Village has the following
duties and responsibilities under this chapter:
      (1)   To receive from the Village Manager applications for planned unit
residential development;
      (2)   Planning and Zoning Commission may establish its own rules and
procedures for carrying out its duties;
      (3)   Receive from the Chairperson of Planning and Zoning Commission,
hear and make determinations of appeals filed by any person, office,
department, board or bureau aggrieved by a decision of the Village Manager and
notify the Village Manager of such determination;
      (4)   Receive from the Village Manager, hear and grant variations of this
chapter in harmony with the general purpose and intent and only in the specific
instances contained in the variation procedures outlined in this subchapter.
Notifying the Village Manager of such variation actions;
      (5)   Receive from the Village Manager applications for special
exceptions, hear and make determinations consistent with the standards
contained in this chapter for granting special exceptions. Notify the Village
Manager of such decisions;
      (6)   Receive from the Village Manager applications for amendment of this
chapter, hear and make recommendations upon such applications. Notify the
Village Board; and
      (7)   To petition for zoning amendment.
(2009 Code, § 40-12-1) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.206 PROCEDURE FOR ZONING ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Zoning certificate procedure.
      (1)   No zoning permit pertaining to the use of land, structures or
buildings shall be issued by any officer, department or employee of the village
unless the application for such permit has been subjected to administrative
review by the Village Manager for compliance with this chapter. Any permit
issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
Zoning permits shall not be issued to any applicant so long as that applicant
is indebted to the village for any prior fees of any type.
      (2)   Applications for zoning permits shall be filed in written form with
the Village Manager on forms prescribed by him or her indicating:
         (a)   Legal description of the property;
         (b)   Name and address of applicant, owner and contractor;
         (c)   Uses to be established or expanded; and
         (d)   Other information deemed appropriate by the Village Manager to
clearly denote the nature and character of the intended improvement and use.
      (3)   For all uses, except one- and two-family residential structures on
platted regular shaped lots, the applications for a zoning certificate shall be
accompanied by a drawing to scale showing the actual dimensions as certified by
a land surveyor or licensed civil engineer as a true copy of the lot on which
the improvement or use is to be placed, accompanied by a drawing to scale of
the location on such lot of the proposed building, structure or use, and
accessory buildings; and location and height of any fences or landscape
screening proposed to be installed. For one- and two-family structures on
platted regular shaped lots, the application for a zoning permit shall be
accompanied by a dimensioned freehand sketch drawing showing the proposed
building, structure or use, nearest distances to lot lines, height of buildings
or portions of buildings and location and height of fences or landscape
screening proposed to be installed.
      (4)   The Village Manager shall approve or deny the issuance of a zoning
certificate within seven days of the date of filing for such certificate. If
not approved within time limit, the zoning permit shall be deemed to be denied.
      (5)   Such zoning certificate, once issued, shall be maintained in a
prominent location at the premises for which it is issued, and shall not be
removed until final inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy by
the Village Inspector.
      (6)   Work or change in use authorized by zoning certificate but not
started within 90 days shall require a new certificate. Certificates issued for
new building construction or expansion shall require the completion of the
exterior of building(s) within 360 days. A certificate shall be revoked and
notice of violation issued when it shall be found from personal inspection or
competent evidence that the rules or regulations under which it has been issued
are being violated.
   (B)   Zoning certificate of occupancy procedure.
      (1)   No building or building addition constructed after the effective
date of this chapter and no land vacant on the effective date of this chapter,
shall be used for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued
by the Village Inspector. No change in use shall be made until such certificate
of occupancy shall state that the use or occupancy complies with the provisions
of this chapter.
      (2)   Every application for a zoning certificate shall be deemed to be an
application for certificate of occupancy.
      (3)   No certificate of occupancy for the use of a premises for which a
zoning permit has been issued shall be issued until construction has been
completed, a final inspection made and the premises certified to be in
compliance with the plans and specifications for which the zoning certificate
was issued. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued to any applicant so
long as that applicant is indebted to the village for any prior fees of any
type. The zoning certificate of occupancy shall be issued or denied within
seven days after the Village Inspector is notified that the building or
premises is ready for occupancy.
   (C)   Variation procedure.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission, after a public hearing, may
recommend to the Village Board the varying of the regulations of this chapter
in harmony with their general purpose and intent only in the specific instances
hereinafter set forth, where the Planning and Zoning Commission makes finding
of fact in accordance with the standards hereinafter prescribed and further,
finds that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of this chapter.
      (2)   An application for variation shall be filed in writing with the
Village Manager. The application shall contain such information as the Planning
and Zoning Commission may, by rule, require. Notice of such public hearing
shall be made as prescribed by law. The required legal notice may be
supplemented by such additional form of notice as the Planning and Zoning
Commission, by rule, may require.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not recommend to the
Village Board varying the regulations of this chapter, as authorized by this
section, unless it shall first make findings of fact based upon the evidence
presented to it in each of the following evidence of which the petitioner is
responsible for demonstrating:
         (a)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations
governing the zoning district in which it is located;
         (b)   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to
the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
         (c)   Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this chapter;
         (d)   The plight of the applicant is due to unique circumstances and
does not result from the actions of the applicant;
         (e)   Granting the variation requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district; and
         (f)   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
      (4)   No nonconforming uses of neighboring lands or structures, in the
same district and no permitted, special or nonconforming uses or lands or
structures in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a
variance.
      (5)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may require such conditions and
restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to
comply with the standards set forth in this subchapter to reduce or minimize
the injurious effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood
and to implement the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
      (6)   The following situations, and only those situations, are
permissible areas in which variations from the regulations of this chapter are
allowed to be recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and granted by
the Village Board when in accordance with the standards established in this
section:
         (a)   To permit a yard less than required by the applicable
regulations;
         (b)   To permit the use of a lot of record on the effective date of
this chapter for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient
area of the lot, but in no event shall the area of the lot be less than 80% of
the required lot area;
         (c)   To permit the same off-street parking spaces to qualify as
required spaces for two or more uses; provided, that the maximum use of such
facility by each use does not take place during the same hours of the same days
of the week;
         (d)   To increase by not more than 25% the maximum distance that
required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use served;
         (e)   To allow any permitted nonresidential use in a residence
district to exceed the floor area ratio imposed by the applicable regulations;
         (f)   To permit a variation in number, size or location of accessory
use, accessory area, accessory buildings or structures; and
         (g)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to
the Planning and Zoning Commission the power to recommend through variations or
to the Village Board the authority to alter or change the zoning
classifications of the zoning district map or to permit a use not otherwise
permitted by variation, such power and authority being exercised only by the
zoning amendment procedure as outlined in division (E) below.
   (D)   Appeals procedure.
      (1)   An appeal may be taken to the Planning and Zoning Commission by any
person or by any officer, department, board or bureau aggrieved by a decision
of the Village Manager or his or her authorized agent. Such an appeal shall be
taken within 45 days of the action complained of, by filing with the
Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds thereof. The Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall forthwith transmit to the Planning and Zoning Commission all the papers
constituting a record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
      (2)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed unless the Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission certifies
to the Planning and Zoning Commission, after notice of the appeal has been
filed with the Village Clerk, that by reason of facts stated in the appeal, a
stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in
which case the proceedings shall not be stayed unless by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by a court of
record in application of the Village Manager and on due cause shown.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall select a reasonable time
and place for the hearing of the appeal and give notice thereof to the parties
and shall render a written decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may affirm or may reverse, wholly or in
part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination that, in its
opinion, ought to be done; and to that end, shall have all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken. The Village Manager shall maintain
records of all actions of the Planning and Zoning Commission relative to
appeals.
   (E)   Zoning amendment procedure.
      (1)   Amendments may be proposed by the Village Board of Trustees, the
Planning and Zoning Commission or any person; provided, that any person shall
have a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive
possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest or any
exclusive possessory interest (with the concurrence of the person holding the
freehold interest) which is specifically enforceable in the land which is
described in the application for amendment. Any proposal shall set forth names
of owner of all benefitting interests in any land trusts wherein a land trust
is proposing such amendment.
      (2)   An application for an amendment shall be obtained from and filed
with the Village Manager. Such applications for zoning amendments shall be in a
form so that the application, when complete, including required accompanying
material, shall provide such information as required by Planning and Zoning
Commission for its review. Application for amendments initiated by the Planning
and Zoning Commission or Village Board of Trustees shall include a copy of the
minutes of that body approving the filing of an application for zoning
amendment. Applications for zoning amendments initiated by any person described
above as eligible to petition for a zoning amendment, shall not be considered
nor scheduled for public hearing until the zoning amendment fee has been
deposited with the Village Clerk to partially cover the cost of this procedure,
and under no condition shall such sum or any part thereof be refunded for
failure of said amendment to be enacted into law.
      (3)   Once the zoning regulations amendment has been filed with the
Village Manager, the Village Manager shall arrange proper legal notice, as
required by law, and schedule for public hearing the next regular Planning and
Zoning Commission meeting which fulfills minimum public notice requirement.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on
each application for zoning amendment at the time and place scheduled in the
public notice. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of proceedings
preserved in the manner as from time to time prescribed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Where additional information is required for the
Commission’s review, the Board, by official action, may continue the hearing to
the time and place of the next Planning and Zoning Commission meeting.
      (5)   (a)   Within 45 days after the close of the hearing on a proposed
amendment, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make its recommendation to
the Village Board. On applications for zoning amendments which would change the
zoning classification of a particular property, the recommendation shall
include findings of fact bearing on the decision. Such findings of fact shall
relate to matters such as:
            1.   Existing uses of other property within the general area of the
subject property;
            2.   Evidenced recent trends in land use development of the general
area;
            3.   Any conditions which render the property less desirable or
inappropriate for the uses to which it is presently zoned;
            4.   Availability of other areas already zoned for such uses;
            5.   The zoning amendment, if granted, serves the public interest
and does not solely benefit the property of the applicant alone; and
            6.   The amendment would not be inconsistent with the objectives of
the comprehensive plan.
         (b)   In its findings of fact and recommendation to the Village Board,
the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval or disapproval, or
recommend the change of zoning classification of the subject property to any
other more restrictive zoning classification than specified in the public
notice.
      (6)   The Village Board shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this
chapter until it shall have received a written report and recommendation from
the Planning and Zoning Commission except, however, that no action by the
Planning and Zoning Commission within 45 days of the public hearing of the
matter shall be deemed to be a favorable recommendation. A favorable vote of
two-thirds of the Trustees then holding office will be required to adopt a
zoning amendment not recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (7)   The Village Board, after receiving the recommendation of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, or after the above prescribed time period, if
no report is received and without further public hearing may grant or deny any
proposed zoning amendment, or may refer it back to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for further study. In case of a written protest against any proposed
zoning amendment signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage
proposed to be altered or by the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately
adjoining or across the alley therefrom or by the owners of 20% of the frontage
directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, as to regulations or
district, filed with the Village Clerk, such amendment shall not be passed
except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of the Trustees then holding office.
      (8)   The Village Manager shall cause to be published, no later than
March 31 of each year, a zoning district map clearly showing the existing
zoning uses, divisions, restrictions, regulations and classifications for the
preceding calendar year. If, in any calendar year, there are no changes in the
zoning uses, division, restrictions, regulations and classifications no map
need be published for such calendar year. The Village Board may establish a fee
to be charged each person desiring a copy of such map. Such fee shall be paid
to the village who shall account for such monies. Such fees shall be applied to
defray the costs of publishing the zoning map.
   (F)   Special use procedures.
      (1)   Applications for special use may be filed by any person having a
freehold interest in land or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive
possession (with the concurrent of the person holding the freehold interest) or
a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest or an exclusive
possessory interest which is specifically enforceable.
      (2)   An application for a special use permit shall be obtained from and
filed with the Village Manager. Such application for a special use permit shall
be in a form so that the application, when complete, including required
accompanying material, shall provide such information as required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission for its review. The accompanying material shall
include a written statement signed by the applicant as to how the standards for
the granting of the special use permit are met. These standards shall include:
         (a)   The proposed use will not adversely affect other property
developed or able to be developed to the uses already permitted;
         (b)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary
supporting facilities have been or are being provided;
         (c)   Adequate measures have been provided to accommodate ingress and
egress so as to avoid congestion, not unduly impede surrounding traffic flows
or create hazardous or unsafe conditions;
         (d)   The standards for site development, will be such as to enhance
the proposed use and its setting, screen or so locate parking, loading, storage
and less attractive accessory uses away from public view, and to otherwise
complement the visual appearance of the area in which the proposed project is
to be located. The applicant may offer or the Planning and Zoning Commission
may require a site development and landscape and screening plan as part of the
applicant’s written statement; and
         (e)   The proposed special use, if permitted, will conform to all
other requirements of the district in which it is to be located or if not
conforming, a listing of necessary variations which will be required subsequent
to the granting of the special use permitted by the Village Board.
      (3)   Once the special use application has been filed with the Village
Manager, the Village Manager shall arrange proper legal notice as required by
law and schedule the public hearing for the next regular Planning and Zoning
Commission meeting which fulfills minimum public notice requirements.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on
the proposed special use at the time and place scheduled in the public notice.
The hearing shall be conducted and a record of the proceedings preserved in the
manner as from time to time prescribed by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (5)   Within 45 days of the close of the hearing on the proposed special
use, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make its recommendation to the
Village Board attaching the applicant’s signed statement and any other
conditions suggested by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Village Board
may recommend granting or denying the special use permit and may modify or
attach any additional conditions to which the proposed special use would be
subject.
      (6)   The granting of a special use by the Village Board shall constitute
authorization for the Village Manager to issue a zoning certificate for the
proposed use subject to any conditions imposed in the granting.
      (7)   Special uses approved by the Village Board shall be designated on
the zoning map by a symbol. Failure of the applicant or other subsequent person
continuing the special use, from continually maintaining the use in a manner
complying with the conditions under which the use was granted, shall constitute
a zoning violation subject to the penalties of this chapter. In the event of
termination of a special use, permitted uses under the applicable zoning
classification shall be the only uses allowed and for which subsequent building
permits or use permits may be issued.
(2009 Code, § 40-12-2) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015; Ord. 17-24, passed 6-12-
2017)
§ 156.207 INTERPRETATION AND RELATION TO OTHER ORDINANCES AND RESTRICTIONS.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public safety, health,
convenience, comfort, morals and general welfare. It is not intended by this
chapter to interfere with, abrogate, annul or repeal any ordinance, rules or
regulations previously adopted and not in conflict with any of the provisions
of this chapter or which shall be adopted pursuant to law relating to the use
of buildings or premises, nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with,
abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties,
except that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or required larger open
spaces that other covenants or other agreements, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
(2009 Code, § 40-12-3) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.208 REPEAL OF PRIOR ZONING REGULATIONS.
   Upon the adoption of this chapter taking effect, the following existing
zoning rules and regulations of the municipal code are hereby repealed and
superseded by this regulation: prior existing Article X.
(2009 Code, § 40-12-4) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.209 FEES.
   (A)   An application for an amendment, special use or variation, filed by or
on behalf of the owner or owners of the property affected shall be accompanied
by a fee of $75.
   (B)   An application for a planned development shall be accompanied by a fee
of $250.
   (C)   Final plats of all or a portion of a project shall be accompanied by
the final plat fee as outlined in §§
156.185 through
156.192.
   (D)   An application for an appeal shall be accompanied by a fee of $10.
   (E)   An application for a zoning amendment shall be accompanied by a fee of
$25.
   (F)   (1)   Application for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by a
fee of $30.
      (2)   Application for a zoning certificate shall also be construed as an
application for the certificate of occupancy for which no fee is required.
(2009 Code, § 40-12-6) (Ord. 15-08, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations and penalties. Any person or any entity which violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100 for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Village may pursue additional remedies to violations. In case any
building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter, the proper authorities of the village, in addition
to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful erection, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or
abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or
land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such
premises.
(2009 Code, § 40-12-5)
Zoning District  A-1 R-S R-1 R-2 R-2 R-2 R-4 R-4 R-4 R-4 R-5 R-5 R-5 R-5 R-5
Zoning            A-1  R-S    R-1    R-2    R-2    R-2       R-4    R-4    R-4       R-4    R-5    R-5    R-5       R-5    R-5
District
                  1                         2      2 unit           2      2 unit    3 - 4         2      2 unit    3 - 4
        Lot Type unit 1 unit 1 unit 1 unit units  separate  1 unit units  separate  units  1 unit units  separate  units  >4 units
                                                   ownership               ownership                      ownership
                                                                                                                           15,000 or
Lot size          1.0                              6,000                   6,000                          6,000            3,000
(sq.     Interior ac   14,500 10,200 10,200 12,000 each      10,200 12,000 each      12,000 10,200 12,000 each      12,000 whichever
ft.)                                                                                                                       is
                                                                                                                           greater
                                                                                                                           18,000 or
                                                                                                                           3,000 per
        Corner   1.0  14,500 12,000 12,000 14,400 7,200     12,000 14,400 7,200     14,400 12,000 14,400 7,200     14,400 unit,
                  ac                               each                    each                                            whichever
                                                                                                                           is
                                                                                                                           greater
Front
yard     All      30   30     25     25     25     25        25     25     25        25     25     25     25        25     25
(ft.)
Rear
yard     Interior 100  15     10     20     20     20        20     20     20        20     20     20     20        20     20
(ft.)*
Side
yard     Interior 8    8      8      8      8      8         8      8      8         10     8      8      8         10     10
(ft.)
         Corner
        interior 8    8      8      8      8      8         8      8      8         10     8      8      8         10     10
         side
         Corner
        street   30   30     25     25     25     25        25     25     25        25     25     25     25        25     25
         side
Lot line Interior 200  90     85     85     100    50        85     100    50        100    85     100    50        100    100
(ft.)
        Corner   200  90     100    100    120    60        100    120    60        120    100    120    60        120    120
Floor /  All      0.2  0.30   0.30   0.40   0.40   0.40      0.75   0.75   0.40      0.75   1.00   1.00   0.40      1.00   1.00
lot area
Building
height   All      non  35     35     35     35     35        45     45     35        45     45     45     35        45     45
(max.             e
ft.)
* By zoning regulations definition, corner lots will not be considered to have rear yards, but only front and side yards
 
(2009 Code, § 40-5-7)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to 2009 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                            Code Section
5 ILCS 120/1                            31.05,
                                        33.01
5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.                    31.02,
                                        92.52
5 ILCS 120/2                            33.01
5 ILCS 120/2.02                         31.03
5 ILCS 120/2.03                         31.03
5 ILCS 120/2.05                         33.20
5 ILCS 120/2.06                         31.05,
                                        33.03
5 ILCS 120/2.06(c)                      32.032
5 ILCS 140/1.1 et seq.                  36.065
5 ILCS 140/7                            36.074
5 ILCS 140/11                           36.075
5 ILCS 205/1 et seq.                    92.52
5 ILCS 270/1                            30.07
5 ILCS 430/5-15                         36.030
5 ILCS 430/5-65                         36.119,
                                        36.999
5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40          36.030
5 ILCS 430/15-10                        36.118
5 ILCS 430/50-5                         36.030
5 ILCS 430/70-5                         36.030
5 ILCS 430/70-5(a)                      36.030
5 ILCS 430/70-5(c)                      36.030
10 ILCS                                 30.02
20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.                  34.070
30 ILCS 235/6                           32.067
40 ILCS 5/21-101 et seq.                38.004
                                        38.037,
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.                    115.35,
                                        115.36
50 ILCS 105/2                           30.03,
                                        32.006
50 ILCS 705/6.1                         35.17
50 ILCS 720/1 et seq.                   35.17
65 ILCS                                 31.01
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2                         10.36
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2(2)                      10.36
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2(5)                      10.36
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2.1                       10.36
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                         Ch. 152,
                                        152.01
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1                       10.99
65 ILCS 5/1-2-3                         10.01,
                                        10.03
65 ILCS 5/1-2-4                         32.032
65 ILCS 5/1-2-5                         32.032
65 ILCS 5/1-2-6                         10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2-7                         10.99
65 ILCS 5/1-2-8                         10.99
65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1                       10.99
                                        70.01,
65 ILCS 5/1-3-2                         130.01,
                                        130.02
65 ILCS 5/2-2-12                        30.01
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5                      30.06
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-6                      30.04
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-10                     30.02
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-15                     31.08
                                        30.04,
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30                     30.07,
                                        32.060
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-35                     30.04,
                                        32.040
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40                     30.04,
                                        32.043
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-45                     32.044
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50                     30.05,
                                        32.003
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50(c)                  31.04,
                                        32.031
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50(d)                  31.01
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5                      32.001,
                                        32.030
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-10                     32.004
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-15                     30.03
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-20                     30.04,
                                        32.037
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25                     30.04
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-5                      31.01
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-15                     32.001
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-75(b)                  30.06
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-90                     32.030
                                        32.006,
65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5                      32.056,
                                        32.080,
                                        32.096
65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-10                     32.044
65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-21                     35.17
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5                      32.010
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-10                     32.007
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-20                     32.004
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-30                     32.005
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35                     32.002
                                        32.057,
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40                     32.058,
                                        32.062
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40 et seq.             54.136
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-45                     32.058,
                                        32.063
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-50                     32.067
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-55                     32.059
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-65                     32.065
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-70                     32.065
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-85                     32.061
                                        30.01,
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90                     32.032,
                                        32.033
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-95                     32.044
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-110                    32.032,
                                        32.038
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-115                    32.066
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-15                     31.20
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-20                     31.07
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25                     31.02,
                                        31.03
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-35                     31.05
65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-5                      32.014
65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-5                      30.10,
                                        30.30
65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-10                     30.10,
                                        30.30
65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-15                     30.30
65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-15(b)                  30.13
65 ILCS 5/7-1-8                         156.042
65 ILCS 5/8-3-1                         38.001
65 ILCS 5/8-8-8                         38.003
65 ILCS 5/8-9-1                         30.09
65 ILCS 5/8-9-2                         30.09
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1                        38.066
                                        38.070,
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2                        38.085,
                                        38.086,
                                        38.999
65 ILCS 5/9-2-4.5                       91.120
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-6                      35.17
                                        Ch. 90,
                                        90.99,
65 ILCS 5/11-1-1                        130.02,
                                        130.15,
                                        130.43,
                                        Ch. 133
65 ILCS 5/11-1-2                        35.17
65 ILCS 5/11-1-3                        38.002
65 ILCS 5/11-1-5                        130.41
65 ILCS 5/11-1-6                        34.050,
                                        37.06
                                        130.17—
65 ILCS 5/11-5-2                        130.19,
                                        132.04,
                                        134.02
65 ILCS 5/11-5-3                        130.31
65 ILCS 5/11-5-4                        130.32
65 ILCS 5/11-5-6                        Ch. 90,
                                        90.06
65 ILCS 5/11-8-4                        130.36
65 ILCS 5/11-40 et seq.                 70.01
65 ILCS 5/11-12                         34.009
65 ILCS 5/11-12-4                       34.001
                                        34.006,
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12                      Ch. 152,
                                        152.01
65 ILCS 5/11-19-4                       38.006
65 ILCS 5/11-20-6                       91.025
65 ILCS 5/11-20-7                       91.025,
                                        91.137
65 ILCS 5/11-20-7(d)                    91.138
65 ILCS 5/11-20-8                       91.137
65 ILCS 5/11-20-8(d)                    91.138
                                        Ch. 90,
65 ILCS 5/11-20-9                       90.31,
                                        90.99
65 ILCS 5/11-20-12                      91.137
65 ILCS 5/11-20-12(d)                   91.138
65 ILCS 5/11-20-13                      91.045,
                                        91.137
65 ILCS 5/11-20-13(e)                   91.138
65 ILCS 5/11-20-15                      91.138
65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1                    91.135,
                                        91.138
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2                       Ch. 152,
                                        152.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8                       Ch. 152,
                                        152.01
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1                       91.105
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01                    91.137,
                                        91.138
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.1 et seq.             91.120
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.1                     91.105
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2                       Ch. 152,
                                        152.01
65 ILCS 5/11-39-4                       150.004
65 ILCS 5/11-40-1                       71.21
65 ILCS 5/11-40-3.1                     73.10
65 ILCS 5/11-42-5                       110.11,
                                        110.36
65 ILCS 5/11-60-2                       91.006
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et seq.             38.105
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1                     155.130
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2                   38.105
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(a)                  38.114
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(c)                  38.114
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9)               38.114
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-6(e)                  38.114
65 ILCS 5/11-80-1 through 5/11-80-23    95.095
65 ILCS 5/11-80-2                       95.150
                                        95.023,
65 ILCS 5/11-80-3                       95.025,
                                        95.026
65 ILCS 5/11-80-7                       95.111,
                                        95.130
                                        95.110,
65 ILCS 5/11-80-13                      95.111,
                                        130.44
65 ILCS 5/11-80-17                      95.020
65 ILCS 5/11-81-1                       38.009
65 ILCS 5/11-81-2                       38.009
65 ILCS 5/11-98-1                       38.008
65 ILCS 5/32-5.1                        130.16
75 ILCS 5/4-1                           30.03
105 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.                 136.01
220 ILCS 5/16-104                       38.086
220 ILCS 5/21-201(v)                    95.201
220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)                    115.31,
                                        115.32
220 ILCS 5/21-401                       95.201,
                                        115.30
220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6)                 115.31
220 ILCS 5/21-801                       115.30
220 ILCS 5/21-801(b)                    115.30
220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi)             115.30
220 ILCS 5/22-501                       115.50
220 ILCS 5/22-501(r)(1)                 115.99
220 ILCS 5/22-501(s)                    115.52
220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.                   95.215
220 ILCS 65/4                           95.204
225 ILCS 320/3                          53.26
                                        112.01—
230 ILCS 15/1                           112.03,
                                        112.10
230 ILCS 15/3                           112.05,
                                        112.06
230 ILCS 15/4                           112.07
230 ILCS 15/6                           112.08
230 ILCS 15/8.1                         112.10
ILCS Chapter 235                        111.001
235 ILCS 5/1 et seq.                    111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.02                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.03                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.04                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.05                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.06                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.17                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.17.1                     111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.18                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.21                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.22                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.23                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.24                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.25                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.30                       111.001
235 ILCS 5/1-3.34                       111.001
                                        111.015,
                                        111.019,
                                        111.020,
                                        111.023,
235 ILCS 5/4-1                          111.026,
                                        111.040,
                                        111.055,
                                        111.057,
                                        111.059
235 ILCS 5/4-2                          32.012
235 ILCS 5/4-4                          111.065,
                                        111.092
235 ILCS 5/4-5                          111.017
235 ILCS 5/6-1                          111.022
235 ILCS 5/6-2                          111.018
235 ILCS 5/6-5                          111.067
235 ILCS 5/6-10                         111.066
235 ILCS 5/6-11                         111.042
235 ILCS 5/6-12                         111.044
235 ILCS 5/6-15                         111.067
                                        111.058,
235 ILCS 5/6-16                         111.068—
                                        111.072
235 ILCS 5/6-17                         111.067
                                        111.060—
235 ILCS 5/6-20                         111.062,
                                        111.064
235 ILCS 5/6-21                         111.018,
                                        111.024
235 ILCS 5/6-22                         111.067
235 ILCS 5/6-24                         111.025
235 ILCS 5/6-28                         111.041
235 ILCS 5/6-33                         111.001
235 ILCS 5/7-1                          111.016
235 ILCS 5/7-5                          111.999
235 ILCS 5/7-7                          111.093
235 ILCS 5/7-9                          111.094—
                                        111.096
235 ILCS 5/7-13                         111.091
235 ILCS 5/7-14                         111.043
235 ILCS 5/10-2                         111.085
235 ILCS 5/10-3                         111.086
235 ILCS 5/10-4                         111.086
235 ILCS 5/10-5                         111.088
235 ILCS 5/10-6                         111.089
235 ILCS 5/10-7                         111.090
410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.                  132.05
410 ILCS 625/3.6                        113.02
410 ILCS 650/1 et seq.                  111.052
410 ILCS 650/10                         111.053
415 ILCS 5                              152.07
415 ILCS 5/4(e)                         53.26
415 ILCS 10/1 et seq.                   Ch. 133
430 ILCS 65/0.01 et seq.                35.17
510 ILCS 5/1                            90.01
510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.                    90.35
510 ILCS 5/2                            90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.02                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.03                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.05                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.06                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.11                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.12                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.13                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.14                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.15                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.16                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.18                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/2.19                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/10                           90.32
510 ILCS 5/13                           90.35
510 ILCS 5/15.2                         90.02
510 ILCS 5/24                           90.02
605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.                95.201
625 ILCS Chapter 1                      70.01
625 ILCS 5                              73.08
625 ILCS 5/1-168.8                      74.20
625 ILCS 5/3-815                        72.04
625 ILCS 5/4-107(k)                     73.13
625 ILCS 5/4-201                        73.01
625 ILCS 5/4-202                        73.02
625 ILCS 5/4-204                        73.02,
                                        73.04
625 ILCS 5/4-205                        73.05
625 ILCS 5/4-206                        73.06
625 ILCS 5/4-207                        73.07
625 ILCS 5/4-208                        73.08
625 ILCS 5/4-209                        73.05,
                                        73.09
625 ILCS 5/4-209.1                      73.10
625 ILCS 5/4-210                        73.12
625 ILCS 5/4-211                        73.13
625 ILCS 5/4-212.1                      73.14
625 ILCS 5/4-213                        73.14
625 ILCS 5/4-214                        73.99
625 ILCS 5/6-306.5                      72.11
625 ILCS 5/11                           71.20
625 ILCS 5/11-203                       70.15
625 ILCS 5/11-206                       70.21
625 ILCS 5/11-208                       71.02
625 ILCS 5/11-301                       70.17
625 ILCS 5/11-302                       71.03
625 ILCS 5/11-304                       71.05
625 ILCS 5/11-313                       71.21
625 ILCS 5/11-415                       71.22
625 ILCS 5/11-500 through 5/11-502      74.20
625 ILCS 5/11-502                       71.23
625 ILCS 5/11-506                       71.21
625 ILCS 5/11-505                       71.25
625 ILCS 5/11-604                       71.21
625 ILCS 5/11-605                       71.21
625 ILCS 5/11-608                       71.21
625 ILCS 5/11-1006                      110.10
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.1 et seq.            72.05
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2                    72.05
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3(c)                 72.99
625 ILCS 5/11-1302                      72.99
625 ILCS 5/12                           71.40
625 ILCS 5/12-602                       71.41
625 ILCS 5/12-605                       71.40
625 ILCS 5/12-605.1                     71.40
625 ILCS 5/12-605.2                     71.40
625 ILCS 5/12-611                       71.42
625 ILCS 5/12-709                       74.20
625 ILCS 5/15-316(b)                    72.06
625 ILCS 25/1                           74.20
720 ILCS 5                              130.02
720 ILCS 5/2-1 through 720 5/ILCS 2-11  130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-13 through 720 ILCS 5/2-16 130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-19                         130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-20                         130.01
720 ILCS 5/12C-60                       130.46
720 ILCS 5/16-1                         131.01
720 ILCS 5/21-1                         131.02
720 ILCS 5/21-1.01                      131.03
720 ILCS 5/25-1                         130.18
720 ILCS 5/26-1                         132.01
720 ILCS 5/28-1                         111.056
720 ILCS 5/31-1                         132.02
720 ILCS 5/31-6(c)                      130.26
720 ILCS 5/31-7                         130.25
720 ILCS 5/31-8                         132.03
720 ILCS 5/32-9                         131.06
720 ILCS 5/47-10                        91.045
720 ILCS 505/1                          130.40
720 ILCS 550/3                          132.05
720 ILCS 550/11                         137.02
720 ILCS 570/201 et seq.                137.01
720 ILCS 600/5                          137.03,
                                        137.04
720 ILCS 605/1                          130.45
720 ILCS 635/0.01 et seq.               137.03
720 ILCS 675/1                          130.21
720 ILCS 675/0.01 et seq                130.23
730 ILCS 5/5-5-5(b)                     30.06
740 ILCS 115/1 et seq.                  135.02
740 ILCS 115/4                          135.02
740 ILCS 174/15(a)                      36.118
740 ILCS 174/15(b)                      36.118
745 ILCS 10/2-201 et seq.               30.08
745 ILCS 10/9-107                       38.007
765 ILCS 205/2                          152.09,
                                        155.094
775 ILCS 5/6-101                        36.118
                                        
 
REFERENCES TO 2009 CODE
 
2009 Code Code Section
2009 Code                 Code Section
1-1-1                     10.01
1-1-2                     10.02
1-1-3                     10.03
1-1-4                     10.04
1-1-5                     10.05
1-1-8                     10.20
1-1-9                     10.21
1-1-10                    10.22
1-1-11                    10.23
1-1-12                    10.24
1-1-15                    10.35
1-1-16                    10.36
1-1-17                    10.06
1-1-20                    10.99
1-1-21                    10.99
1-1-22                    10.99
1-1-23                    10.99
1-1-24                    10.99
1-2-1                     31.01
1-2-2                     31.02
1-2-3                     31.03
1-2-4                     31.04
1-2-5                     31.05
1-2-6                     31.06
1-2-7                     31.07
1-2-8                     31.08
1-2-9                     31.09
1-2-11                    31.20
1-2-12                    31.21
1-2-14                    31.35
1-2-15                    31.36
1-2-16                    31.37
1-2-18                    30.01
1-2-19                    30.02
1-2-20                    30.03
1-2-21                    30.04
1-2-22                    30.05
1-2-23                    30.06
1-2-24                    30.07
1-2-25                    30.08
1-2-26                    30.09
1-2-27                    30.10
1-2-28                    30.11
1-2-29                    30.12
1-2-30                    30.13
1-2-31                    30.14
1-2-32                    30.15
1-2-33                    30.16
1-2-34                    30.17
1-2-40                    32.001
1-2-41                    32.002
1-2-42                    32.003
1-2-43                    32.004
1-2-44                    32.005
1-2-45                    32.006
1-2-46                    32.007
1-2-47                    32.008
1-2-48                    32.009
1-2-49                    32.010
1-2-50                    32.011
1-2-51                    32.012
1-2-52                    32.013
1-2-53                    32.014
1-2-54                    32.015
1-2-56                    32.030
1-2-57                    32.031
1-2-58                    32.032
1-2-59                    32.033
1-2-60                    32.034
1-2-61                    32.035
1-2-62                    32.036
1-2-63                    32.037
1-2-64                    32.038
1-2-65                    32.039
1-2-66                    32.040
1-2-67                    32.041
1-2-68                    32.042
1-2-69                    32.043
1-2-70                    32.044
1-2-73                    32.055
1-2-74                    32.056
1-2-75                    32.057
1-2-76                    32.058
1-2-77                    32.059
1-2-78                    32.060
1-2-79                    32.061
1-2-80                    32.062
1-2-81                    32.063
1-2-82                    32.064
1-2-83                    32.065
1-2-84                    32.066
1-2-85                    32.067
1-2-88                    32.080
1-2-89                    32.081
1-2-90                    32.082
1-2-94                    32.095
1-2-95                    32.096
1-2-98                    32.110
1-2-99                    32.111
1-2-100                   32.112
1-2-101                   32.113
1-3-1                     30.30
1-4-1                     30.45
1-4-2                     30.46
1-5-1                     36.001
1-5-2                     36.002
1-5-3                     36.003
1-5-4                     36.004
1-5-5                     36.005
1-5-6                     36.006
1-5-7                     36.007
1-5-8                     36.008
1-5-9                     36.009
1-5-10                    36.010
1-5-11                    36.011
1-5-12                    36.012
1-5-13                    36.013
1-5-14                    36.014
1-5-15                    36.015
1-5-16                    36.016
1-6-1                     36.030
1-7-1                     33.01
1-7-2                     33.02
1-7-3                     33.03
1-7-4                     33.04
1-7-5                     33.05
1-7-6                     33.06
1-7-7                     33.07
1-7-8                     33.08
1-7-11                    33.20
1-7-12                    33.21
1-7-13                    33.22
1-7-14                    33.23
1-7-15                    33.35
1-7-16                    33.36
1-7-17                    33.37
1-7-18                    33.38
1-7-19                    33.39
1-7-20                    33.40
1-7-21                    33.41
Ch. 1, Div. 7, Addendum A Ch. 34, Appendix A
3-1-1                     90.01
3-1-2                     90.02
3-1-3                     90.03
3-1-4                     90.04
3-1-5                     90.05
3-1-6                     90.06
3-1-7                     90.07
3-1-8                     90.08
3-1-9                     90.09
3-1-10                    90.10
3-1-11                    90.99
3-2-1                     90.25
3-2-2                     90.26
3-2-3                     90.27
3-2-4                     90.28
3-2-5                     90.29
3-2-6                     90.30
3-2-7                     90.31
3-2-8                     90.32
3-2-9                     90.33
3-2-10                    90.34
3-2-11                    90.35
3-2-12                    90.36
3-2-13                    90.37
3-2-14                    90.38
3-2-15                    90.39
3-2-16                    90.40
3-2-17                    90.41
3-2-18                    90.99
4-1-1                     34.001
4-1-2                     34.002
4-1-3                     34.003
4-1-4                     34.004
4-1-5                     34.005
4-1-6                     34.006
4-1-7                     34.007
4-1-8                     34.008
4-1-9                     34.009
4-2-1                     34.020
4-2-2                     34.021
4-3-1                     34.035
4-3-2                     34.036
4-3-3                     34.037
4-3-4                     34.038
6-1-1                     150.001
6-1-3                     150.002
6-1-4                     150.003
6-2-1                     150.015
6-2-2                     150.016
6-3-1                     150.030
6-3-2                     150.031
6-4-1                     150.045
6-4-2                     150.046
6-5-1                     150.060
6-5-2                     150.061
6-6-1                     150.075
6-6-2                     150.076
6-7-1                     150.090
6-7-2                     150.091
6-7-3                     150.092
6-7-4                     150.093
6-7-5                     150.094
6-8-1                     150.105
6-8-2                     150.106
6-8-3                     150.107
6-8-4                     150.108
7-1-1                     110.01
7-1-2                     110.02
7-1-3                     110.03
7-1-4                     110.04
7-1-5                     110.05
7-1-6                     110.06
7-1-7                     110.07
7-1-8                     110.08
7-1-9                     110.09
7-1-10                    110.10
7-1-11                    110.11
7-2-1                     110.25
7-2-2                     110.26
7-2-3                     110.27
7-2-4                     110.28
7-2-5                     110.29
7-2-6                     110.30
7-2-7                     110.31
7-2-8                     110.32
7-2-9                     110.33
7-2-10                    110.34
7-2-11                    110.35
7-2-12                    110.36
7-3-1                     112.01
7-3-2                     112.02
7-3-3                     112.03
7-3-4                     112.04
7-3-5                     112.05
7-3-6                     112.06
7-3-7                     112.07
7-3-8                     112.08
7-3-9                     112.09
7-3-10                    112.10
7-4-1                     113.01
7-4-2                     113.02
Ch. 7                     Ch. 117, Form 1,
                          Ch. 117, Form 2
Ch. 7                     Ch. 117, Form 3,
                          Ch. 117, Form 4
8-1-1                     115.01
8-1-2                     115.02
8-1-3                     115.03
8-1-4                     115.04
8-1-5                     115.05
8-1-6                     115.06
8-1-7                     115.07
8-1-8                     115.08
8-1-9                     115.09
8-1-10                    115.10
8-1-11                    115.11
8-1-12                    115.12
8-1-13                    115.13
8-1-14                    115.14
8-1-15                    115.15
8-2-1                     115.30
8-2-2                     115.31
8-2-3                     115.32
8-2-4                     115.33
8-2-5                     115.34
8-2-6                     115.35
8-2-7                     115.36
8-3-1                     115.50
8-3-2                     115.51
8-3-3                     115.52
8-3-4                     115.99
12-1-1                    36.045
12-1-2                    36.046
12-1-3                    36.047
12-1-4                    36.048
12-1-5                    36.049
12-1-6                    36.050
12-1-7                    36.051
12-1-8                    36.052
13-1-1                    93.01
13-1-2                    93.02
13-1-3                    93.03
13-1-4                    93.99
14-1-1                    152.01
14-1-2                    152.02
14-1-3                    152.03
14-1-4                    152.04
14-1-5                    152.05
14-1-6                    152.06
14-1-7                    152.07
14-1-8                    152.08
14-1-9                    152.09
14-1-10                   152.10
14-1-11                   152.11
14-1-12                   152.12
14-1-13                   152.13
14-1-14                   152.99
14-1-15                   152.14
15-1-1                    36.065
15-1-2                    36.066
15-1-3                    36.067
15-1-4                    36.068
15-1-5                    36.069
15-1-6                    36.070
15-1-7                    36.071
15-1-8                    36.072
15-1-9                    36.073
15-1-10                   36.074
15-1-11                   36.075
15-1-12                   36.076
15-1-13                   36.077
15-1-14                   36.078
15-1-15                   36.078
16-1-1                    50.01
16-1-2                    50.02
16-1-3                    50.03
16-1-4                    50.04
16-1-5                    50.05
16-1-6                    50.06
16-1-7                    50.07
16-1-8                    50.08
16-1-9                    50.09
16-1-10                   50.10
16-1-11                   50.11,
                          50.99
16-1-12                   50.12
16-1-13                   50.13
16-1-14                   50.14
16-1-15                   50.15
16-1-16                   50.16
16-1-17                   50.17
16-1-18                   50.18
16-1-19                   50.19
16-1-20                   50.20
21-1-1                    111.001
21-2-1                    111.015
21-2-2                    111.016
21-2-3                    111.017
21-2-4                    111.018
21-2-5                    111.019
21-2-6                    111.020
21-2-7                    111.021
21-2-8                    111.022
21-2-9                    111.023
21-2-10                   111.024
21-2-11                   111.025
21-2-12                   111.026
21-3-1                    111.040
21-3-2                    111.041
21-3-3                    111.042
21-3-4                    111.043
21-3-5                    111.044
21-3-6                    111.045
21-3-7                    111.046
21-3-8                    111.047
21-3-9                    111.048
21-3-10                   111.049
21-3-11                   111.050
21-3-12                   111.051
21-3-13                   111.052
21-3-14                   111.053
21-3-15                   111.054
21-3-16                   111.055
21-3-17                   111.056
21-3-18                   111.057
21-3-19                   111.058
21-3-20                   111.059
21-3-21                   111.060
21-3-22                   111.061
21-3-23                   111.062
21-3-24                   111.063
21-3-25                   111.064
21-3-26                   111.065
21-3-27                   111.066
21-3-28                   111.067
21-3-29                   111.068
21-3-30                   111.069
21-3-31                   111.070
21-3-32                   111.071
21-3-33                   111.072
21-4-1                    111.085
21-4-2                    111.086
21-4-3                    111.087
21-4-4                    111.088
21-4-5                    111.089
21-4-6                    111.090
21-4-7                    111.091
21-4-8                    111.092
21-4-9                    111.093
21-4-10                   111.999
21-4-11                   111.094
21-4-12                   111.095
21-4-13                   111.096
22-1-1                    36.090
22-1-2                    36.091
22-1-3                    36.092
22-1-4                    36.093
22-1-5                    36.094
22-1-6                    36.095
22-1-7                    36.096
22-1-8                    36.097
22-1-9                    36.098
22-1-10                   36.099
22-1-11                   36.100
22-1-12                   36.101
22-2-1                    36.115
22-2-2                    36.116
22-2-3                    36.117
22-2-4                    36.118
22-2-5                    36.119,
                          36.999
22-2-6                    36.120,
                          36.999
23-1-1                    70.01
23-2-1                    70.15
23-2-2                    70.16
23-2-3                    70.17
23-2-4                    70.18
23-2-5                    70.19
23-2-6                    70.20
23-2-7                    70.21
23-2-8                    70.22
23-3-1                    71.01
23-3-2                    71.02
23-3-3                    71.03
23-3-4                    71.04
23-3-5                    71.05
23-4-1                    71.20
23-4-2                    71.21
23-4-3                    71.22
23-4-4                    71.23
23-4-5                    71.24
23-4-6                    71.25
23-4-7                    71.26
23-4-8                    71.27
23-5-1                    71.40
23-5-2                    71.41
23-5-3                    71.42
23-5-4                    71.43
23-6-1                    72.01
23-6-2                    72.02
23-6-3                    72.03
23-6-4                    72.04
23-6-5                    72.05,
                          72.99
23-6-6                    72.06
23-6-7                    72.07
23-6-8                    72.08
23-6-9                    72.09
23-6-10                   72.10
23-6-11                   72.11
23-7-1                    73.01
23-7-2                    73.02
23-7-3                    73.03
23-7-4                    73.04
23-7-5                    73.05
23-7-6                    73.06
23-7-7                    73.07
23-7-8                    73.08
23-7-9                    73.09
23-7-10                   73.10
23-7-11                   73.11
23-7-12                   73.12
23-7-13                   73.13
23-7-14                   73.14
23-7-15                   73.99
25-1-1                    91.001
25-1-2                    91.002
25-1-3                    91.003
25-1-4                    91.004
25-1-5                    91.005
25-1-6                    91.006
25-1-7                    91.007
25-2-1                    91.020
25-2-2                    91.021
25-2-3                    91.022
25-2-4                    91.023
25-2-5                    91.024
25-2-6                    91.025
25-3-1                    91.040
25-3-2                    91.041
25-3-3                    91.042
25-3-4                    91.043
25-3-5                    91.044
25-3-6                    91.045
25-4-1                    91.060
25-4-2                    91.061
25-4-3                    91.062
25-4-4                    91.063
25-5-1                    91.075
25-5-2                    91.076
25-5-3                    91.077
25-5-4                    91.999
25-6-1                    91.090
25-6-2                    91.091
25-7-1                    91.105
25-8-1                    91.120
25-9-1                    91.135
25-9-2                    91.136
25-9-3                    91.137
25-9-4                    91.138
27-1-1                    130.01
27-1-2                    130.02
27-2-1                    130.15
27-2-2                    130.16
27-2-3                    130.17
27-2-4                    130.18
27-2-5                    130.19,
                          130.99
27-2-6                    130.20
27-2-7                    130.21
27-2-8                    130.22
27-2-9                    130.23
27-2-10                   130.24
27-2-11                   130.25
27-2-12                   130.26
27-2-13                   130.27
27-2-14                   130.28
27-2-15                   130.29
27-2-16                   130.30
27-2-17                   130.31
27-2-18                   130.32
27-2-19                   130.33
27-2-20                   130.34
27-2-21                   130.35
27-2-22                   130.36
27-2-23                   130.37
27-2-24                   130.38
27-2-25                   130.39
27-2-26                   130.40
27-2-27                   130.41
27-2-28                   130.42
27-2-29                   130.43
27-2-30                   130.44
27-2-31                   130.45
27-2-32                   130.46
27-2-33                   130.47
27-2-34                   130.48
27-3-1                    131.01
27-3-2                    131.02
27-3-3                    131.03
27-3-4                    131.04
27-3-5                    131.05
27-3-6                    131.06
27-3-7                    131.07
27-4-1                    132.01
27-4-2                    132.02
27-4-3                    132.03
27-4-4                    132.04
27-4-5                    132.05,
                          132.99
27-5-1                    133.01
27-5-2                    133.02
27-5-3                    133.03
27-5-4                    133.04
27-5-5                    133.05
27-5-6                    133.06
27-5-7                    133.07
27-5-8                    133.08
27-5-9                    133.09
27-5-10                   133.10
27-5-11                   133.11
27-5-12                   133.12
27-5-13                   133.13
27-5-14                   133.14
27-6-1                    134.01
27-6-2                    134.02
27-7-1                    135.01
27-7-2                    135.02
27-8-1                    136.01
27-8-2                    136.02
27-8-3                    136.03
27-8-4                    136.04
27-8-5                    136.05
27-8-6                    136.99
27-8-7                    136.06
27-9-1                    94.001
27-9-2                    94.002
27-9-3                    94.003
27-9-4                    94.999
27-10-1                   74.01
27-10-2                   74.02
27-10-3                   74.03
27-10-4                   74.04
27-10-5                   74.05
27-10-6                   74.06
27-10-7                   74.07
27-10-8                   74.08
27-10-9                   74.09
27-10-10                  74.10
27-10-11                  74.11
Ch. 27, Sch. A            Ch. 75, Sch. I
Ch. 27, Sch. B            Ch. 75, Sch. II
Ch. 27, Sch. C            Ch. 75, Sch. III
Ch. 27, Sch. D            Ch. 75, Sch. IV
Ch. 27, Sch. E            Ch. 76, Sch. I
Ch. 27, Sch. F            Ch. 76, Sch. II
Ch. 27, Sch. G            Ch. 76, Sch. III
Ch. 27, Sch. H            Ch. 76, Sch. IV
Ch. 27, Sch. I            Ch. 76, Sch. V
Ch. 27, Sch. K            Ch. 75, Sch. V
Ch. 27, Sch. L            Ch. 75, Sch. VI
28-1-1                    92.01
28-1-2                    92.02
28-1-3                    92.03
28-1-4                    92.04
28-1-5                    92.05
28-1-6                    92.06
28-1-7                    92.07
28-1-8                    92.08
28-1-9                    92.09
28-1-10                   92.10
28-1-11                   92.11
28-1-12                   92.12
28-1-13                   92.13
28-1-14                   92.14
28-1-15                   92.15
28-1-16                   92.16
28-1-17                   92.17
28-1-18                   92.18
28-1-19                   92.19
28-1-20                   92.20
28-1-21                   92.21
28-1-22                   92.22
28-1-23                   92.23
28-1-24                   92.24
28-1-25                   92.25
28-1-26                   92.26
28-1-27                   92.27
28-1-28                   92.28
28-1-29                   92.29
28-2-1                    92.40
28-2-2                    92.41
29-1-1                    151.001
29-1-2                    151.002
29-1-3                    151.003
29-1-4                    151.004
29-1-5                    151.015
29-1-6                    151.016
29-1-7                    151.017
29-1-8                    151.018
29-1-9                    151.019
29-1-10                   151.020
29-1-11                   151.021
29-1-12                   151.022
29-1-14                   151.035
29-1-15                   151.036
29-1-16                   151.037
29-1-17                   151.038
29-1-18                   151.039
29-1-21                   151.050
29-1-22                   151.051
29-1-23                   151.052
29-1-24                   151.053
29-1-25                   151.054
29-1-26                   151.055
29-1-27                   151.056
29-1-28                   151.057
29-1-30                   151.070
29-1-31                   151.071
29-1-32                   151.072
29-1-33                   151.073
29-1-35                   151.085
29-1-36                   151.086
29-1-37                   151.087
29-1-38                   151.088
29-1-39                   151.089
29-1-41                   151.100
29-1-42                   151.101
29-1-43                   151.102
29-1-44                   151.103
29-1-45                   151.104
29-1-47                   151.115
29-1-48                   151.116
29-1-49                   151.117
29-1-50                   151.118
29-1-51                   151.119
29-1-60                   151.130
29-1-61                   151.131
29-1-62                   151.132
29-1-63                   151.133
29-1-64                   151.134
29-1-65                   151.135
29-1-67                   151.150
29-1-68                   151.151
29-1-69                   151.152
29-1-70                   151.153
29-1-72                   151.165
29-1-73                   151.166
29-1-74                   151.167
29-1-75                   151.168
29-1-76                   151.169
29-1-77                   151.170
29-1-78                   151.171
29-1-79                   151.172
29-2-1                    151.185
29-2-2                    151.186
29-2-3                    151.187
29-2-4                    151.188
29-2-5                    151.189
29-2-6                    151.190
29-3-1                    151.205
29-3-2                    151.206
29-3-3                    151.207
29-3-5                    151.220
29-3-6                    151.221
29-3-7                    151.222
29-3-8                    151.223
29-3-9                    151.224
29-3-10                   151.225
29-3-11                   151.226
29-3-12                   151.227
29-3-13                   151.228
29-3-15                   151.240
29-3-16                   151.241
29-3-18                   151.255
29-3-19                   151.256
29-3-20                   151.257
29-3-21                   151.258
29-3-22                   151.259
29-3-23                   151.260
29-3-24                   151.261
29-3-25                   151.262
29-3-26                   151.263
29-3-27                   151.264
29-3-28                   151.265
29-3-29                   151.266
29-3-30                   151.267
29-3-31                   151.268
29-3-32                   151.269
29-3-33                   151.270
29-3-34                   151.272
29-3-35                   151.271
29-3-37                   151.285
29-3-38                   151.286
29-3-39                   151.287
29-3-40                   151.288
29-3-41                   151.289
29-3-42                   151.290
29-3-44                   151.305
29-3-46                   151.320
29-3-47                   151.321
29-3-48                   151.322
29-3-50                   151.335
29-3-51                   151.336
29-3-52                   151.337
29-3-53                   151.338
29-3-54                   151.339
29-4-1                    151.350
29-4-2                    151.351
29-4-3                    151.352
29-4-5                    151.365
29-4-6                    151.366
29-4-7                    151.367
29-4-9                    151.380
29-4-10                   151.381
29-4-11                   151.382
29-4-12                   151.383
29-4-13                   151.384
29-4-15                   151.395
29-4-16                   151.396
29-4-17                   151.397
29-4-18                   151.398
29-4-19                   151.399
29-4-20                   151.400
29-4-21                   151.401
29-5-1                    151.415
29-5-2                    151.416
29-5-4                    151.430
29-5-5                    151.431
29-5-6                    151.432
29-5-7                    151.433
29-5-9                    151.455
29-5-10                   151.456
29-5-11                   151.457
29-5-12                   151.458
29-5-14                   151.470
29-5-15                   151.471
29-5-16                   151.472
29-5-18                   151.485
29-5-19                   151.486
29-5-20                   151.487
29-5-21                   151.488
29-5-23                   151.500
29-5-24                   151.501
29-5-26                   151.515
29-6-1                    151.530
29-6-2                    151.531
29-6-4                    151.545
29-6-5                    151.546
29-6-6                    151.547
29-6-7                    151.548
29-6-8                    151.549
29-6-10                   151.560
29-6-11                   151.561
29-6-12                   151.562
29-6-13                   151.563
29-6-14                   151.564
29-6-15                   151.565
29-6-17                   151.580
29-6-18                   151.581
29-6-19                   151.582
29-6-21                   151.595
29-6-22                   151.596
29-6-23                   151.597
29-6-25                   151.610
29-6-26                   151.611
29-6-28                   151.625
29-7-1                    94.015
29-7-2                    94.016
29-7-4                    94.030
29-7-5                    94.031
29-7-6                    94.032
29-7-7                    94.033
29-7-9                    94.045
29-7-10                   94.046
29-7-12                   94.060
29-7-13                   94.061
29-7-14                   94.062
29-7-15                   94.063
Ch. 29, Art. VIII         94.075
30-1-1                    37.01
30-1-2                    37.02
30-1-3                    37.03
30-1-4                    37.04
30-1-5                    37.05
30-1-6                    37.06
30-2-1                    35.01
30-2-2                    35.02
30-2-3                    35.03
30-2-4                    35.04
30-2-5                    35.05
30-2-6                    35.06
30-2-7                    35.07
30-2-8                    35.08
30-2-9                    35.09
30-2-10                   35.10
30-2-11                   35.11
30-2-12                   35.12
30-2-13                   35.13
30-2-14                   35.14
30-2-15                   35.15
30-2-16                   35.16
30-2-17                   35.17
30-3-1                    34.050
30-3-2                    34.051
30-3-3                    34.052
30-3-4                    34.053
30-3-5                    34.054
30-3-6                    34.055
30-3-7                    34.056
30-3-8                    34.057
30-3-9                    34.058
30-3-10                   34.059
30-3-11                   34.060
30-3-12                   34.061
30-3-13                   34.062
30-3-14                   34.063
30-3-15                   34.064
30-3-16                   34.065
30-3-17                   34.066
30-3-18                   34.067
30-3-19                   34.068
30-3-20                   34.069
30-3-21                   34.070
32-1-1                    153.01
32-1-2                    153.02
32-1-3                    153.03
32-1-4                    153.04
32-1-5                    153.05
32-1-6                    153.06
32-1-7                    153.07
32-1-8                    153.08
32-1-9                    153.09
32-1-10                   153.10
32-1-11                   153.11
32-1-12                   153.12
32-1-13                   153.13
32-1-14                   153.14
32-1-15                   153.15
32-1-16                   153.16
32-1-17                   153.17
32-1-18                   153.18
32-1-19                   153.19
32-1-20                   153.99
32-1-21                   153.99
34-1-1                    95.001
34-1-2                    95.002
34-2-1                    95.015
34-2-2                    95.016
34-2-3                    95.017
34-2-4                    95.018
34-2-5                    95.019
34-2-6                    95.020
34-2-7                    95.021
34-2-8                    95.022
34-2-9                    95.023
34-2-10                   95.024
34-2-11                   95.025
34-2-12                   95.026
34-2-13                   95.027
34-2-14                   95.028
34-2-15                   95.029
34-2-16                   95.030
34-2-17                   95.031
34-2-18                   95.032
34-2-19                   95.033
34-3-1                    95.045
34-3-2                    95.046
34-3-3                    95.047
34-3-4                    95.048
34-3-5                    95.049
34-3-6                    95.050
34-3-7                    95.051
34-3-8                    95.052
34-4-1                    95.065
34-4-2                    95.066
34-4-3                    95.067
34-4-4                    95.068
34-4-5                    95.069
34-4-6                    95.070
34-4-7                    95.071
34-4-8                    95.072
34-4-9                    95.073
34-4-10                   95.074
34-4-11                   95.075
34-4-12                   95.076
34-4-13                   95.077
34-4-14                   95.078
34-4-15                   95.079
34-4-16                   95.080
34-4-17                   95.081
34-4-18                   95.082
34-4-19                   95.083
34-4-20                   95.084
34-4-21                   95.085
34-4-22                   95.086
34-4-23                   95.087
34-4-24                   95.088
34-4-25                   95.089
34-4-26                   95.090
34-4-27                   95.091
34-4-28                   95.092
34-4-29                   95.093
34-4-30                   95.094
34-4-31                   95.095
34-5-1                    95.110
34-5-2                    95.111
34-5-3                    95.112
34-6-1                    95.125
34-6-2                    95.126
34-6-3                    95.127
34-6-4                    95.128
34-6-5                    95.129
34-6-8                    95.130
34-7-1                    95.145
34-7-2                    95.146
34-7-3                    95.147
34-7-4                    95.148
34-7-5                    95.149
34-7-6                    95.150
34-8-1                    95.165
34-8-2                    95.166
34-8-3                    95.167
34-8-4                    95.168
34-8-5                    95.169
34-8-6                    95.170
34-8-7                    95.171
34-9-1                    95.185
34-9-2                    95.186
34-9-3                    95.187
34-9-4                    95.188
34-10-1                   95.200
34-10-2                   95.201
34-10-3                   95.202
34-10-4                   95.203
34-10-5                   95.204
34-10-6                   95.205
34-10-7                   95.206
34-10-8                   95.207
34-10-9                   95.208
34-10-10                  95.209
34-10-11                  95.210
34-10-12                  95.211
34-10-13                  95.212
34-10-14                  95.213
34-10-15                  95.214
34-10-16                  95.215
34-10-17                  95.216
34-10-18                  95.217
34-10-19                  95.218
34-10-20                  95.219
34-10-21                  95.220
34-10-22                  95.999
34-10-23                  95.221
34-10-24                  95.222
                          Ch. 95, App. A,
Ch. 34                    Ch. 95, App. B,
                          Ch. 95, App. C
35-1-1                    155.001
35-1-2                    155.002
35-1-3                    155.003
35-1-4                    155.004
35-1-5                    155.005
35-1-6                    155.006
35-1-7                    155.007
35-1-8                    155.008
35-1-9                    155.009
35-1-10                   155.010
35-1-11                   155.011
35-1-12                   155.012
35-2-1                    155.025
35-2-2                    155.026
35-2-3                    155.027
35-2-4                    155.028
35-2-5                    155.029
35-2-6                    155.030
35-2-7                    155.031
35-2-8                    155.032
35-2-9                    155.033
35-2-10                   155.999
35-3-1                    155.045
35-3-2                    155.046
35-3-3                    155.047
35-3-4                    155.048
35-3-5                    155.049
35-3-6                    155.050
35-3-7                    155.051
35-3-8                    155.052
35-3-9                    155.053
35-3-10                   155.054
35-3-11                   155.055
35-3-12                   155.056
35-4-1                    155.070
35-4-2                    155.071
35-4-3                    155.072
35-4-4                    155.073
35-4-5                    155.074
35-4-6                    155.075
35-4-7                    155.076
35-4-8                    155.077
35-5-1                    155.090
35-5-2                    155.091
35-5-3                    155.092
35-5-4                    155.093
35-5-5                    155.094
35-5-6                    155.095
35-5-7                    155.096
35-5-8                    155.097
35-5-9                    155.098
35-5-10                   155.099
35-6-1                    155.110
35-6-2                    155.111
35-8-1                    155.125
35-8-2                    155.126
35-8-3                    155.127
35-8-4                    155.128
35-8-5                    155.129
35-8-7                    155.130
35-9-1                    155.145
35-10-1                   155.160
35-10-2                   155.161
35-11-1                   155.175
35-11-2                   155.176
35-11-3                   155.177
35-11-4                   155.178
35-11-5                   155.179
35-11-6                   155.180
35-11-7                   155.181
35-11-8                   155.182,
                          155.999
35-11-9                   155.183
36-1-1                    38.001
36-1-2                    38.002
36-1-3                    38.003
36-1-4                    38.004
36-1-5                    38.005
36-1-6                    38.006
36-1-7                    38.007
36-1-8                    38.008
36-1-9                    38.009
36-2-1                    38.020
36-2-2                    38.021
36-2-3                    38.022
36-2-4                    38.023
36-2-5                    38.024
36-2-6                    38.025
36-2-7                    38.026
36-2-8                    38.027
36-2-9                    38.028
36-2-10                   38.029
36-2-11                   38.030
36-2-12                   38.031
36-2-13                   38.032
36-2-14                   38.033
36-2-15                   38.034
36-2-16                   38.035
36-2-17                   38.036
36-2-18                   38.037
36-3-1                    38.050
36-3-2                    38.051
36-3-3                    38.052
36-3-4                    38.053
36-3-5                    38.054
36-4-1                    38.065
36-4-2                    38.066
36-4-3                    38.067
36-4-4                    38.068
36-4-5                    38.069
36-4-6                    38.070
36-5-1                    38.085
36-5-2                    38.086
36-5-3                    38.087
36-5-4                    38.088
36-5-5                    38.089
36-5-6                    38.090
36-5-7                    38.091
36-5-8                    38.092
36-5-9                    38.999
37-1-1                    38.105
37-1-2                    38.106
37-1-3                    38.107
37-1-4                    38.108
37-1-5                    38.109
37-1-6                    38.110
37-1-7                    38.111
37-1-8                    38.112
37-1-9                    38.113
37-1-10                   38.114
37-1-11                   38.115
37-1-12                   38.116
39-1-1                    51.01
39-1-2                    51.02
39-1-3                    51.03
39-1-4                    51.04
39-1-5                    51.05
39-1-6                    51.06
39-1-7                    51.07
39-1-12                   51.20
39-1-13                   51.21
39-1-14                   51.22
39-1-15                   51.23
39-1-16                   51.24
39-1-17                   51.25
39-1-18                   51.26
39-1-19                   51.27
39-1-20                   51.28
39-1-21                   51.29
39-1-22                   51.30
39-1-23                   51.31
39-1-24                   51.32
39-1-25                   51.33
39-1-26                   51.34
39-1-27                   51.35
39-1-28                   51.36
39-1-29                   51.37
39-1-30                   51.38
39-1-31                   51.39
39-2-1                    52.01
39-2-2                    52.02
39-2-3                    52.03
39-2-4                    52.04
39-2-5                    52.05
39-2-6                    52.06
39-2-7                    52.07
39-2-8                    52.08
39-2-9                    52.09
39-2-10                   52.10
39-2-11                   52.11
39-2-12                   52.12
39-2-13                   52.13
39-2-14                   52.14
39-2-15                   52.15
39-2-16                   52.16
39-2-21                   52.30
39-2-22                   52.31
39-2-23                   52.32
39-2-24                   52.33
39-3-1                    53.01
39-3-2                    53.02
39-3-3                    53.03
39-3-4                    53.04
39-3-5                    53.05
39-3-6                    53.06
39-3-11                   53.20
39-3-12                   53.21
39-3-13                   53.22
39-3-14                   53.23
39-3-15                   53.24
39-3-16                   53.25
39-3-17                   53.26
39-3-18                   53.27
39-3-19                   53.28
39-3-20                   53.29
39-3-21                   53.30
39-3-22                   53.31
39-3-23                   53.99
39-4-1                    54.001
39-4-4                    54.015
39-4-5                    54.016
39-4-6                    54.017
39-4-7                    54.018
39-4-10                   54.030
39-4-11                   54.031
39-4-12                   54.032
39-4-13                   54.033
39-4-14                   54.034
39-4-15                   54.035
39-4-16                   54.036
39-4-17                   54.037
39-4-21                   54.050
39-4-22                   54.051
39-4-23                   54.052
39-4-24                   54.053
39-4-25                   54.054
39-4-26                   54.055
39-4-27                   54.056
39-4-30                   54.057
39-4-31                   54.058
39-4-32                   54.059
39-4-33                   54.060
39-4-34                   54.061
39-4-36                   54.062
39-4-37                   54.063
39-4-38                   54.064
39-4-42                   54.080
39-4-43                   54.081
39-4-44                   54.082
39-4-45                   54.083
39-4-46                   54.084
39-4-49                   54.095
39-4-50                   54.096
39-4-51                   54.097
39-4-52                   54.098
39-4-53                   54.099
39-4-54                   54.100
39-4-55                   54.101
39-4-56                   54.102
39-4-57                   54.103
39-4-58                   54.104
39-4-59                   54.105
39-4-65                   54.120
39-4-66                   54.121
39-4-67                   54.122
39-4-68                   54.123
39-4-71                   54.135
39-4-72                   54.136
39-4-73                   54.137
39-4-74                   54.138
39-4-75                   54.139
39-4-76                   54.140
39-4-77                   54.999
39-4-78                   54.999
39-4-79                   54.999
Ch. 39 Appendices         Ch. 54 Appendices
40-1-1                    156.001
40-1-2                    156.002
40-2-1                    156.015
40-2-2                    156.016
40-3-1                    156.030
40-3-2                    156.031
40-3-3                    156.032
40-3-4                    156.033
40-3-5                    156.034
40-3-6                    156.035
40-3-7                    156.036
40-3-8                    156.037
40-3-9                    156.038
40-3-10                   156.039
40-3-11                   156.040
40-3-12                   156.041
40-3-13                   156.042
40-3-14                   156.043
40-3-15                   156.044
40-4-1                    156.060
40-4-2                    156.061
40-4-3                    156.062
40-4-4                    156.063
40-5-1                    156.075
40-5-2                    156.076
40-5-3                    156.077
40-5-4                    156.078
40-5-5                    156.079
40-5-6                    156.080
40-5-7                    156.081
40-6-1                    156.095
40-6-2                    156.096
40-7-1                    156.110
40-7-2                    156.111
40-7-3                    156.112
40-8-1                    156.125
40-8-2                    156.126
40-8-3                    156.127
40-8-4                    156.128
40-8-5                    156.129
40-8-6                    156.130
40-8-7                    156.131
40-11-1                   156.185
40-11-2                   156.186
40-11-3                   156.187
40-11-4                   156.188
40-11-5                   156.189
40-11-6                   156.190
40-11-7                   156.191
40-11-8                   156.192
40-12-1                   156.205
40-12-2                   156.206
40-12-3                   156.207
40-12-4                   156.208
40-12-5                   156.999
40-12-6                   156.209
41-1-1                    154.001
41-1-2                    154.002
41-1-3                    154.003
41-1-4                    154.004
41-1-5                    154.005
41-1-6                    154.006
41-1-7                    154.007
41-1-8                    154.008
41-1-9                    154.009
41-1-10                   154.010
41-1-11                   154.011
41-1-12                   154.012
41-2-1                    154.025
41-2-2                    154.026
41-2-3                    154.027
41-2-4                    154.028
41-2-5                    154.029
41-2-6                    154.030
41-2-7                    154.031
41-2-8                    154.032
41-2-9                    154.999
41-3-1                    154.045
41-3-2                    154.046
41-3-3                    154.047
41-3-4                    154.048
41-3-5                    154.049
41-3-6                    154.050
41-3-7                    154.051
41-3-8                    154.052
41-3-9                    154.053
41-3-10                   154.054
41-3-11                   154.055
41-4-1                    154.070
41-4-2                    154.071
41-4-3                    154.072
41-4-4                    154.073
41-4-5                    154.074
41-4-6                    154.075
41-4-7                    154.076
41-4-8                    154.077
41-4-9                    154.078
41-5-1                    154.090
41-5-2                    154.091
41-5-3                    154.092
41-5-4                    154.093
41-5-5                    154.094
41-5-6                    154.095
41-5-7                    154.096
41-5-8                    154.097
41-5-9                    154.098
41-5-10                   154.099
41-6-7                    154.999
41-6-9                    154.999
41-6-14                   154.999
41-6-20                   154.999
41-7-1                    154.140
41-7-2                    154.141
41-7-3                    154.142
41-7-4                    154.143
41-7-6                    154.144
41-7-7                    154.145
                          
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
11-1-71  11-01-1971  51.20
11-01-71 11-01-1971  52.12
06-05-72 06-05-1972  51.33
84       04-16-1984  51.29
87-2     1-26-1987   53.06
                     155.001—
                     155.012,
                     155.025—
                     155.033,
                     155.045—
                     155.056,
                     155.070—
                     155.077,
91-4     5-6-1991    155.090—
                     155.099,
                     155.110,
                     155.111,
                     155.125—
                     155.129,
                     155.145,
                     155.160,
                     155.161
                     54.001,
                     54.015—
                     54.018,
                     54.030—
                     54.037,
                     54.050—
                     54.064,
92-3     5-11-1992   54.080—
                     54.084,
                     54.095—
                     54.105,
                     54.120—
                     54.123,
                     54.135—
                     54.140,
                     54.999
92-4     5-11-1992   51.37,
                     51.39
93-5     4-11-1993   115.01—
                     115.15
96-6     5-13-1996   155.005,
                     155.028
96-14    12-9-1996   91.062,
                     91.063
97-1     2-10-1997   130.22
97-3     3-10-1997   51.22
97-4     3-10-1997   95.065
97-5     3-10-1997   31.08
                     155.008,
97-6     4-14-1997   155.051—
                     155.053,
                     155.093
97-10    11-10-1997  91.060,
                     91.061
98-6     7-13-1998   51.03,
                     51.29
98-9     10-10-1998  155.051,
                     155.093
98-11    12-14-1998  155.056
99-4     3-8-1999    95.165—
                     95.171
                     38.085—
99-7     6-14-1999   38.092,
                     38.999
                     51.28,
                     51.29,
99-13    12-13-1999  51.31,
                     92.10,
                     110.03,
                     Ch. 150, App. A
00-07    11-13-2000  95.073
01-04    3-12-2001   95.185—
                     95.188
                     154.001—
                     154.012,
                     154.025—
                     154.032,
                     154.045—
                     154.055,
                     154.070—
10-09-01 10-09-2001  154.078,
                     154.090—
                     154.099,
                     154.110—
                     154.129,
                     154.140—
                     154.145,
                     154.999
02-06    9-9-2002    38.050—
                     38.054
02-10    10-15-2002  30.30
03-01    5-12-2003   72.02
                     153.01—
04-03    4-12-2004   153.19,
                     153.99
04-05    5-10-2004   36.030
                     155.175—
04-07    6-14-2004   155.183,
                     155.999
05-01    3-14-2005   91.075—
                     91.077
                     154.048,
05-07    11-14-2005  154.095,
                     155.048,
                     155.050
                     155.051,
                     155.055,
05-08    11-14-2005  155.072,
                     155.091,
                     155.093—
                     155.097
06-576   3-6-2006    130.47
06-02    3-13-2006   155.130
                     155.047,
                     155.051,
                     155.072,
06-04    7-10-2006   155.090,
                     155.093,
                     155.094,
                     155.098
                     150.001—
                     150.003,
                     150.030,
                     150.031,
                     150.045,
                     150.046,
06-07    7-12-2006   150.060,
                     150.061,
                     150.075,
                     150.076,
                     150.090—
                     150.094,
                     150.105—
                     150.108
                     152.01—
07-02    4-9-2007    152.14,
                     152.99
07-04    5-14-2007   30.30
                     154.047,
                     154.051,
                     154.072,
07-10    8-13-2007   154.090,
                     154.093—
                     154.095,
                     154.098
07-11    8-13-2007   155.051,
                     155.090
08-02    4-14-2008   155.127,
                     155.129
08-04    5-12-2008   115.30—
                     115.36
                     115.50—
08-05    5-12-2008   115.52,
                     115.99
09-11    10-13-2009  Ch. 76, Sch. I
10-01    4-12-2010   155.130
10-03    5-10-2010   Ch. 75, Sch. IV
10-08    10-12-2010  111.001,
                     111.020
11-01    1-10-2011   Ch. 75, Sch. II,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. I
11-02    1-10-2011   Ch. 75, Sch. I
11-03    1-10-2011   Ch. 76, Sch. IV
11-04    2-14-2011   92.40
11-05    2-14-2011   92.41
11-06    4-11-2011   35.17
11-10    9-12-2011   Ch. 150, App. A
                     91.025,
11-12    9-12-2011   91.044,
                     91.138
11-13    10-11-2011  155.130
12-05    6-11-2012   51.07
                     50.01—
12-06    7-9-2012    50.20,
                     50.99
12-08    7-9-2012    Ch. 75, Sch. VII
12-13    9-10-2012   Ch. 76, Sch. IV
12-14    11-14-2012  Ch. 75, Sch. IV
                     90.02,
12-18    12-10-2012  90.32,
                     90.35,
                     90.99
13-02    3-13-2013   Ch. 76, Sch. I
13-21    12-9-2013   31.02
14-02    4-14-2014   154.094,
                     155.094
14-05    5-12-2014   154.096,
                     155.096
14-06    5-12-2014   72.04
15-01    3-9-2015    130.19,
                     130.99
15-06    6-8-2015    32.015
                     34.009,
                     34.035—
                     34.038,
                     156.001,
                     156.002,
                     156.015,
                     156.016,
                     156.030—
                     156.043,
                     156.060—
                     156.063,
15-08    8-31-2015   156.075—
                     156.081,
                     156.095,
                     156.096,
                     156.110—
                     156.112,
                     156.125—
                     156.131,
                     156.185—
                     156.192,
                     156.205—
                     156.209
15-18    12-14-2015  111.021
                     154.140,
16-01    2-8-2016    154.145,
                     155.125
16-02    2-8-2016    111.020
16-04    3-14-2016   113.02
16-11    4-11-2016   35.17
16-17    6-13-2016   38.105—
                     38.116
16-18    8-8-2016    111.020
16-19    9-12-2016   111.056
16-20    10-11-2016  30.30
16-21    10-11-2016  30.30
16-22    10-11-2016  30.30
16-23    10-11-2016  30.30
16-24    10-11-2016  30.30
16-26    10-11-2016  111.020
17-01    1-9-2017    155.130
17-05    2-13-2017   50.02
17-19    3-13-2017   111.040
17-22    4-10-2017   31.20,
                     33.41
17-25    4-10-2017   155.126
                     90.04,
                     95.031,
                     151.241,
                     151.256,
17-24    6-12-2017   156.016,
                     156.035,
                     156.038,
                     156.043,
                     156.110,
                     156.206
17-30    6-12-2017   Ch. 75, Sch. IV
17-31    8-14-2017   31.05
17-37    11-13-2017  154.097,
                     155.097
17-40    11-13-2017  30.30
                     36.115—
17-45    12-11-2017  36.120,
                     36.999
18-02    1-8-2018    111.020,
                     111.021
                     154.005,
                     154.072,
18-03    2-12-2018   154.096,
                     155.005,
                     155.072,
                     155.096
18-06    3-12-2018   132.05,
                     132.99
18-12    4-23-2018   51.21,
                     51.22
18-13    6-4-2018    111.040
18-14    6-11-2018   111.021
                     156.002,
18-19    6-11-2018   156.016,
                     156.045
18-23    7-23-2018   116.01—
                     116.06
18-28    11-13-2018  36.117,
                     36.118
19-04    3-11-2019   Ch. 75, Sch. IV
19-05    3-11-2019   92.40
19-06    3-11-2019   91.020,
                     91.021
19-09    4-8-2019    114.01—
                     114.09
19-03    6-10-2019   94.003
19-17    8-12-2019   51.22
                     137.01—
19-29    12-9-2019   137.04,
                     137.99
                     154.160—
19-30    12-9-2019   154.162,
                     154.999
20-03    2-10-2020   91.075
20-04    2-10-2020   72.04
20-07    4-13-2020   156.061
                     35.01,
20-08    3-9-2020    35.18,
                     35.19
20-11    5-27-2020   111.073—
                     111.074
20-12    6-8-2020    150.015,
                     150.016
                     114.03,
20-13    8-10-2020   114.04,
                     114.07
20-14    7-13-2020   Ch. 75, Sch. I
20-18    9-14-2020   30.30
20-19    10-13-2020  156.165 -
                     156.175
20-21    11-9-2020   Ch. 75, Sch. VI
20-22    10-13-2020  51.29
20-26    12-14-2020  110.29
20-28    12-17-2020  52.11
21-04    3-8-2021    154.110 -
                     154.129
21-07    4-12-2021   51.21,
                     51.22
                     31.05,
21-12    5-10-2021   32.056,
                     35.18,
                     35.19
21-14    - -2021     154.161
21-15    6-14-2021   91.003
21-18    7-12-2021   54.034,
                     54.037
21-19    7-12-2021   154.095,
                     155.095
21-20    8-9-2021    111.20
21-22    9-13-2021   31.05
                     91.090,
21-23    10-12-2021  95.091,
                     130.19,
                     154.125
                     95.145,
21-28    10-12-2021  95.146,
                     95.148,
                     95.149
22-11    4-11-2022   51.21,
                     51.22
                     150.001,
22-23    10-11-2022  150.015,
                     150.016
22-24    11-14-2022  95.024,
                     154.094
23-01    1-9-2023    50.02
23-10    4-10-2023   51.21,
                     51.22
23-14    6-12-2023   156.096
23-18    7-10-2023   74.20
23-22    9-11-2023   156.038
23-24    9-11-2023   Ch. 75, Sch. I
24-10    9-23-2024   51.21,
                     51.22
24-11    9-9-2024    51.22
                     95.003,
                     95.023,
25-04    2-10-2025   130.01,
                     130.24,
                     156.016,
                     156.046
                    
 
 
 
