Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances passed by the County
of Rock Island. The table includes links to the ordinances, as maintained in
PDF format. For other legislation, including ordinances passed prior to 2024,
please contact the County offices.
 
Ordinances that amend the Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out.
 
Jump to:
2024 Ordinances
2025 Ordinances
2024 Ordinances
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No.  Eff. Date  Short Title and Code Sections Affected
R-2024-01 12/19/2023 Resolution on project labor agreements
                     Repealing and replacing Ch. 2 regarding liquor
                     regulations.
2024-03-A 3/21/2024   
                     Section affected:
                     Chapter 110
2024-04-A 4/16/2024  Amending the zoning and building fee structure.
                     Adopting the Code of Ordinances.
2024-05   5/23/2024   
                     ADO
                     Amending Ch. 110 regarding alcoholic beverages.
2024-06-A 6/18/2024   
                     Section affected:
                     110.057
                     Amending Ch. 10 regarding liquor licenses.
2024-07-A 7/16/2024   
                     Section affected:
                     110.059
                     Amending Ch. 130 regarding prohibition of sale of tobacco
                     to minors; possession of tobacco by minors
2024-08-A 8/20/2024   
                     Section affected:
                     130.01
2024-09   10/1520/24 Regulating public camping within unincorporated boundaries
                     and on properties owned by Rock Island County, IL
                     Renumbering code sections applicable to pollution control
2024-10-A 11/19/2024 facilities.
                      
                     Repeal 150.35 - 150.44; Add Ch. 156
2024-12-A 12/17/2024 Amending a rate for Recorder of Deeds GIS Fund
 
 
2025 Ordinances
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
2025-01  9/16/2025 Opting in to the preferential assessment for affordable
                   housing construction and rehabilitation.
                   Urban Hens
2025-02  10/1/2025  
                   Adding Ch. 157
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
 
 
COUNTY OF ROCK ISLAND, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2024-12-A, passed 12-17-2024; and
State legislation current through 2024 Illinois Legislative Service, Pamphlet
#6
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE COUNTY OF ROCK ISLAND,
ILLINOIS, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF ROCK ISLAND COUNTY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of Rock Island County,
Illinois are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form
and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and general welfare of the County and for the proper conduct of its affairs;
and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Illinois empower and
authorize the County of Rock Island to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance book form;
and
WHEREAS, the legislative Authority of the County of Rock Island has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
County of Rock Island of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the County
and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the County that this ordinance take effect at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNTY BOARD OF ROCK ISLAND COUNTY,
ILLINOIS:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of Rock Island County, Illinois as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the County of Rock Island,
Illinois.”
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   Chapter
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
         10.   General Provisions
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
         30.   Officials and Employees
         31.   Organizations
         32.   Emergency Management
         33.   Law Enforcement and Public Safety
         34.   Fees, Finances
         35.   Taxation
         36.   County Policies
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
         50.   Water
         51.   Sewage
         52.   Garbage, Collection, and Disposal
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
         70.   Traffic Regulations
         71.   Parking Regulations
         72.   Traffic Schedules
         73.   Parking Schedules
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
         90.   Health and Sanitation; Nuisances
         91.   Animals
         92.   Parks and Recreation
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
         110.   Alcoholic Beverages
         111.   Public Works Contractors
         112.   Amusement and Leisure
         113.   Sexually-Oriented Businesses
         114.   Telecommunications Carriers
         115.   Public Fireworks Display
         116.   Bicycle Sales, Registration
         117.   Food Service Establishments
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
         130.   General Offenses
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
         150.   Building Regulations; Construction
         151.   Mobile Homes, Mobile Home Parks
         152.   Stormwater Management
         153.   Subdivision Regulation
         154.   Zoning Regulations
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      I.   Contracts and Agreements
      II.   Public Property
      III.   Funds
      IV.   Zoning Map Matrix
      V.   Enterprise Zones
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
Section 3.   All prior Ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and re-ordaincd in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing, public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or
borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public
use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor
shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature
or pertaining to subjects not in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Rock Island County Board and the Clerk of Rock Island
County is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the County Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this county, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the County Board of Rock Island County on this 23rd day
of May 2024.
                                             Richard H. “Quijas” Brunk /s/
                                             Richard H. “Quijas” Brunk
                                             Rock Island County Board Chairman
ATTEST:
Karen K. Kinney /s/
Karen K. Kinney
Rock Island County Clerk
 
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title
   
10.02   Acceptance
   
10.03   Amendments
   
10.04   Code alteration
   
10.05   Repeal of general ordinances
   
10.06   Public utility ordinances
   
10.07   Court proceedings
   
10.08   Severability clause
   
10.09   Definitions
   
10.10   Catch lines
   
10.11   License
   
10.12   Application
   
10.13   Liability of officers
   
10.99   Penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE.
   (A)   Upon adoption by the County Board, the county code is hereby declared
to be and shall hereafter constitute the official county code of the county.
   (B)   The county code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the “Rock
Island County Code” and it is hereby published by the authority of the County
Board, and shall be kept up to date as provided in §
10.03 under the direction of the County Board Chairperson acting for said
County Board.
   (C)   Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter
and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well
as to the section itself when reference is made to this code by title in any
legal document.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-1)
§ 10.02 ACCEPTANCE.
   This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of the
state as the ordinance of the county of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in §
10.05.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-2)
§ 10.03 AMENDMENTS.
   Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter, and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the county
code.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-3)
§ 10.04 CODE ALTERATION.
   It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace, or
deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the County Board. The County Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk.
Any person having in his or her custody an official copy of this code shall
make every effort to maintain this code in an up to date and efficient manner.
He or she shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when
such are delivered to him or her, or made available to him or her through the
office of the County Clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of
officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the
county and shall be returned to the office the County Clerk when directed so to
do by order of the County Board.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.05 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the county passed prior to the adoption of this
code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still
in force, or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject
to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), from which are
excluded the following ordinance which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating boundaries; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
county; and all special ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-1)
§ 10.06 PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and
other public ways shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or
by virtue of §
10.05.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-2)
§ 10.07 COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   (1)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable.
      (2)   If any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the
party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
up on the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the county
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying, or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
county under any ordinance or provisions thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-3)
§ 10.08 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
code, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The County Board hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase
thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, divisions,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional,
invalid, or ineffective.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-4)
§ 10.09 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Construction of words.
      (1)   Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties, or persons,
any single matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used.
      (2)   When any subject matter, party, or person is referred to in this
code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender,
several matters, parties, or persons, and females as well as males and bodies
corporate, shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of
construction shall not be applied to any section of this code which contains
any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter
or content may be repugnant thereto.
      (3)   The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the county has
been changed in the content of this code to “title,” “chapter,” “section,” and/
or “division,” or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the county’s ordinances is not meant to amend the
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-1)
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
      AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another.
      BOARD. Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the County Board of Rock
Island County, Illinois.
      CODE. The official code of the county, and amendments thereto.
      COUNTY. The County of Rock Island, located in the State of Illinois.
      COUNTY BOARD CHAIRPERSON. The duly elected chair of the County Board. May
be referred to as the CHIEF ELECTED OFFICIAL of the county.
      EMPLOYEES. Whenever reference is made in this code to a county employee
by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
County of Rock Island.”
      FEE. A sum of money charged by the county for the carrying on of a
business, profession, or occupation.
      KNOWINGLY. The word KNOWINGLY imports only a knowledge that the facts
exist which brings the act or omission within the provisions of this code. It
does not require any KNOWLEDGE of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
      LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession, or occupation.
      MISDEMEANOR. Any offense for which a sentence of a term of imprisonment
in other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
      NEGLIGENT. The term, as well as NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, and NEGLIGENTLY
imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable consequences of the
act or omission as a prudent human ordinarily bestows in acting in his or her
own concern.
      NUISANCE. Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of
the inhabitants of the county, or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
      OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
      OFFENSE. Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omissions
of any act required by the provisions of this code.
      OFFICERS. Whenever reference is made in this code to a county officer by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the
County of Rock Island.”
      OPERATOR. The person who is in charge of any operation, business, or
profession.
      OWNER. Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
      PERSON. Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization, government, or any other group acting as an unit, as
well as a natural person.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right, or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged, or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
      RETAILER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles, or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
      STATE. Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the State of Illinois.
      STREET. Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares,
public places, and sidewalks.
      TENANT. Applied to a building or land shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
      WHOLESALER. This term and WHOLESALE DEALER, as used in this code unless
otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of
goods, merchandise, articles, or things in quantity to persons who purchase for
the purpose of resale.
      WILLFULLY. When applied to the intent with which an act is done or
omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the
omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law or to
injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
      WRITTEN, IN WRITING. May include printing and another mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it
shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, by his or her proper mark.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
§ 10.10 CATCH LINES.
   (A)   The catch lines of the several sections of this code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections.
   (B)   The catchlines are not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any
manner affect the scope, remaining, or intent of the provisions of any division
or section hereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of such sections, including the catch lines, are amended or reenacted.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-3)
§ 10.11 LICENSE.
   When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any
license previously issued to him or her by the county may be revoked by a court
of competent jurisdiction or by the County Board.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-2)
§ 10.12 APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to
every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section.
      (2)   Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code
where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action of a
continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty
or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
   (C)   (1)   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is
created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense.
      (2)   Provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   (D)   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.13 LIABILITY OF OFFICERS.
   No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the County Board to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-4)
Cross-reference:
   County officials, employees, see
Chapter 31
   Law enforcement, see
Chapter 33
§ 10.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be
fined in a sum not to exceed $1,000 for any one offense, excepting any specific
section of this code wherein the maximum fine is limited to a lesser amount and
said person may be confined in the County Jail for a period of not more than
six months (55 ILCS 5/5-1113).
(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
31.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
33.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY
      
34.   FEES, FINANCES
      
35.   TAXATION
      
36.   COUNTY POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
Ethics of Officials, Employees
   
30.01   Definitions
   
30.02   Prohibited political activities
   
30.03   Gift ban
   
30.04   Ethics Advisor
   
30.05   Sexual harassment policy
Municipal Retirement Fund
   
30.20   Preamble
   
30.21   Contributions
   
30.22   Implementation
   
30.23   Exclusion in State Retirement Fund
County Administrator
   
30.35   Establishment
   
30.36   Limitation of authority
   
30.37   Appointment
   
30.38   Compensation
   
30.39   Removal
   
30.40   Vacancy
   
30.41   Qualifications, education, experience
   
30.42   Duties, responsibilities
   
30.43   Administration
   
30.44   Budget
   
30.45   Personnel
   
30.46   Legislation
   
30.47   Support
   
30.48   Contracts, agreements
   
30.49   Communication
   
30.50   Property
   
30.51   Organization
   
30.52   Procedures, records, reports
 
   
30.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Ethics Commission, see §
31.55 through
31.59
ETHICS OF OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES
§ 30.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of Presidential or
Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   Are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in § 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-
3).
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. The same meaning as that term is defined in § 3 of
the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3).
   COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
subchapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off, or any period when the employee is on a
leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not
fixed, COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer is on
premises under control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION. The same meaning as that term is defined in § 9-1.4 of the
Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).
   EMPLOYEE. A person employed by the county, whether on a full-time or part-
time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction
and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work
is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
   EMPLOYER. The County of Rock Island, Illinois.
   GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance,
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:
      (1)   Compensation for employment;
      (2)   Service credit towards pension benefits; and/or
      (3)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created
by statute or subchapter, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
      (1)   Related to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative,
or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   Are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or a County Clerk under § 9-
3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those
activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a County
Clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
      (1)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the
purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payments for tickets for any
political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
      (4)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes, or for or against any referendum question.
      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes, or for or against any referendum question.
      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office, or for or against any referendum
question.
      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for an elective office or
a political organization, or for or against any referendum question or helping
in an effort to get voters to the polls.
      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office, or for or
against any referendum question.
      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for an elective
office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for an elective office, or for or against any referendum question.
      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for an elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:
      (1)   Is seeking official action:
         (a)   By an officer; or
         (b)   By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee.
      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business:
         (a)   With the officer; or
         (b)   With an employee, or with the officer or another employee
directing that employee.
      (3)   Conducts activities regulated:
         (a)   By the officer; or
         (b)   By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee.
      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2013)
§ 30.02 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally misappropriate any property or resources of the
county in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited activity:
      (1)   As part of that officer or employee’s duties;
      (2)   As a condition of employment; or
      (3)   During any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation, or
personal time off).
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment, or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this subchapter.
   (E)   No person either:
      (1)   In a position that is subject to recognized merit principles or
public employment; or
      (2)   In a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by
federal funds and that is subject to the “Federal Standards for a Merit System
of Personnel Administration” applicable to grant-in-aid programs shall be
denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member
or an officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political
organization or club.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2013; Res. passed 5-21-2013) Penalty, see §
30.99
§ 30.03 GIFT BAN.
   (A)   Purpose. Except as permitted by this section, no officer or employee,
and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as “recipients”), shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section.
   (B)   Exceptions. Division (A) above is not applicable to the following
(each of the exceptions listed in this division (B) is mutually exclusive and
independent of each other):
      (1)   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public;
      (2)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value;
      (3)   Any:
         (a)   Contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code; or
         (b)   Activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a
political organization or candidate.
      (4)   Educational materials and missions;
      (5)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business;
      (6)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual’s spouse or the individual’s or fiancee;
      (7)   (a)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient, or his or her spouse or immediate family member,
and not because of the personal friendship.
         (b)   In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of
personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which
the gift was offered, such as:
            1.   The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
            2.   Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
            3.   Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar
gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family
members.
      (8)   (a)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on
a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are:
            1.   Consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared; or
            2.   Catered.
         (b)   For purposes of this division (B)(8), CATERED means food or
refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
      (9)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee) if the
benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others
in similar circumstances;
      (10)   (a)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts.
         (b)   For the purpose of this division (B)(10), INTRA-GOVERNMENTAL
GIFT means any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or
employee, and INTER-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift given to an officer or
employee by an officer or employee of another governmental entity;
      (11)   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death; and/or
      (12)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
   (C)   Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not
violate this section if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to
return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an
amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income
taxation under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or
hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2013)
§ 30.04 ETHICS ADVISOR.
   (A)   The County Board Chairperson, with the advice and consent of the
County Board, shall designate an Ethics Advisor for the county and Forest
Preserve District of the county. The duties of the Ethics Advisor may be
delegated to an officer or employee of the county unless the position has been
created as an office by the county.
   (B)   The Ethics Advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and
employees of the county concerning the interpretation of and compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter and state ethics laws. The Ethics Advisor
shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the County Board.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2013)
Cross-reference:
   Penalties concerning the Ethics Commission, see 31.99(B)
§ 30.05 SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY.
   The county’s “Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment,” as adopted by the
resolution passed in 2018 as Exhibit A, is hereby adopted by reference as if
fully incorporated herein.
(Res. passed - -2018)
MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND
§ 30.20 PREAMBLE.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of 40 ILCS 5/7.173.2, participating
municipalities are authorized to pick up those contributions required to be
made by all of its employees to the State Municipal Retirement Fund, under the
provisions of 40 ILCS 5/7-173(a)(1) and (a)(3), and those additional
contributions made by the Sheriff’s law enforcement deputies, pursuant to 40
ILCS 5/7-173.1.
   (B)   Such contributions, when picked up, shall be treated as employer
contributions, pursuant to I.R.C. § 414(h).
   (C)   The effect of the legislation is to defer taxation on amounts
contributed to the State Municipal Retirement Fund until distribution.
   (D)   The county is a participating municipality with respect to the State
Municipal Retirement Fund.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-1) (Ord. passed 7-1-1984)
§ 30.21 CONTRIBUTIONS.
   Pursuant to the provisions of 40 ILCS 5/7-173.2 the contributions required
of all employees of the county, under 40 ILCS 5/7-173(a)(1) and (a)(3), and
those additional contributions made by the Sheriff’s law enforcement deputies,
pursuant to 40 ILCS 5/7-173.1, for purposes of funding the State Municipal
Retirement Fund shall be picked-up by the county.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-2) (Ord. passed 7-1-1984)
§ 30.22 IMPLEMENTATION.
   The Treasurer of the county be and hereby is directed to implement the
provisions of 40 ILCS 5/7-173.2 as of the effective date of this subchapter,
with respect to all employees of the county, by means of a reduction in current
employee earnings.
(Prior Code, § 1-10-3) (Ord. passed 7-1-1984)
§ 30.23 EXCLUSION IN STATE RETIREMENT FUND.
   The County Board shall exclude from participation in the State Retirement
Fund all officials and employees in positions normally requiring performance of
duty for less than 1,000 hours per year.
(Res. passed 11-21-1989)
COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR
§ 30.35 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created the position, which shall be known as “County
Administrator,” to advise, assist, and shall be responsible to the County
Board, hereinafter referred fo as the “Board,” for the proper and efficient
administration of such affairs of the county as are assigned to the position by
the Board.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.36 LIMITATION OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   It is the intention of the Board to create a position to which may be
delegated certain administrative duties in and under the Board’s direction. No
provision of the subchapter is intended to vest in or grant to the County
Administrator any duty or authority which is vested by general law or
ordinance/resolution, or in any other county officer.
   (B)   No provision of this subchapter shall be construed to delegate to the
County Administrator any authority reserved to the County Board by law; nor
shall the County Administrator have the power to bind, obligate, or commit the
county in any manner except as provided herein or by expressed grant of
authority by the County Board.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.37 APPOINTMENT.
   The County Administrator shall be recruited and selected in a process as
recommended by the executive committee of the County Board and approved by the
Board. Approval of the selection of the County Administrator shall be made by a
majority vote of the Board, and then the Board approved County Administrator
shall be appointed by the Chairperson of the County Board.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.38 COMPENSATION.
   The compensation of the County Administrator shall be fixed by the Board.
The County Administrator shall be given a performance evaluation annually when
other evaluations of non-union individuals are given by the executive committee
of the Board.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.39 REMOVAL.
   The County Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Board, and may
be removed by a majority vote of the Board, provided written notice is given
not less than ten days and not more than 30 days prior to the Board meeting in
which discussion of the full Board is allowed and a vote is taken.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.40 VACANCY.
   (A)   The position of County Administrator shall be deemed vacant if the
incumbent is, by death, illness, or other casualty, unable to continue in the
office, or resigns or is removed from office.
   (B)   A vacancy in the office shall be filled on an interim basis as
provided in §
30.37 until such time the incumbent County Administrator is able to resume
normal duties or a new County Administrator is appointed following policies as
identified in §
30.37 and repeated in the procedure manual.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.41 QUALIFICATIONS, EDUCATION, EXPERIENCE.
   (A)   The position requires excellent written and oral communication skills
and interpersonal skills; extensive administrative and management ability;
thorough knowledge and expertise in the principles and practices of public
administration and local government management, public financial management,
planning, project management, financial management and budgeting, long range
strategic planning, public personnel management, and community and inter-
governmental relations; skill in coordination and leadership of diverse
departments and functions; and extensive experience in service to elected and/
or appointed boards of directors.
   (B)   This level of expertise and experience is typically demonstrated by a
Master’s degree in Public Administration from an accredited college or
university and five to ten years of experience in increasingly responsible
positions requiring the planning and execution of administrative operations in
complex public or private organizations similar in size and scope to the
county.
   (C)   In keeping with the County Procedure Manual, the County Administrator
must establish and maintain residency within the county within six months of
the date of hire.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.42 DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The County Administrator shall be responsible for the administration of all
departments and functions which are under the jurisdiction of the Board.
Departments and functions which are exempt from the direct authority of the
County Administrator should, nevertheless, conform to the budgetary procedures,
and schedule as set forth from time to time by the County Administrator, and
should cooperate, insofar as possible, with other directives and procedures of
the County Administrator as though such directives and procedures were
established by the Board.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.43 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The County Administrator shall report to the County Executive
Committee as chaired by the County Board Chairperson.
   (B)   The County Administrator shall administer and carry out the directives
and policies of the Board, and follow all resolutions, ordinances, and
regulations of the Board to assure that they are faithfully executed.
   (C)   (1)   The County Administrator shall report to the Board on action
taken pursuant to any directive of policy within the time set by the Board.
      (2)   The County Administrator shall advise the Board on matters of
policy and may make recommendations to the Board on any matter before the
Board.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.44 BUDGET.
   Under guidance and direction of the Board, and in pursuant of the policies
and contracts established by the Board, the County Administrator shall:
   (A)   Establish the schedule and procedures to be followed by all county
departments, offices, and agencies in connection with the preparation, review,
adoption, implementation, and amendment of the annual budget. The County
Administrator shall supervise and administer all phases of the budgetary
process. The County Administrator shall review departmental and agency budget
requests, and prepare and submit to the Board and its committees the annual
budget, which includes all of the funds, departments, and agencies which the
Board is required to review and approve; and
   (B)   The County Administrator shall review and approve all applications for
grant funding in accordance with the Board’s adopted financial policy and
provide a quarterly report to the Board.
   (C)   The County Administrator shall recommend long-term plans of capital
improvement with accompanying financial plans.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.45 PERSONNEL.
   In coordination with the Human Resources Committee and in accordance with
county policy and terms of Board approved collective bargaining agreements, the
County Administrator shall:
   (A)   Select, employ, supervise, suspend, discharge, or remove all personnel
positions or employment under the jurisdiction of the Board except persons
appointed by the Board as required by the laws of the state;
   (B)   Recommend to the Board and maintain a policy for classifying,
compensating, and evaluating all positions in county service which are under
direct purview of the County Board; and
   (C)   Be responsible for all other aspects of personnel management,
including employee benefits, administration, labor relations, collective
bargaining, training, and development.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.46 LEGISLATION.
   The County Administrator, in coordination with the Governmental Affairs
Committee, or its designated subcommittee, shall:
   (A)   Draft, recommend, and support legislation pertinent to the county’s
interests and objectives. The County Administrator may represent the county at
state legislative hearings when deemed necessary by the County Board;
   (B)   The County Administrator shall keep the County Board informed
concerning proposed or accomplished actions of other governmental units and
recommend inter-governmental agreements when applicable; and
   (C)   The County Administrator, in coordination with the Chairperson of the
County Board, is authorized and directed to act as a liaison with other
governmental units when deemed necessary by the Chairperson of the County
Board.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.47 SUPPORT.
   (A)   The County Administrator shall assist the County Board Chairperson in
preparation and distribution of the agenda and supporting documentation for all
meetings of the County Board.
   (B)   The County Administrator shall assist the chairs of the Board’s
committees and subcommittees in the preparation and distribution of the agenda,
minutes, and supporting documents for meetings of committees and subcommittees
of the Board.
   (C)   The County Administrator shall attend all meetings of the County Board
and may be requested to participate in the discussion of any matter before the
Board.
   (D)   The County Administrator shall attend County Board committee and
subcommittee meetings when requested by chairs of the committees or
subcommittees, and may participate in discussions and recommend measures for
adoption when appropriate or requested.
   (E)   The County Administrator shall provide the County Board, or its
committees or subcommittees, upon request, with data or information concerning
the county and provide advice and recommendations on county government
operations.
   (F)   The County Administrator shall assist in the county’s economic
development initiatives as assigned by the County Board Chairperson, or as
directed by the County Board.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.48 CONTRACTS, AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The County Administrator, in coordination with the County Board
Chairperson, is authorized to negotiate leases, contracts, and other agreements
for goods or services when deemed advantageous to the county, subject to
applicable state law; the recommendation of the applicable County Board
committee; and the approval of the County Board.
   (B)   The County Administrator shall ensure that all terms and conditions of
leases, contracts, and other agreements are performed and shall promptly notify
the Board of any violations of such leases, contracts, and other agreements.
   (D)   If directed by the County Board, the County Administrator shall
develop, install, and maintain a centralized system for purchasing goods and
services on behalf of county departments and functions.
(Res. passed - -)
Cross-reference:
   Contracts and agreements, see TSO Table I
§ 30.49 COMMUNICATION.
   The County Administrator shall maintain and supervise systems of
communication and information technology, including, but not limited to,
information technology and data processing, telephone, micrographics, copier
services and printing services, and mail services. The County Administrator
shall assist the County Board and its committees and subcommittees, in
coordination with the various county departments, offices, and agencies, in the
development and implementation of policies and guidelines to provide for
systems of communication and information technology to allow computerized
electronic access by county employees, members of the public, and other
interested persons or entities to records and information that is lawfully
available to the public and which is kept in the various departments, offices,
and agencies of the county government.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.50 PROPERTY.
   The County Administrator shall be responsible for the care and custody for
all county property as established and provided by state statutes. The County
Administrator may provide for appropriate protection of the county and its
properly from loss, damage, liability, and other risks. The County
Administrator shall provide communication services to the County Public
Building Commission, and the Sheriff’s Office as it relates to the care and
custody of the County Jail, Justice Center, and Courthouse as appropriate or
directed by the County Board.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.51 ORGANIZATION.
   The County Administrator shall:
   (A)   Recommend to the Board the structures of county departments and
functions, including reporting relationships, physical facilities, and
location;
   (B)   From time to time, recommend changes to the organization structure;
   (C)   Direct departments to undertake tasks for other departments on a
temporary basis if the County Administrator deems it necessary for the proper
and efficient administration of the county government to do so;
   (D)   Call meetings of employees to facilitate and coordinate the work of
the county;
   (E)   Require and receive reports from county departments concerning the
activities of such departments; and
   (F)   Shall organize and supervise the work of the county departments.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.52 PROCEDURES, RECORDS, REPORTS.
   (A)   (1)   The County Administrator recommends improved or standardized
procedures and provides other central administrative services as may be
directed by the Board.
      (2)   The County Administrator shall maintain records to or required by
the powers and duties of the position, and examines the records, accounts and
operations of the county departments and agencies.
   (B)   The County Administrator prepares reports on the state of the county
and its government operations and work accomplished, and makes recommendations
as to action or programs the incumbent deems necessary for the efficient
operation of the county and the welfare of its residents.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of §§
30.01 through
30.04 may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in
an amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (2)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of §
30.03 is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more
than $5,000.
      (3)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of §§
30.01 through
30.04 to the local enforcement authorities, the state’s Attorney, or any other
law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (4)   (a)   A violation of §
30.02 shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the county
by filing in the Circuit Court information, or a sworn complaint, charging such
offense.
         (b)   The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of
criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of
the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
      (5)   A violation of §
30.03 may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the
county, or, if an Ethics Commission has been created, by the Commission through
the designated administrative procedure.
      (6)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of §§
30.02 or
30.05 is subject to discipline or discharge.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2013)
CHAPTER 31: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Board of Trustees
   
31.01   Electronic attendance of meetings
Code Hearing Unit
   
31.15   Establishment of Unit
   
31.16   Hearing officers
   
31.17   Rules
   
31.18   Administrative proceedings
   
31.19   Determination of violation
   
31.20   Administrative review
   
31.21   Enforcement of decisions
   
31.22   Contest by mail
   
31.23   No limitation
Emergency Telephone System Board
   
31.35   Members
   
31.36   Duties
   
31.37   Terms of office
   
31.38   Vacancy
   
31.39   Annual meeting
   
31.40   Appointment
Ethics Commission
   
31.55   Creation
   
31.56   Appointees
   
31.57   Chairperson
   
31.58   Powers and duties
   
31.59   Complaints
 
   
31.99   Penalty
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 31.01 ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE OF MEETINGS.
   The Board of Trustees, upon adopting the “Electronic Attendance of Meetings
Policy,” attached o the resolution passed November 27, 2018, which permits
Board members to attend and participate in any meeting of the Board via
electronic means is incorporated by reference herein.
(Res. passed 11-27-2018)
CODE HEARING UNIT
§ 31.15 ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIT.
   (A)   The county, by the passage of this subchapter, hereby establishes a
Code Hearing Unit pursuant to the provisions of 55 ILCS 5/5-41005 et seq., a
copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
   (B)   This Unit shall be known as the County Code Hearing Unit and shall be
authorized to conduct administrative adjudications for the county and its
departments concerning alleged violations of county ordinances relating to the
following:
      (1)   Animal control;
      (2)   The definition, identification, and abatement of public nuisances;
      (3)   The accumulation, disposal, and transportation of garbage, refuse,
and other forms of solid waste;
      (4)   The construction and maintenance of buildings and structures;
      (5)   Sanitation practices; and
      (6)   Zoning.
(Prior Code, § 1-20-2) (Ord. 1999-1006B, passed 10-19-1999)
§ 31.16 HEARING OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Chairperson of the County Board, with the advice and consent of
the County Board, shall appoint one or more hearing officers to preside over
the administrative adjudications of ordinance violations.
   (B)   The hearing officer shall have all powers and duties enumerated under
55 ILCS 5/5-41005 et seq. However, prior to conducting any administrative
adjudication proceedings, a hearing officer may be required to complete a
training program approved by the County Board’s Administration Committee.
   (C)   The following procedures shall apply to all administrative hearings
before the administrative hearing officer:
      (1)   All parties shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard and an
opportunity to cross-examine witnesses;
      (2)   Any attorney appearing on behalf of any respondent shall file a
written notice of appearance;
      (3)   In no event shall the case for the county be made by an employee of
the Code Hearing Unit;
      (4)   The hearing officer may, at his or her discretion, grant
continuances upon a finding of good cause;
      (5)   All testimony given before the hearing officer shall be given under
oath or affirmation;
      (6)   (a)   The hearing officer shall hear testimony and accept any
evidence relevant to the existence or non-existence of a code violation.
         (b)   The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply to hearings before the administrative hearing office. Pursuant
to 55 ILCS 5/5-41035, a code enforcement officer’s signed violation notice and
report form shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of the code
violation described in the form;
      (7)   No violation may be established except upon proof by a
preponderance of the evidence;
      (8)   The hearing officer may issue subpoenas to secure the attendance
and testimony of relevant witnesses pursuant to the provisions of 55 ILCS 5/5-
41025;
      (9)   The record all hearings shall include all documents presented at
the hearing, a copy of the notice of the violation or the notice of the hearing
and a copy of the hearing officer’s findings, decision, and order;
      (10)   Any party desiring to record the testimony presented before the
hearing officer shall inform the hearing officer of their desire and may do so
at the discretion of the hearing officer. The code hearing unit shall not be
responsible for providing recording or transcribing services or equipment. Any
such services or equipment shall be provided by the requesting party at their
own expense, regardless of the outcome of the hearing; and
      (11)   If, at the time set for hearing, the respondent fails to appear,
the hearing officer may proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant
to the existence of a code violation and make a determination regarding
liability. Within 21 days, a respondent who has been found in default may
petition the hearing officer to set aside the determination and set a new
hearing date on the basis that the failure to appear at the hearing was for
good cause.
(Prior Code, § 1-20-3) (Ord. 1999-1006B, passed 10-19-1999)
§ 31.17 RULES.
   The rules and regulations promulgated of the conduct of the administrative
hearing officer shall be published and kept on file in the office of the County
Clerk where they shall be available for the public to inspect and copy during
normal business hours.
(Prior Code, § 1-20-4) (Ord. 1999-1006B, passed 10-19-1999)
§ 31.18 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS.
   Any authorized county code enforcement officer may institute administrative
proceedings before the administrative hearing officer by following the
procedures set forth in 55 ILCS 5/5-41020.
(Prior Code, § 1-20-5) (Ord. 1999-1006B, passed 10-19-1999)
§ 31.19 DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION.
   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination based on the evidence presented as to whether a code violation
exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as the
hearing officer’s findings, decision, and order. Pursuant to 55 ILCS 5/5-41040,
findings, decisions, and order shall include the hearing officer’s findings of
fact, a determination of whether a code violation exists based on the findings
of fact, and an order imposing a fine or other penalty and directing the
respondent to correct the violation if the violation has been proved, or
dismissing the case if the violation has not been proved. The hearing officer
may impose any sanction provided for in the code for the violations proved,
including the imposition of fines and the recovery of the costs of the
proceedings. After the final determination of liability, the hearing officer
shall inform all respondents of their right to seek judicial review of the
determination. A copy of the hearing officer’s findings, decision, and order
shall be served on each party by personal service or by any method provided for
service under 55 ILCS 5/5-41020.
(Prior Code, § 1-20-6) (Ord. 1999-1006B, passed 10-19-1999)
§ 31.20 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   The hearing officer’s findings, decision, and order shall be subject to
review in the Circuit Court of the county. The Administrative Review Law, 735
ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., and the rules adopted pursuant thereto shall govern all
actions for judicial review.
(Prior Code, § 1-20-7) (Ord. 1999-1006B, passed 10-19-1999)
§ 31.21 ENFORCEMENT OF DECISIONS.
   The enforcement of the hearing officer’s order, including the enforcement of
sanctions and the collection of unpaid fines, fees, and costs shall be done
according to the provisions of 55 ILCS 5/5-41050 and 55 ILCS 5/5-41055.
(Prior Code, § 1-20-8) (Ord. 1999-1006B, passed 10-19-1999)
§ 31.22 CONTEST BY MAIL.
   (A)   Any respondent may elect to contest an alleged violation through the
mail rather than at an administrative hearing.
   (B)   The respondent may write and sign a letter setting forth any evidence
the respondent may have to contest the alleged violation. The respondent shall
be informed of the findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer by
personal service or by any method provided for under 55 ILCS 5/5-41020.
(Prior Code, § 1-20-9) (Ord. 1999-1006B, passed 10-19-1999)
§ 31.23 NO LIMITATION.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the county shall not
be precluded from seeking remedies for any code violations through the use of
any other appropriate administrative procedures or judicial proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 1-20-10) (Ord. 1999-1006B, passed 10-19-1999)
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD
§ 31.35 MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Emergency Telephone System Board of the county shall consist of
nine members appointed on the basis of their experience and ability. The
members of the Emergency Telephone System Board of the county shall serve
without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary
expenses.
   (B)   (1)   Six members of the Emergency Telephone System Board of the
county, shall be representatives of the governmental entities in the county,
including:
         (a)   The County of Rock Island, Illinois;
         (b)   The City of Rock Island, Illinois;
         (c)   The City of Moline, Illinois;
         (d)   The City of East Moline, Illinois;
         (e)   The City of Silvis, Illinois; and
         (f)   The Village of Milan, Illinois.
      (2)   A member representing a municipality shall be appointed by the
Chairperson of the County Board upon recommendation of the Mayor or President
of the Board of Trustees of the municipality. The county representative shall
be appointed by the Chairperson of the County Board with the advise and consent
of the County Board.
      (3)   All emergency telephone equipment and dispatch services between the
City of East Moline, Illinois and Moline, Illinois, pursuant to 50 ILCS 750/
1 et seq., and specifically 50 ILCS 750/3, are combined, centralized, and
located at the 911 Centre Communications, Police Department, 212 5th Avenue,
Rock Island, IL 61201.
   (C)   Two members of the Emergency Telephone System Board of the county
shall be appointed based upon their residence in areas of the county which
provide emergency services but which are not set forth in division (B)(1)
above, to wit: upper county and lower county; and one member of the Emergency
Telephone System Board of the county shall have no residence qualifications
other than being a resident of the county. These appointments shall be made by
the Chairperson of the County Board, with the advice and consent of the County
Board.
(Prior Code, § 5-10-1) (Ord. passed 2-16-1988; Ord. passed 1-19-1999)
§ 31.36 DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Emergency Telephone System Board of the county
shall be as follows:
   (A)   Planning a 911 system for the county;
   (B)   Coordinating and supervising the implementation, upgrading, or
maintenance of the system, including the establishment of equipment
specifications and coding systems;
   (C)   Receiving monies from the surcharge imposed under 215 ILCS 134/45.3,
and from any other source, for deposit into the Emergency Telephone System
Fund;
   (D)   Authorizing all disbursements from such fund, by means of resolutions
adopted by a majority of all the members of the Emergency Telephone System
Board, for purposes authorized by law;
   (E)   Hiring, on a temporary basis, any staff necessary for the
implementation or upgrade of the system, and providing for the compensation for
such staff;
   (F)   To adopt rules providing for its procedures, organization, and
officers, provided that the County Treasurer shall be the treasurer of the
Emergency Telephone System Board; and
   (G)   To do all things related to the purposes for which it was created not
prohibited by law.
(Prior Code, § 5-10-1) (Ord. passed 2-16-1988; Ord. passed 1-19-1999)
§ 31.37 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The terms of office of all persons appointed to the Emergency Telephone
System Board of the county shall be two years. The term of office of original
appointees shall commence on April 1, 1988 and end at midnight, March 31, 1990.
Successor appointees shall be appointed for terms of similar duration. There
shall be no limit in the number of terms a members may serve.
(Prior Code, § 5-10-1) (Ord. passed 2-16-1988; Ord. passed 1-19-1999)
§ 31.38 VACANCY.
   A vacancy on the Emergency Telephone System Board of the county may be
occasioned by the resignation, death, removal from an appropriate geographical
area, physical or mental incapacity, or continual refusal to attend scheduled
meetings of or by a member. The appointing authority shall have the power to
determine the existence of a vacancy. All vacancies shall be filled within 60
days from the date the appointing authority determines a vacancy to exist.
(Prior Code, § 5-10-1) (Ord. passed 2-16-1988; Ord. passed 1-19-1999)
§ 31.39 ANNUAL MEETING.
   There shall be an annual meeting of the Emergency Telephone System Board in
the month of April of each calendar year. The original Emergency Telephone
System Board, and such successor Emergency Telephone System Board, shall
conduct its organizational activities at such meeting. Other regular and
special meetings shall be held and convened as the Emergency Telephone System
Board may provide in its rules. The Chairperson of the County Board has the
authority to call the ETSB into service by giving such member thereof telephone
notice at least 24 hours in advance of the time the meeting is to begin. The
regular meeting place of the ETSB shall be the County Office Building, 1504
Third Avenue, Rock Island, Illinois, but the ETSB may schedule meetings at
other accessible locations in the county.
(Prior Code, § 5-10-1) (Ord. passed 2-16-1988; Ord. passed 1-19-1999)
§ 31.40 APPOINTMENT.
   Whenever a power of appointment to the ETSB is exercised, the appointing
authority shall immediately notify the Chairperson of the County Board who
shall in turn notify the ETSB.
(Prior Code, § 5-10-1) (Ord. passed 2-16-1988; Ord. passed 1-19-1999)
ETHICS COMMISSION
§ 31.55 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Ethics Commission of
the county and Forest Preserve District of the county. The Commission shall be
comprised of three members appointed by the County Board Chairperson with the
advice and consent of the County Board. No person shall be appointed as a
member of the Commission who is related, either by blood or by marriage up to
the degree of first cousin, to any elected officer of the county. No more than
two members of the Commission shall belong to the same political party at the
time such appointments are made. Party affiliation shall be determined by
affidavit of the person appointed.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2013)
§ 31.56 APPOINTEES.
   (A)   At the first meeting of the Commission, the initial appointees shall
draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two Commissioners shall serve two-
year terms, and the third Commissioner shall serve a one-year term. Thereafter,
all Commissioners shall be appointed to two-year terms. Commissioners may be
reappointed to serve subsequent terms.
   (B)   At the first meeting of the Commission, the Commissioners shall choose
a Chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson or any two Commissioners. A quorum shall consist of two
Commissioners, and official action by the Commission shall require the
affirmative vote of two members.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2013)
§ 31.57 CHAIRPERSON.
   The County Board Chairperson, with the advice and consent of the County
Board, may remove a Commissioner in case of incompetency, neglect of duty, or
malfeasance in office after service on the Commissioner by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a copy of the written charges against the
Commissioner and after providing an opportunity to be heard in person or by
counsel upon not less than ten days’ notice. Vacancies shall be filled in the
same manner as original appointments.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2013)
§ 31.58 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its
duties and the exercise of its powers;
   (B)   (1)   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to
investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for
disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with §
31.59 and refer violations of §§
30.03 or
30.05 to the appropriate attorney for prosecution.
      (2)   The Commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a
written complaint alleging a violation of this subchapter and not upon its own
prerogative;
   (C)   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated the provisions of this subchapter;
   (D)   To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of
books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all
officers and employees of the county to cooperate with the Commission during
the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with requests
by the Commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge; and
   (E)   The powers and duties of the Commission are limited to matters clearly
within the purview of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2013)
§ 31.59 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Complaints alleging a violation of this subchapter shall be filed with
the Ethics Commission.
   (B)   (1)   Within three business days after the receipt of a complaint, the
Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of
the complaint. The Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within three business days after receipt by the Commission. The notices to the
respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time, and
place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to
establish whether probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the
complainant, to proceed.
      (2)   The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by
the Open Meetings Act. The Commission shall issue notice to the complainant and
the respondent of the Commission’s ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint
and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed within seven business days
after receiving the complaint.
   (C)   (1)   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of §
30.03 and there is a determination of probable cause, then the Commission’s
notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within four weeks
after the complaint’s receipt. Alternatively, the Commission may elect to
notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to
prosecute such actions and request that the complaint be adjudicated
judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or
if there is no determination of probable cause, then the Commission shall send
by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the
decision to dismiss the complaint and that notice shall be made public.
      (2)   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of §
30.02, then the Commission shall notify in writing the attorney designated by
the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and shall transmit to the
attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the custody of the
Commission concerning the alleged violation.
   (D)   (1)   On the scheduled date and upon at least 48 hours public notice
of the meeting, the Commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint and
shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence.
      (2)   The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the
Open Meetings Act.
   (E)   Within 30 days after the date of the hearing or any recessed hearing
is concluded, the Commission shall either:
      (1)   Dismiss the complaint; or
      (2)   Issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and
to the County Board Chairperson/Forest Preserve President or other officer
having authority to discipline the officer or employee, or impose a fine upon
the violator, or both. The particular findings in the case, any recommendation
for discipline, and any fine imposed shall be a matter of public information.
   (F)   If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a
written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven business days
after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a
fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the
recommendation or fine. Within 14 days after receiving the demand, the
Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least 48
hours public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to
present testimony and evidence. Within seven days thereafter, the Commission
shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the
County Board Chairperson or other officer having authority to discipline the
officer or employee or impose a find on the violator, or both.
   (G)   If a complaint is filed during the 60 days preceding the date of any
election at which the respondent is a candidate, the Commission shall render
its decision as required under division (E) above within seven days after the
complaint is filed and, during the seven days preceding that election, the
Commission shall render such decision before the date of the election, if
possible.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2013)
Cross-reference:
   Ethics of officials, employees, see §§ 
30.01 through
30.04
Statutory reference:
   Open Meetings Act, see 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
§ 31.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to  §  
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The Commission, as outline in §
31.59, may fine any person who intentionally violates any provision of §
30.03 in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more than $5,000. The
Commission may fine any person who knowingly files a frivolous complaint
alleging a violation of §§
31.55 through
31.59 in any amount of not less than $1,001 and not more than $5,000. The
Commission may recommend any appropriate discipline up to and including
discharge.
      (2)   A complaint alleging the violation of §
31.59 must be filed within one year after the alleged violation.
(Ord. passed 5-21-2013)
CHAPTER 32: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
32.01   Establishment
   
32.02   Agency location
   
32.03   Coordinator
   
32.04   Coordination and functions
   
32.05   Mobile Support Team
   
32.06   Mutual aid agreements
   
32.07   Proclamation of emergency
   
32.08   Members
   
32.09   County Treasurer
   
32.10   Purchases or contracts necessary
   
32.11   Appropriations
   
32.12   Adoption of the NIMS System
   
32.13   Adoption of the PDM Plan
   
32.14   Adoption of the Quad City Metro Area Outdoor Warning Siren
§ 32.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to the provisions of  §  10(b) of the Emergency Management Agency
Act, being 20 ILCS 3305/10(b), the County Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency is hereby created, to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or
damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotages or other
hostile action, or from any natural or human-made disaster, in accordance with
the provisions of the Emergency Management Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305/5). The
County Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall consist of a Coordinator
and such additional members as may be selected by the Coordinator.
(Prior Code, Title 5, Chapter 11) (Ord. passed 7-15-2003)
§ 32.02 AGENCY LOCATION.
   The Chairperson of the County Board is authorized to designate space in a
county building or elsewhere, as may be provided by the County Board, for the
County Emergency Services and Disaster Agency as its office.
(Prior Code, Title 5, Chapter 11) (Ord. passed 7-15-2003)
§ 32.03 COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The Coordinator of the County Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
shall be appointed by the Chairperson of the County Board with the consent of
the County Board, and shall serve until removed by the same.
   (B)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training, and operation of the Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency, subject to the direction and control of the Chairperson of the County
Board, as provided by 20 ILCS 3305/10(a).
   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve
as the Coordinator, the Chairperson of the County Board or any person
designated by him or her, shall be and act as the Coordinator until a new
appointment is made as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, Title 5, Chapter 11) (Ord. passed 7-15-2003)
§ 32.04 COORDINATION AND FUNCTIONS.
   The County Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall coordinate and may
perform such emergency management functions within the county as are prescribed
in and by the State Emergency Operations Plan, and programs, orders, rules, and
regulations as may be promulgated by the State Emergency Management Agency and
by local ordinance, and in addition, shall conduct such functions outside the
territorial limits of the county as may be required under mutual aid agreements
and compacts entered into pursuant to 20 ILCS 3305/6(c)(5).
(Prior Code, Title 5, Chapter 11) (Ord. passed 7-15-2003)
§ 32.05 MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   (A)   All or any members of the county organization may be designated as
members of a Mobile Support Team, created by the Governor or the Director of
the State Emergency Management Agency, pursuant to the provisions of 20 ILCS
3305/8.
   (B)   The leaders of such Mobile Support Team shall be designated by the
Coordinator of the County Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, unless the
Director of the State Emergency Management Agency selects another person.
   (C)   Any member of a Mobile Support Team who is a county officer or
employee while serving a call to duty by the Governor or the Director of the
State Emergency Management Agency, whether serving within or without the
county, have the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities incident to
such employment or office, and shall receive the compensation incidental to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the county, while so serving, shall receive such compensation as
provided by law.
(Prior Code, Title 5, Chapter 11) (Ord. passed 7-15-2003)
§ 32.06 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   The Coordinator of the County Emergency Services and Disaster Agency may
negotiate mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions, municipal
corporations, or bodies politic within the state pursuant to the provisions of
20 ILCS 3305/13. No such agreement shall be effective unless approved by the
County Board and by the Director of the State Emergency Management Agency.
(Prior Code, Title 5, Chapter 11) (Ord. passed 7-15-2003)
§ 32.07 PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY.
   If the Governor proclaims that a emergency disaster exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States, or the occurrence within the state
of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or
from human-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the County
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency to cooperate fully with the State
Emergency Management Agency and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency
powers and provided by law.
(Prior Code, Title 5, Chapter 11) (Ord. passed 7-15-2003)
§ 32.08 MEMBERS.
   (A)   Members of the County Emergency Services and Disaster Agency who are
paid employees or officers of the county, if called for training by the
Director of the State Emergency Management Agency, shall receive for time spent
in such training the same rate of pay as is incident to such employment or
office. Members who are not county employees or officers shall receive for such
training time such compensation as may be established by the County Board.
   (B)   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the County
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall, before entering upon such duties,
subscribe to the oath set forth in 20 ILCS 3305/20 of the Emergency Management
Agency Act.
(Prior Code, Title 5, Chapter 11) (Ord. passed 7-15-2003)
§ 32.09 COUNTY TREASURER.
   The County Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the state to the county for expenses incident to training
members of the County Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, compensation for
services and expenses of a mobile support team while serving outside the county
in response to a call by the Governor or the Director of the State Emergency
Management Agency, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the
state incident to Emergency Management Agency activities as provided by law.
(Prior Code, Title 5, Chapter 11) (Ord. passed 7-15-2003)
§ 32.10 PURCHASES OR CONTRACTS NECESSARY.
   The County Board may, upon recommendation of the Coordinator of the County
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, authorize any purchase or contracts
necessary to place the county in a position to combat effectively any disaster
resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to
protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of
such disaster, or from human-made or natural disaster.
(Prior Code, Title 5, Chapter 11) (Ord. passed 7-15-2003)
§ 32.11 APPROPRIATIONS.
   The County Board shall make appropriations for Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency Operations in the manner prescribed by law and levy taxes
therefor in the manner provided by law for the ordinary expenses of the county.
(Prior Code, Title 5, Chapter 11) (Ord. passed 7-15-2003)
§ 32.12 ADOPTION OF THE NIMS SYSTEM.
   (A)   The Homeland Security President Directive/HSPD-5 establishes the
National Incident Management System (NIMS).
   (B)   The NIMS establishes a single, comprehensive approach to domestic
incident management to ensure that all levels of government across the nation
have the capability to work efficiently and effectively together using a
national approach to domestic incident management.
   (C)   The NIMS provides a consistent nationwide approach for federal, state,
and local governments to work together to prepare for and respond to, and
recover from, domestic incidents regardless of the cause, size, or complexity.
   (D)   The NIMS provides for interoperability and compatibility among
federal, state, and local capabilities and includes a core set of concepts,
principles, terminology, and technologies covering the incident command system,
unified command, training, management of resources, and reporting.
   (E)   Beginning October 1, 2004, all federal departments and agencies shall
make adoption of the NIMS a requirement for providing federal preparedness
assistance through grants, contracts, or other activities to local governments.
   (F)   The county hereby adopts the National Incident Management System
(NIMS) as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents.
(Prior Code,  §  1-17-1)
§ 32.13 ADOPTION OF THE PDM PLAN.
   The County Board hereby approves entering into a grant agreement with the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA) to update the County Pre-Disaster
Mitigation Plan and hiring Bi-State Regional Commission to update the Plan.
(Res. passed 6-17-2014)
§ 32.14 ADOPTION OF THE QUAD CITY METRO AREA OUTDOOR WARNING SIREN.
   The document entitled “Quad City Metro Area Outdoor Warning Sirens -
Guidance for Testing and Activation,” dated January 28, 2009, be hereby adopted
by the county and incorporated herein as if fully set out, and be incorporated
into the Emergency Operation Plan for the county.
(Res. passed 2-17-2009)
CHAPTER 33: LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
Police Department
   
33.01   Communication with prisoners
   
33.02   Deduction of money, medical costs; county inmates
   
33.03   Reimbursement for periodic imprisonment
   
33.04   Use of excessive force
 
   
33.99   Penalty
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.01 COMMUNICATION WITH PRISONERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate with persons
confined in the County Jail from property, public or private, adjacent to or
across the street or alley from the County Jail.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term COMMUNICATE shall mean oral or
visual means of communication.
   (C)   In order for conduct to be prohibited by the provisions of this
section, it is not necessary that it be directed toward a specific individual.
   (D)   Within 30 days of the adoption of this section, the Sheriff of the
county shall conspicuously post signs on or about the jail facility advising
the public that communicating with, or attempting to communicate with, persons
confined in the jail is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 5-8-1) (Ord. passed 2-15-1994) Penalty, see §
33.99
§ 33.02 DEDUCTION OF MONEY, MEDICAL COSTS; COUNTY INMATES.
   (A)   The deduction from an inmate’s cash accounts should be limited to:
      (1)   Ten dollars per each initial sick call appointment initiated by an
inmate for each separate medical complaint;
      (2)   Twenty dollars for each appointment with a medical professional
outside of the County Jail; and
      (3)   Fifty cents per dose of over-the-counter medication dispensed at
the County Jail.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 19)
   (B)   (1)   Pursuant to 730 ILCS 125/17 that if an inmate has been
determined to be eligible for medical assistance under the Public Aid Code,
being 305 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., the cost of such medical services, to the extent
that they exceed $500, shall be reimbursed by the Department of Public Aid.
      (2)   Reimbursement by the county for the cost of physician or hospital
services provided to inmates in the custody of County Sheriff shall be at the
State Department of Public Aid’s rates for medical assistance patients.
(Prior Code, § 6-20-1)
(Res. 2003-0129, passed 1-21-2003)
§ 33.03 REIMBURSEMENT FOR PERIODIC IMPRISONMENT.
   (A)   The rate for cost of board of persons sentenced to periodic
imprisonment at the County Jail who are gainfully employed shall be $40 per
day.
   (B)   Persons sentenced to periodic imprisonment in the County Jail who are
gainfully employed shall pay their board on a weekly basis to the Clerk of the
Circuit Court.
   (C)   The Clerk of the Circuit Court shall keep individual accounts with
respect to money collected pursuant to the provisions of this section, and
shall remit the same to the County Treasurer, who shall consider such money as
being General Fund money, to be held and paid out in the manner provided by
law.
   (D)   The Sheriff of the county shall inform those persons obligated by the
provisions hereof to pay for their board of such obligations and the day upon
which payments are to be made.
   (E)   In the event the court orders that all or a portion of an offender’s
earnings be turned over to the Clerk of the Circuit Court, the Clerk shall
deposit and distribute said money in accordance with the provisions of 730 ILCS
5/5-7-6(a), (b), and (c).
   (F)   In the event the Sheriff of the county desires to collect money owing
and due for board which has not been ordered by the court:
      (1)   Certification of this fact shall be given to the Clerk of the
Circuit Court; and
      (2)   The Sheriff, thereafter, shall collect and remit such fees in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 5-13-1) (Ord. passed 11-21-1995; Ord. passed 3-19-2013)
§ 33.04 USE OF EXCESSIVE FORCE.
   (A)   It is the policy of the county that excessive force by local law
enforcement agencies shall not be used against individuals engaged in lawful
and non-violent civil rights demonstrations within the county boundaries.
   (B)   It is the policy of the county to enforce applicable state and local
laws against the physical barring of an entrance to or exit from a facility or
location which is the subject of non-violent civil rights demonstrations within
its jurisdiction.
   (C)   The county directs the County Sheriff to implement this section by
amending applicable Law Enforcement Department procedures.
(Res. passed - -)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Persons found guilty of violating  §  
33.01 shall be fined in amount not to exceed $500.
(Prior Code, § 5-8-1)
(Ord. passed 2-15-1994)
CHAPTER 34: FEES, FINANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
34.001   Defining responsible bidder
   
34.002   Recorder of Deeds; fees
   
34.003   Property purchases
   
34.004   Home health services
   
34.005   Project labor agreement
Fees, Fines
   
34.015   Health Department fees
   
34.016   License fees
   
34.017   Deeds; assignments; leases; liens
   
34.018   Sheriff’s fees; summons, warrants
   
34.019   Oversize, overweight vehicle fees
   
34.020   Location, placement, construction fees
   
34.021   Schedule of fees; County Clerk
Court Fees
   
34.035   Fees to be collected
   
34.036   Circuit Clerk; distribution formula
   
34.037   Civil cases
   
34.038   Forcible entry; detainer
   
34.039   Counterclaim; joining third party defendant
   
34.040   Confession of judgment
   
34.041   Appearance
   
34.042   Garnishment; wage deduction; citation
   
34.043   Petition to vacate; modify
   
34.044   Mailing
   
34.045   Certified copies
   
34.046   Habeas corpus
   
34.047   Certification; authentication; reproduction
   
34.048   Remands
   
34.049   Record search
   
34.050   Hard copy
   
34.051   Index inquiry; other records
   
34.052   Commitment petitions
   
34.053   Alias summons
   
34.054   Jury services
   
34.055   Voluntary assignment
   
34.056   Expungement petition
   
34.057   Estates
   
34.058   Criminal, quasi-criminal costs, fees
   
34.059   Transcripts of judgment
   
34.060   Change of venue
   
34.061   Tax objection complaints
   
34.062   Tax deeds
   
34.063   Collections
   
34.064   Corrections of numbers
   
34.065   Adoptions
   
34.066   Child support
   
34.067   Sheriff; court security
   
34.068   Court document storage
   
34.069   Court automation fee
   
34.070   Exceptions
   
34.071   Drug, alcohol testing
   
34.072   Other fees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.001 DEFINING RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
   (A)   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER, for construction contracts, means a bidder as
defined in 55 ILCS 5/5-1022(b). The county will also consider:
      (1)   All applicable laws prerequisite to doing business in the state;
      (2)   Evidence of compliance with:
         (a)   Federal Employer Tax Identification Number or Social Security
number (for individuals); and
         (b)   Provisions of 42 U.S.C. § 2000(e) and Federal Executive Order
No. 11246 as amended by Executive Order No. 11375 (known as the Equal
Opportunity Employer provisions).
      (3)   Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverages:
general liability, worker’s compensation, completed operations, automobile,
hazardous occupation, product liability, and professional liability;
      (4)   Compliance with all provisions of the State Prevailing Wage Act,
including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance, and retirement for
those trades as covered in the Act; and
      (5)   Active participation in apprenticeship and training with craft
specific programs approved and registered with the United States Department of
Labor’s Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training.
   (B)   Highway Department projects shall be exempt from provisions in this
section that are not in concurrence with the State Department of Transportation
rules.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to federally funded
construction projects if such application would jeopardize the receipt or use
of federal funds in support of such a project.
   (D)   All contractors and sub-contractors are required to turn in certified
payroll on a weekly basis.
   (E)   All bidding contractors or sub-contractors performing work on public
works projects in the county shall provide proof that they have a program or
policy in place for the prevention of drug abuse.
   (F)   Certification from the bidder that all employees expected to perform
work on the project have completed a ten-hour or greater OSHA safety program in
the last five years. Only workers who have satisfactorily completed a ten-hour
or greater OSHA safety program will be allowed to participate in the project.
The bidder must have copies of employee is OSHA cards on file and the county
may request that the bidder provide copies of employee OSHA cards. Failure to
produce an employee’s OSHA card may result in determination that a bidder is
not a responsible bidder.
(Ord. passed 10-18-2016)
§ 34.002 RECORDER OF DEEDS; FEES.
   For recordation of all real estate related documents, the fee shall increase
from $65 per document to $74 per document. Such fees shall be distributed as
follows:
   (A)   To the Rental Housing Support Program (RHSP) a total of $18 (increased
from $9);
   (B)   To be evenly divided between the County General Revenue Fund and the
Recorder’s Document Automation Fund a total of $1 (no change);
   (C)    To the GIS Fund a total of $21 (increased from $11) to be charged for
the filing of every instrument, paper, or notice for record; and that such fees
collected shall be deposited into the GIS Automation Fund #140 with $1 of each
transaction being retained by the County Recorder to offset costs and the
remaining $20 of each transaction to be disbursed according to law for the
maintenance and advancement of the Countywide GIS;
   (D)   To the Recorder’s Document Automation Fund a total of $14.90 (no
change); and
   (E)   To the General Fund, Recorder’s Department a total of $29.10 (no
change).
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 2024-12-A, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 34.003 PROPERTY PURCHASES.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of sale, the County Collector
shall collect from each person purchasing property under the Revenue Act of
1939 a fee of $60.
   (B)   The County Treasurer shall hold the money in a special fund to pay
interest and costs pursuant to a court ordered sale in error.
   (C)   The County Treasurer shall invest the principal and income not
immediately required for payment in investments authorized under 55 ILCS 5/3-
10009 and 5/3-11002, and shall pay into the county’s General Fund each year
prior to the annual tax sale any accumulation in the special fund in excess of
$500,000.
(Prior Code, § 1-14-1) (Res. 95-909, passed 9-19-1995)
§ 34.004 HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      BOARD. The Board of Health of the county.
      DEPARTMENT. The County Health Department.
      HOME HEALTH SERVICES. The items and services furnished to individuals,
under the care of a physician, on a visiting basis in a place of residence used
as the individuals’ home. These services are provided by the County Health
Department under a plan for furnishing such items and services to an
individual, established and periodically reviewed by the individual’s physician
and shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, part-time or intermittent
nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered professional
nurse, or the services of one or more of the following:
         (a)   Physical;
         (b)   Occupational or speech therapy;
         (c)   Medical social work; or
         (d)   Intermittent services of a home health aid, and such equipment
as may be needed by the individual receiving such services.
   (B)   There shall be charged by the County Health Department for each home
visit by any person providing Home Health Services, as that term is defined in
division (A) above, a fee not to exceed $75. However, in those situations where
in the fee is being charged to the recipient of the services, or to the spouse
of such person, the County Health Department is authorized to adjust the fee,
taking into consideration the income and family size of the individual to whom
the fees are being charged, in the manner set forth in the following schedule,
as recommended by the Board.
   (C)   The Board shall review the schedule of fees not less than annually and
recommend such changes to the County Board as will keep such fees as close as
possible to the actual cost of providing the services, such cost to be
determined by applying accepted cost accounting methods.
   (D)   Such fees as are provided in this section shall be collected by the
Department from the individual to whom the services were provided, from any
other person who may be legally liable therefor, or from the estates of those
individuals to whom the services are provided or who may be otherwise legally
liable therefor, or from any municipality, political subdivision, or unit of
local government which contractually agrees to be financially responsible for
such fees for home health services provided to its residents under the
provisions of any inter-governmental or other contract authorized by law.
   (E)   The Administrator of the Department shall be responsible for all
billing procedures and the collection of fees. All fees collected shall be
deposited in the Health Fund.
   (F)   The state’s Attorney of the county is authorized to commence
appropriate legal proceedings to collect all fees owing and due under the
provisions of this section, at the request of the Administrator of the
Department.
(Prior Code, Title 4, Chapter 3) (Ord. passed 4-20-1976; Ord. passed 8-18-1987)
§ 34.005 PROJECT LABOR AGREEMENT.
   (A)   On all public works projects with an estimated total construction cost
of $400,000 or more, the project will be bid and constructed under the terms of
the Illowa Construction Labor and Management Council’s IMPACT Agreement
(“IMPACT Agreement”). The terms of the IMPACT Agreement are fully incorporated
herein.
   (B)   All contractors are performing work that falls within the job
classifications, as defined by the Illinois Department of Labor (IDOL)
Prevailing Wage Rate Determinations, shall be signatory to the craft listed
with such craft classification.
   (C)   All contractors must directly perform at least 51% of the services
identified in the project solicitation. The named contractor performing the
project must be the entity directly performing the services. Any affiliates
and/or subsidiaries shall not contribute to the minimum performance percentage
required.
   (D)   All contractors acting as construction managers shall secure a bond
for the entire project up to $14,000,000.
   (E)   Apprentice ratios shall be as provided in each respective craft’s
local labor agreement.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to contravene any state or
federal law or to jeopardize the county’s entitlement to external funding
sources. If any provisions of this section or its application is held invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, this invalidity does not affect any
other provision or application of this section that can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application. To achieve this purpose, the provisions
of this section are declared to be severable.
(Res. 2024-01, passed 12-19-2023)
FEES, FINES
§ 34.015 HEALTH DEPARTMENT FEES.
   (A)   Certified birth certificates shall now be as it is listed in § 34.021.
   (B)   Certified death certificates shall now be as it is listed in § 34.021.
   (C)   Veterans shall receive one free certificate.
(Prior Code, § 4-8-2) (Res. passed 3-17-2004)
§ 34.016 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   For issuance of liquor licenses, the fee shall be increased from the
statutory fee as it is listed in § 34.021.
   (B)   For issuing marriage license, the certificate thereof, and for
recording the same, including the recording of the parent’s or guardian’s
consent where indicated from the statutory fee as it is listed in § 34.021.
   (C)   For canceling tax sale and issuing and sealing certificates of
redemption from the statutory fee as it is listed in § 34.021.
   (D)   For officially certifying and sealing each copy of any process, file,
record, or other instrument of and pertaining to the office of the County
Clerk, from the statutory fee of $5 to the fee allowed under 410 ILCS 535/25
which allows the local Registrar or County Clerk to charge fees for providing
these services for which the State Registrar may charge fees under this section
of $10.
(Prior Code, § 6-12-1) (Ord. 2003-0101B, passed 1-21-2003)
§ 34.017 DEEDS; ASSIGNMENTS; LEASES; LIENS.
   (A)   For recording deeds, assignments, leases, liens, or other instruments
from the statutory fee of $12 for up to four pages to the actual cost of $14
for up to four pages, plus $1 for each additional document number therein
noted.
(Prior Code, § 6-12A-1)
   (B)   For certified copies of records, from the statutory fee of $12 to the
actual cost of $49.
(Prior Code, 6-12B-1)
(Ord. 2003-0305B, passed 3-18-2003; Ord. 2005-08, passed 9-20-2005)
§ 34.018 SHERIFF’S FEES; SUMMONS, WARRANTS.
   (A)   For serving or attempting to serve summons on each defendant, and/or
an order of judgment granting injunctional relief, and/or each garnishee, and/
or an order of replevin, and/or an attachment on each defendant in each county
the fee shall be increased from the statutory fee of $10 to the actual cost of
$34.33 per civil process service.
   (B)   For serving or attempting to serve a warrant of arrest, to be paid
upon conviction, the fee shall be increased from the statutory fee of $8 to the
actual cost of $42.14 per case.
   (C)   For taking special bail the fee shall be increased from the statutory
fee of $24 to the actual cost of $43 per case.
   (D)   For serving or attempting to serve notice of judgments or levying to
enforce judgment the fee shall be increased from $3 with $0.50 mileage each way
to the actual cost of $40.29 plus mileage of $0.50 each way.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-1) (Ord. 2003-0101A, passed 1-21-2003; Ord. passed 11-19-
2013)
§ 34.019 OVERSIZE, OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE FEES.
   (A)   If the State Department of Transportation is not required to issue
permit, the fee scheduled will be based on per axle rate of $3 per axle.
   (B)   If the county oversize/overweight vehicle permit is a general permit
for all oversize/overweight loads as follows:
      (1)   Single trip permit; and
      (2)   Round trip permit, not to exceed 14 days. A 14-day round trip for
movement to a site is valid only for the first day the permit is valid. The
return trip must be made on the same designated route on any of the 13 days.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 14) (Res. passed 4-15-2003)
§ 34.020 LOCATION, PLACEMENT, CONSTRUCTION FEES.
   (A)   Any public utility, municipal corporation, private corporation,
associations, or persons who desire to locate, place, or construct ditches,
drains, track, rails, poles, wires, pipe lines, or other equipment along or
under county highways must obtain permission for such activity from the County
Board.
   (B)   A condition of obtaining permission from the County Board for the
location, placement, or construction of ditches, drains, track, rails, poles,
wires, pipe lines, or other equipment along or under county highways shall be
payment to the county of an annual fee, which fee shall be in the amount of $1
per linear foot. Said fee shall be charged with respect to each linear foot of
each and every ditch, drain, track, rail, pole, wire, pipe line, or other
equipment located, placed, or constructed under or along county highways, and
shall be imposed upon each public utility, municipal corporation, or private
corporation or individual utilizing ditches, drains, track, rails, poles,
wires, pipe lines, or other equipment along or under county highways. It is the
specific intent of this section to impose the fee upon each linear foot of wire
or cable installed or located within any pipe line, conduit, or other
excavation, and upon each linear foot of wire, cable, or other device capable
of transmitting energy or impulse which is attached to poles or other
aboveground devices.
   (C)   The first annual payment of the fee provided by this section shall be
made within 30 days after written permission to engage in location of
construction is granted by the County Board, and annually thereafter on or
before December 1 of each calendar year.
   (D)   Public utilities, municipal corporations, and private corporations,
associations, or individuals which are presently utilizing the type of
improvements or equipment described in this section and which do not have
current written permission from the County Board therefor shall pay the fee for
the calendar year 1988 on or before December 31, 1988 and annually thereafter
on or before December 1 of each calendar year.
   (E)   The fee provided by this section shall not limit the power of the
County Board to impose other conditions upon persons or entities who seek
written permission from the County Board with respect to engaging in the
activities which are the subject of this section, and shall not relieve any
such persons or entities from complying with any and all other obligations
imposed by law.
(Prior Code, § 6-16-1) (Ord. passed 9-20-1988)
§ 34.021 SCHEDULE OF FEES; COUNTY CLERK.
   Fees for services shall be increased as follows:
Service New Price Based on Cost with Entire Increase to General Fund Revenue
Service                                    New Price Based on Cost with Entire
                                           Increase to General Fund Revenue
Birth certificate                          $15
Birth certificate (copy)                   $8
Cancel tax sale, issue/seal certificate of $160
rede"mption
Civil union certificate                    $15
Civil union certificate (copy)             $8
Civil union/marriage license               $35
Death certificate                          $20
Death certificate (copy)                   $14
Index/file assumed name certificate        $10
Liquor license application                 $110
Marriage certificate                       $15
Marriage certificate (copy)                $8
 
(Ord. passed 10-15-2013)
COURT FEES
§ 34.035 FEES TO BE COLLECTED.
   (A)   The Clerks of all trial courts located in the county shall continue to
collect the fee authorized by 55 ILCS 5/5-39001, such fee being $6, to be paid
at the time of filing the first pleading, papers, or other appearance filed by
such party in all court cases. No additional fee is to be charged if more than
one party is represented in a single pleading, paper, or other appearance.
   (B)   Such fee shall not be charged in criminal or quasi-criminal cases,
matters coming to any Clerk on a change of venue, or in any proceedings to
review a decision of any administrative officer, agency, or body.
   (C)   Such fees shall be in addition to all other fees and charges of such
Clerks, shall be assessable as costs, and remitted monthly to the County
Treasurer to be distributed in accordance with law. Such fees shall in
maintained in a special fund.
(Prior Code, § 1-6-2) (Res. passed 8-20-1991)
§ 34.036 CIRCUIT CLERK; DISTRIBUTION FORMULA.
   (A)   The provisions of 705 ILCS 105/27.6 setting forth a distribution
formula for certain amounts collected by the Circuit Clerk, in excess of $55,
shall not apply to the Circuit Clerk of the county.
   (B)   The Circuit Clerk shall continue to collect any and all fees provided
by law or ordinance and make appropriate disbursement of the same.
(Prior Code, § 6-4B-1) (Res. passed 4-21-1993)
§ 34.037 CIVIL CASES.
   The fee for filing a complaint, petition, or other pleading initiating a
civil action, with the following exceptions, shall be $150.
   (A)   When the amount of money or damages or the value of personal property
claimed does not exceed $250, the fee shall be $10.
   (B)   When that amount exceeds $250 but does not exceed $500, the fee shall
be $20.
   (C)   When that amount exceeds $500 but does not exceed $2,500, the fee
shall be $40.
   (D)   When that amount exceeds $2,500 but does not exceed $15,000, the fee
shall be $75.
   (E)   (1)   For the exercise of eminent domain, the fee shall be $125.
      (2)   For each additional lot or tract of land, or right or interest
therein subject to be condemned, the damages in respect to which shall require
separate assessment by a jury, the fee shall be $125.
   (F)   For family cases:
      (1)   For filing a petition under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, the fee
shall be $25;
      (2)   For filing a petition for a marriage license, the fee shall be $10;
      (3)   For performing a marriage in court, the fee shall be $10; and
      (4)   For filing a petition under the State Parentage Act of 1984, the
fee shall be $40.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.038 FORCIBLE ENTRY; DETAINER.
   (A)   In each forcible entry and detainer case when the plaintiff seeks
possession only or unites with his or her claim for possession of the property
a claim for rent or damages, or both, in the amount of $15,000 or less, the fee
shall be $50.
   (B)   When the plaintiff unites his or her claim for possession with a claim
for rent or damages or both exceeding $15,000, the fee shall be $125.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.039 COUNTERCLAIM; JOINING THIRD PARTY DEFENDANT.
   When any defendant files a counterclaim as part of his or her answer, or
otherwise or joins another party as a third party defendant, or both, the
defendant shall pay a fee for each counterclaim or third party action in an
amount equal to the fee he or she would have had to pay had he or she brought a
separate action for the relief sought in the counterclaim or against the third
party defendant less the amount of the appearance fee, if that has been paid.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.040 CONFESSION OF JUDGMENT.
   (A)   In a confession of judgment when the amount does not exceed $1,500,
the fee shall be $50.
   (B)   When the amount exceeds $1,500, but does not exceed $15,000, the fee
shall be $115.
   (C)   When the amount exceeds $15,000, the fee shall be $115.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.041 APPEARANCE.
   The fee for filing an appearance in each civil case shall be $60, except as
follows:
   (A)   When the plaintiff in a forcible entry and detainer case seeks
possession only, the fee shall be $50;
   (B)   When the amount in the case does not exceed $1,500, the fee shall be
$30; and
   (C)   When that amount exceeds $1,500 but does not exceed $15,000, the fee
shall be $60.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.042 GARNISHMENT; WAGE DEDUCTION; CITATION.
   (A)   In garnishment affidavit, wage deduction affidavit, and citation
petition when the amount does not exceed $1,000, the fee shall be $15.
   (B)   When the amount exceeds $1,000 but does not exceed $5,000, the fee
shall be $30.
   (C)   When the amount exceeds $5,000, the fee shall be $50.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.043 PETITION TO VACATE; MODIFY.
   (A)   A petition to vacate or modify any final judgment or order of the
court, except in forcible entry and detainer cases and small claims cases, or a
petition to reopen an estate, to modify, terminate, or enforce a judgment or
order for child or spousal support, or to modify, suspend, or terminate an
order for withholding, if filed before 30 days after the entry of the judgment
or order, the fee shall be $50.
   (B)   A petition to vacate or modify any final judgment or order of the
court, except a petition to modify, terminate, or enforce a judgment or order
for child or spousal support or to modify, suspend, or terminate an order for
withholding, if filed later than 30 days after the entry of the judgment or
order, the fee shall be $75.
   (C)   A petition to vacate order of bond forfeiture, the fee shall be $40.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.044 MAILING.
   When the Clerk is required to mail, the fee will be $10, plus the cost of
postage.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.045 CERTIFIED COPIES.
   Each certified copy of a judgment after the first, except in small claims
and forcible entry and detainer cases, the fee shall be $10.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.046 HABEAS CORPUS.
   For filing a petition for relief by habeas corpus, the fee shall be $100.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.047 CERTIFICATION; AUTHENTICATION; REPRODUCTION.
   (A)   Each certification or authentication for taking the acknowledgment of
a deed or other instrument in writing with the seal of office, the fee shall be
$6.
   (B)   Court appeals when original documents are forwarded, under 100 pages,
plus delivery and costs, the fee shall be $60.
   (C)   Court appeals when original documents are forwarded, over 100 pages,
plus delivery and costs, the fee shall be $150.
   (D)   Court appeals when original documents are forwarded, over 200 pages,
an additional fee of $0.25 per page.
   (E)   For reproduction of any document contained in the Clerk’s files:
      (1)   First page, the fee shall be $2;
      (2)   Next 19 pages, the fee shall be $0.50 per page; and
      (3)   All remaining pages, the fee shall be $0.25 per page.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.048 REMANDS.
   (A)   In any cases remanded to the Circuit Court from the Supreme Court or
the Appellate Court for a new trial, the Clerk shall file the remanding order
and reinstate the case with either its original number or a new number.
   (B)   The Clerk shall not charge any new or additional fee for the
reinstatement. Upon reinstatement, the Clerk shall advise the parties of the
reinstatement.
   (C)   A party shall have the same right to a jury trial on remand and
reinstatement as he or she had before the appeal, and no additional or new fee
or charge shall be made for a jury trial after remand.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.049 RECORD SEARCH.
   For each record search, within a division or municipal district, the Clerk
shall be entitled to a search fee of $6 for each year searched.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.050 HARD COPY.
   For each page of hard copy print output, when case records are maintained on
an automated medium, the Clerk shall be entitled to a fee of $6.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.051 INDEX INQUIRY; OTHER RECORDS.
   No fee shall be charged for a single plaintiff/defendant index inquiry or
single case record inquiry when this request is made in person and the records
are maintained in a current automated medium, and when no hard copy print
output is requested. The fees to be charged for management records, multiple
case records, and multiple journal records may be specified by the Chief Judge
pursuant to the guidelines for access and dissemination of information approved
by the Supreme Court.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.052 COMMITMENT PETITIONS.
   For filing commitment petitions under the Mental Health and Developmental
Disabilities Code and for filing a transcript of commitment proceedings held in
another county, the fee shall be $50.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.053 ALIAS SUMMONS.
   For each alias summons or citation issued by the Clerk, the fee shall be $5.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.054 JURY SERVICES.
   The Clerk shall be entitled to receive, in addition to other fees allowed by
law, the sum of $175, as a fee for the services of a jury in every civil action
not quasi-criminal in its nature and not a proceeding for the exercise of the
right of eminent domain and in every other action wherein the right of trial by
jury is or may be given by law. The jury fee shall be paid by the party
demanding a jury at the time of filing the jury demand. If the fee is not paid
by either party, no jury shall be called in the action or proceeding, and the
same shall be tried by the court without a jury.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.055 VOLUNTARY ASSIGNMENT.
   (A)   For filing each deed of voluntary assignment, the fee shall be $20;
for recording the same, the fee shall be $0.50 for each 100 words.
   (B)   Exceptions filed to claims presented to an assignee of a debtor who
has made a voluntary assignment for the benefit of creditors shall be
considered and treated, for the purpose of taxing costs therein, as actions in
which the party or parties filing the exceptions shall be considered as party
or parties plaintiff, and the claimant or claimants as party or parties
defendant, and those parties respectively shall pay to the Clerk the same fees
as provided by this section to be paid in other actions.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.056 EXPUNGEMENT PETITION.
   The Clerk shall be entitled to receive a fee of $60 for each expungement
petition filed and an additional fee of $4 for each certified copy of an order
to expunge arrest records.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.057 ESTATES.
   The Clerk is entitled to receive the fees specified in this section, which
shall be paid in advance, except that, for good cause shown, the court may
suspend, reduce, or release the costs payable under this section.
   (A)   For administration of the estate of a decedent (whether testate or
intestate) or of a missing person, $125, plus the fees specified in division
(C) below, except:
      (1)   When the value of the real and personal property does not exceed
$15,000, the fee shall be $40;
      (2)   When one of the following occurs, the fee shall be $40:
         (a)   Proof of heirship alone is made;
         (b)   A domestic or foreign will is admitted to probate without
administration (including proof of heirship); or
         (c)   Letters of office are issued for a particular purpose without
administration of the estate.
      (3)   For filing a petition to sell real estate, the fee shall be $50.
   (B)   For administration of the estate of a ward, the fee shall be $75, plus
the fees specified in division (C) below, except:
      (1)   When the value of the real and personal property does not exceed
$15,000, the fee shall be $40;
      (2)   When one of the follow occurs, the fee shall be $20:
         (a)   Letters of office are issued to a guardian of the person or
persons, but not of the estate; or
         (b)   Letters of office are issued in the estate of a ward without
administration of the estate, including filing or joining in the filing of a
tax return or releasing a mortgage or consenting to the marriage of the ward.
      (3)   For filing a petition to sell real estate, $50.
   (C)   In addition to the fees payable under divisions (A) or (B) above, the
following fees are payable:
      (1)   For each account (other than one final account) filed in the estate
of a decedent or ward, the fee shall be $25;
      (2)   (a)   For filing a claim in an estate when the amount claimed is
$150 or more but less than $500, the fee shall be $25.
         (b)   When the amount claimed is $500 or more but less than $10,000,
the fee shall be$40.
         (c)   When the amount claimed is $10,000 or more, the fee shall be
$60; provided that the court in allowing a claim may add to the amount allowed
the filing fee paid by the claimant.
      (3)   For filing in an estate a claim, petition, or supplemental
proceeding based upon an action seeking equitable relief, shall be $60,
including:
         (a)   The construction or contest of a will;
         (b)   Enforcement of a contract to make a will; and
         (c)   Proceedings involving testamentary trusts or the appointment of
testamentary trustee;
      (4)   For filing in an estate:
         (a)   The appearance of any person for the purpose of consent, no fee;
and
         (b)   The appearance of an executor, administrator, administrator to
collect, guardian, guardian ad litem, or special administrator, no fee.
      (5)   Except as provided in division (C)(4) above, for filing the
appearance of any person or persons, the fee shall be $30;
      (6)   For each jury demand, the fee shall be $137.50;
      (7)   For disposition of the collection of a judgment or settlement of an
action or claim for wrongful death of a decedent or of any cause of action of a
ward, when there is no other administration of the estate, the fee shall be
$50, less any amount paid under divisions (A)(2) or (B)(2) above, except that
if the amount involved does not exceed $5,000, the fee, including any amount
paid under divisions (A)(2) or (B)(2) above, shall be $20;
      (8)   For each certified copy of letters of office, of court order, or
other certification, the fee shall be $2, plus $1 per page in excess of three
pages for the document certified; and
      (9)   For each exemplification the fee shall be $2, plus the fee for
certification.
   (D)   The executor, administrator, guardian, petitioner, or other interested
person, or his or her attorney, shall pay the cost of publication by the Clerk
directly to the newspaper.
   (E)   The person on whose behalf a charge is incurred for witness, court
reporter, appraiser, or other miscellaneous fee shall pay the same directly to
the person entitled thereto.
   (F)   The executor, administrator, guardian, petitioner, or other interested
person, or his or her attorney, shall pay to the Clerk all postage charges
incurred by the Clerk in mailing petitions, orders, notices, or other documents
pursuant to the provisions of the Probate Act of 1975.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
Statutory reference:
   Probate Act of 1975, see 755 ILCS 5/7-701 et seq.
§ 34.058 CRIMINAL, QUASI-CRIMINAL COSTS, FEES.
   (A)   The Clerk shall be entitled to costs in all criminal and quasi-
criminal cases from each person convicted or sentenced to supervision therein
as follows:
      (1)   Felony complaints, the fee shall be $100;
      (2)   Misdemeanor complaints, the fee shall be $75;
      (3)   Business offense complaints, the fee shall be $75;
      (4)   Petty offense complaints, the fee shall be $75;
      (5)   Minor traffic or ordinance violations, the fee shall be $10;
      (6)   When court appearance required, the fee shall be $15;
      (7)   Motions to vacate or amend final orders, the fee shall be $40;
      (8)   Motions to vacate bond forfeiture orders, the fee shall be $40;
      (9)   Motions to vacate ex parte judgments, whenever filed, the fee shall
be $40;
      (10)   Motions to vacate judgment on forfeitures, whenever filed, the fee
shall be $40; and
      (11)   Motions to vacate “failure to appear” or “failure to comply”
notices sent to the Secretary of State, the fee shall be $40.
   (B)   When the violation complaint is issued by a municipal Police
Department, the Clerk shall be entitled to costs from each person convicted
therein as follows:
      (1)   Minor traffic or ordinance violations, the fee shall be $10; and
      (2)   When court appearance required, the fee shall be $15.
   (C)   (1)   In ordinance violation cases punishable by fine only, the Clerk
of the Circuit Court shall be entitled to receive, unless the fee is excused
upon a finding by the court that the defendant is indigent, in addition to
other fees or costs allowed or imposed by law, the sum of $137.50 as a fee for
the services of a jury.
      (2)   The jury fee shall be paid by the defendant at the time of filing
his or her jury demand.
      (3)   If the fee is not so paid by the defendant, no jury shall be
called, and the case shall be tried by the court without a jury.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.059 TRANSCRIPTS OF JUDGMENT.
   For the filing of a transcript of judgment, the Clerk shall be entitled to
the same fee as if it were the commencement of a new suit.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.060 CHANGE OF VENUE.
   (A)   For the filing of a change of case on a change of venue, the Clerk
shall be entitled to the same fee as if it were the commencement of a new suit.
   (B)   The fee for the preparation and certification of a record on a change
of venue to another jurisdiction, when original documents are forwarded, the
fee shall be $40.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.061 TAX OBJECTION COMPLAINTS.
   For each tax objection complaint containing one or more tax objections,
regardless of the number of parcels involved or the number of taxpayers joining
on the complaint, the fee shall be $50.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.062 TAX DEEDS.
   (A)   Petition for tax deed, if only one parcel is involved, the fee shall
be $200.
   (B)   For each additional parcel, add a fee of $60.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.063 COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   For all collections made of others, except the state and county and
except in maintenance or child support cases, 2.5% of the amount collected and
turned over.
   (B)   Interest earned on any funds held by the Clerk shall be turned over to
the County General Fund as an earning of the office.
   (C)   For any check, draft, or other bank instrument returned to the Clerk
for non-sufficient funds, account closed, or payment stopped, the fee shall be
$25.
   (D)   In child support and maintenance cases, the Clerk, if authorized by an
ordinance of the Court Board, may collect an annual fee of up to $36 from the
person making payment for maintaining child support records and the processing
of support orders to the State KIDS System and the recording of payments issued
by the State Disbursement Unit for the official record of the court. This fee
shall be in addition to and separate from amounts ordered to be paid as
maintenance or child support, and shall be deposited into a separate
Maintenance and Child Support Collection Fund, of which the Clerk shall be the
custodian ex-officio, to be used by the Clerk to maintain child support orders
and record all payments issued by the State Disbursement Unit for the official
record of the court. The Clerk may recover from the person making the
maintenance or child support payment any additional costs incurred in the
collection of this annual fee. The Clerk shall also be entitled to a fee of $5
for certifications made to the Secretary of State as provided in § 7-703 of the
Family Financial Responsibility Law, and these fees shall also be deposited
into the separate Maintenance and Child Support Collection Fund.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
Statutory reference:
   Family Financial Responsibility Llaw, see 625 ILCS 5/7-701 et seq.
§ 34.064 CORRECTIONS OF NUMBERS.
   For correction of the case number, case title, or attorney computer
identification number, if required by rule of the court, on any document filed
in the Clerk’s office, to be charged against the party that filed the document,
the fee shall be $25.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.065 ADOPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   For an adoption, $65.
      (2)   Upon good cause shown, the court may waive the adoption filing fee
in a special needs adoption. The term SPECIAL NEEDS ADOPTION shall have the
meaning ascribed to it by the State Department of Children and Family Services.
   (B)   No fee other than that set forth in division (A) above shall be
charged to any person in connection with an adoption proceeding.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see 705 ILCS 105/27.1b
§ 34.066 CHILD SUPPORT.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of 705 ILCS 105/27.1(u), as amended by Pub.
Act 84-1354, the Circuit Clerk is to be and hereby is authorized to collect an
annual fee of $36 from persons making maintenance or child support payments.
   (B)   Such fees, when collected, shall be deposited in a separate
Maintenance and Child Support Collection Fund, of which the Circuit Clerk shall
be the custodian ex-officio to be used by the Clerk to further maintenance and
child support collection efforts in his or her office.
   (C)   Such fees shall be separate from amounts ordered to be paid as
maintenance or child support.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-1) (Ord. passed 1-20-1987)
§ 34.067 SHERIFF; COURT SECURITY.
   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to the enabling authority set forth in Ill. Rev. Stat.
Ch. 34, § 429.31, a court services fee be and hereby is enacted for purposes of
defraying the expenses incurred by the Sheriff in providing court security, as
required by the provisions of 730 ILCS 125/19.
      (2)   The fee, which may not exceed $15, shall be assessed against each
party in civil cases at the time of filing the first pleasing, paper, or other
appearances. No additional fee may be charged if more than one party is
represented in a pleading, paper or other appearance.
      (3)   The fee shall be assessed against defendants in criminal cases,
local or county ordinance violation cases, traffic and conservation cases up on
pleas of guilty, stipulation of facts or findings of guilty, resulting in
judgments of conviction, or orders of supervision, or sentence of probation
without entry of judgment, pursuant to § 10 of the Cannabis Control Act or §
410 of the Controlled Substances Act. No fee may be imposed on traffic,
conservation or ordinance cases in which fines may be imposed without a court
appearance.
      (4)   The fee imposed by this section shall be collected in the same
manner as all other court fees or costs, and shall be deposited in the County
General Fund for payment solely of costs incurred by the Sheriff in providing
court security.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 6)
   (B)   In any case in which a fee may be imposed by the provisions of this
section, the fee shall be $25.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1)
(Res. passed 3-21-1989; Res. passed 9-16-2003)
Statutory reference:
   Section 10 of the Cannabis Control Act, see 720 ILCS 550/10
   Section 410 of the Controlled Substances Act, see 720 ILCS 57/410
§ 34.068 COURT DOCUMENT STORAGE.
   (A)   The expenses of establishing and maintaining the document storage
system in the office of the Circuit Clerk of the county shall be defrayed by
collection of a document storage fee in the amount of $15 by the Circuit Clerk
of the county.
   (B)   Such fee shall be paid at the time of filing the first pleading,
paper, or appearance filed by each party in all civil cases, or by the
defendant in any felony, traffic, misdemeanor, municipal ordinance, or
conservation case upon a judgment of guilty or grant of supervision. No
additional fee shall be charged if more than one party is represented in a
single pleading, paper or other appearance. This fee shall be collected in the
same manner in which all other fees and costs are collected.
   (C)   The Circuit Clerk shall charge and collect a document storage fee of
$5 on any traffic case satisfied without a court appearance pursuant to Supreme
Court Rule 529.
   (D)   The Circuit Clerk of the county shall commence collecting such fee
under the provisions of this section upon receipt of written notice from the
Chairperson of the County Board, along with a certified copy of this section.
   (E)   The fee authorized herein shall be in addition to all other fees and
charges of the Circuit Clerk and may be waived only if a judge specifically
provides for such waiver.
   (F)   The fee shall be remitted monthly by the Circuit Clerk to the County
Treasurer, to be retained in a special fund, designated as the Court Document
Storage Fund. This fund shall be subject to audit by the County Auditor, and
the County Board may make expenditures therefrom in payment of costs related to
the storage of court records, including hardware, software, research and
development costs, and the cost of personnel related thereto, provided such
expenditure is approved by the Circuit Clerk. The fee shall not be charged in
any matter coming on a change of venue, nor in an administrative review
proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-1) (Res. passed 1-17-2006)
§ 34.069 COURT AUTOMATION FEE.
   (A)   (1)   The Circuit Clerk maintains an automated record keeping system.
      (2)   The statute 705 ILCS 105/27.3a authorizes the County Board to
require the Clerk of the Circuit Court to charge and collect a fee for the
establishment and maintenance of an automated record keeping system.
      (3)    The statute 705 ILCS 105/27.3a has been amended by Pub. Act 94-595
to increase the maximum allowable court automation fee from $5 to $15.
(Prior Code, § 6-17-1)
   (B)   (1)   The expenses of establishing and maintaining the automated
record keeping system in the office of the Circuit Clerk shall be defrayed by
collection of a court automation fee in the amount of $15 by the Circuit Clerk.
      (2)   Such fee shall be paid at the time of filing the first pleading,
paper, or appearance filed by each party in all civil cases, or by the
defendant in any felony, traffic, misdemeanor, municipal ordinance, or
conservation case upon a judgment of guilty or grant of supervision. No
additional fee shall be charged if more than one party is represented in a
single pleading, paper, or other appearance. This fee shall be collected in the
same manner in which all other fees and costs are collected.
      (3)   The Circuit Clerk shall charge and collect a court automation fee
of $5 on any traffic case satisfied without a court appearance pursuant to
Supreme Court Rule 529.
      (4)   The Circuit Clerk shall commence collecting such fee under the
provisions of this section upon receipt of written notice from the Chairperson
of the County Board, along with a certified copy of this section.
      (5)   The fee authorized herein shall be in addition to all other fees
and charges of the Circuit Clerk and may be waived only if a judge specifically
provides for such waiver.
      (6)   The fee shall be remitted monthly by the Circuit Clerk to the
County Treasurer to be retained in a special fund designated as the Court
Automation Fund. This fund shall be subject to audit by the County Auditor, and
the County Board may make expenditures therefrom in payment of costs related to
the automation of court records, including hardware, software, research, and
development costs, and the cost of personnel related thereto, provided such
expenditure is approved by the Circuit Clerk and by the Chief Judge of the
Circuit Court, or his or her designate. The fee shall not be charged in any
matter coming on a change of venue, nor in an administrative review proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 6-17-2)
(Res. passed 1-17-2006)
§ 34.070 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The fee requirements of this subchapter shall not apply to police
departments or other law enforcement agencies. In this subbchapter, LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means an agency of the state or a unit of local government
which is vested by law or ordinance with the duty to maintain public order and
to enforce criminal laws or ordinances. LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY also means the
Attorney General or any state’s attorney.
   (B)   No fee provided herein shall be charged to any unit of local
government or school district.
   (C)   The fee requirements of this subchapter shall not apply to any action
instituted under subsection (b) of 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1 by a private owner or
tenant of real property within 1,200 feet of a dangerous or unsafe building
seeking an order compelling the owner or owners of the building to take any of
the actions authorized under that subsection.   
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
§ 34.071 DRUG, ALCOHOL TESTING.
   The fee to be charged to individuals who are sentenced to probation,
conditional discharge, or supervision and who are required to submit to
mandatory drug and/or alcohol testings shall be a flat fee of $70 each time
they are sentenced to probation, conditional discharge, or supervision to
defray the costs incurred related to such testing.
(Ord. passed - -2017)
§ 34.072 OTHER FEES.
   Any fees not covered in this section shall be set by rule or administrative
order of the Circuit Court with the approval of the Administrative Office of
the state courts. The Clerk of the Circuit Court may provide additional
services for which there is no fee specified by statute in connection with the
operation of the Clerk’s office as may be requested by the public and agreed to
by the Clerk, and approved by the Chief Judge of the Circuit Court. Any charges
for additional services shall be as agreed to between the Clerk and the party
making the request and approved by the Chief Judge of the Circuit Court.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any Clerk to provide any
service not otherwise required by law.
(Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 5) (Ord. passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Senior citizen free homestead exemption
   
35.02   Land trusts
   
35.03   Real property taxes
   
35.04   Mobile home delinquent tax purchasers
   
35.05   Automation fees for delinquent tax purchasers
   
35.06   Duplicate tax bills
Hotel/Motel Tax
   
35.20   Purpose
   
35.21   Tax rate
   
35.22   Definitions
   
35.23   Additional charge
   
35.24   Accounting
   
35.25   Enforcement
 
   
35.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Finances and fees, see
Chapter 34
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 SENIOR CITIZEN FREE HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION.
   All applications for Senior Citizen Freeze Exemption shall be accepted and
processed by the Supervisor of Assessments of the county through December 31 of
each year.
(Prior Code, § 1-7-1) (Ord. passed 9-18-2001)
§ 35.02 LAND TRUSTS.
   (A)   A tax be and hereby is imposed upon the privilege of transferring a
beneficial interest in a land trust holding legal title to real estate located
in the county at the rate of $0.50 for each $500 of value or fraction thereof
stated in the declaration required by the Real Estate Transfer Tax Law (35 ILCS
200/31-1 et seq.).
   (B)   Such tax shall be collected by the Recorder of Deeds prior to
recording the trust documents for the beneficial interest subject to the tax,
when the revenue stamps, purchased from the Department of Revenue, are sold,
pursuant to the Real Estate Transfer Tax Law (35 ILCS 200/31-1 et seq.).
   (C)   All trust documents exempted by § 4 of the Real Estate Transfer Tax
Law (35 ILCS 200/31-1 et seq.), shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant
to the section.
   (D)   This tax shall be in addition to all other occupation and privilege
taxes imposed by the state or any municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1-11-2) (Ord. passed 1-21-1986)
§ 35.03 REAL PROPERTY TAXES.
   Fifty percent of each installment of taxes levied and extended against real
property in the county shall not become delinquent until 60 days after each
installment of taxes would otherwise become delinquent, pursuant to the
provisions of 35 ILCS 200/21-40.
(Prior Code, § 1-15-2) (Ord. passed 1-16-1985)
§ 35.04 MOBILE HOME DELINQUENT TAX PURCHASERS.
   (A)   The County Collector shall assess to the purchaser of a mobile home
for delinquent taxes an automation fee of not more than $10 per mobile home.
   (B)   The fee shall be paid at the time of purchase since the record keeping
system used for processing the delinquent mobile home tax sales is automated.
   (C)   The fees collected shall be retained by the County Treasurer in a fund
designated as the Tax Sale Automation Fund. The fund shall be audited by the
County Auditor.
   (D)   The County Board shall make expenditures from the fund to pay any
costs related to the cost of hardware, software, resource and development, and
personnel.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-1) (Ord. passed 4-15-2003)
§ 35.05 AUTOMATION FEES FOR DELINQUENT TAX PURCHASERS.
   (A)   The County Collector shall assess to the purchaser of property for
delinquent taxes an automation fee of not more than $10 per parcel.
   (B)   The fee shall be paid at the time of purchase since the record keeping
system used for processing the delinquent property tax sales is automated.
   (C)   The fees collected shall be retained by the County Treasurer in a fund
designated as the Tax Sale Automation Fund. The fund shall be audited by the
County Auditor.
   (D)   The County Board shall make expenditures from the fund to pay any
costs related to the automation of property tax collections and delinquent
property sales, including the cost of hardware, software, resource and
development, and personnel.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-1) (Ord. passed 4-15-2003)
§ 35.06 DUPLICATE TAX BILLS.
   Effective January 1, 2000, a fee of $5 for each duplicate tax bill be
charged to any mortgage lender who is not the property owner of record; and
that such fees collected shall be deposited into the Treasurer’s Automation
Fund to be disbursed according to law.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-1) (Res. passed 10-19-1999)
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
§ 35.20 PURPOSE.
   Upon receipt of the tax, the County Treasurer shall keep the proceeds in a
special fund, to be used only for the purpose allowed by law, or remit the tax
to the Treasurer of any unit of local government authorized ro receive the same
pursuant to the provisions of an inter-governmental agreement.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-8) (Ord. passed 5-15-1990)
§ 35.21 TAX RATE.
   There be and hereby is imposed upon all persons in the county engaged in the
business of renting, leasing, or letting rooms in a hotel which is not located
within the corporate limits of a municipality which imposes a similar tax
pursuant to the provisions of the municipal code, such tax being imposed at the
rate of 5% of the gross rental receipts from such renting, leasing, or letting,
excluding from such gross rental receipts the proceeds of such renting,
leasing, or letting to permanent residents of the hotel.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-2) (Ord. passed 5-15-1990)
§ 35.22 DEFINITIONS.
   Wherever the following terms are used in this subchapter, they shall have
the meaning attributed to them in the section, such definition being those set
forth by 35 ILCS 145/2.
   HOTEL. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, or sleeping or housekeeping
accommodations. The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes, or courts,
lodging houses, rooming houses, and apartment houses.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any
room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation or a receiver,
executor, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any
court.
   RENT or RENTAL. The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits,
and property or services of any kind or nature.
   ROOM(S). Any living quarters, or sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-3) (Ord. passed 5-15-1990)
§ 35.23 ADDITIONAL CHARGE
   Persons subject to the tax imposed by this subchapter may reimburse
themselves for this tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax
as an additional charge which maybe stated in combination, in a single amount,
with any state tax imposed under the Hotel Operator’s Occupation Tax Act, being
35 ILCS 145/1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-4) (Ord. passed 5-15-1990)
§ 35.24 ACCOUNTING.
   Every person subject to the tax imposed by this subchapter shall keep
accurate and complete books and records to which the County Treasurer, or his
or her designated representative, shall have access at all times, which records
shall include a daily sheet showing the number of hotel rooms rented during the
24-hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel room when such
shall occur and the actual amount collected for that day of the tax imposed by
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-5) (Ord. passed 5-15-1990)
§ 35.25 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Commencing on August 1, 1990, each person subject to the tax
imposed by this subchapter shall file tax returns or forms to be supplied by
the County Treasurer showing the name of the person subject to the tax, the
address of the place where the person is engaged in the renting, leasing, or
letting of hotel rooms in the county, the person’s principal business address,
if different from the hotel address, the total amount of rental receipts
received by such person during the preceding calendar month from the renting,
leasing, or letting of hotel rooms, commencing with July, 1990, the amount of
rental receipts received from renting, leasing, or letting hotel rooms to
permanent residents during such preceding calendar months, the gross receipts
subject to the tax, the amount of the tax due, and the amount of the penalty
due if any. The return shall be due on or before the last day of each
succeeding calendar month and must indicate the period for which the return is
filed. The amount of tax shall be remitted with the return.
      (2)   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the
rate of 1.5% for each month or portion thereof the payment is delinquent shall
be added and collected. The renters will be filed with the County Treasurer,
and the tax will be paid to the County Treasurer.
   (B)   In the event the tax paid by a person subject to the provisions of
this subchapter average less than $100 per month for any six-month period, the
County Treasurer may authorize such person to file returns and remit the tax on
a quarterly basis. Each three months of a calendar year shall be regarded as a
quarter. If the County Treasurer authorizes filing of returns and payments of
the tax on a quarterly basis, the return must be filed and the tax paid on or
before the last day of the month succeeding the end of the quarter.
   (C)   The state’s Attorney is authorized to commence all legal proceedings
necessary to enforce payment of the tax provided by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-6) (Ord. passed 5-15-1990)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who fails to collect, report, or pay the tax provided by §§
35.20 through
35.25 shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed $500. Each failure to collect, report, or pay the tax
provided by this subchapter may be considered a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 1-9-7) (Ord. passed 5-15-1990)
CHAPTER 36: COUNTY POLICIES
Section
   
36.01   Freedom of Information Act
   
36.02   Code of conduct; federal grant funds
§ 36.01 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT.
   (A)   (1)   The purpose of the Freedom of Information Act is to ensure that
all persons are entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs
of government, and the official acts and policies of those who represent them
as public officials.
      (2)   The principle mandate of the Act provides that each public body
shall make available to any person for inspection, or upon submission of a
written request, to provide copies of any requested records that are subject to
disclosure under the Act. Not all records are subject to disclosure, and the
Act provides a number of exemptions.
      (3)   This Act is not intended to be used to violate individual privacy,
nor for the purpose of furthering a commercial enterprise, or to disrupt the
duly-undertaken work of any public body independent of the fulfillment of any
of the rights of the people to access to information (5 ILCS 140/1).
   (B)   For black and white letter or legal sized copies, the first 50 pages
are free, unless a different fee is otherwise fixed by statute. Any additional
pages will be charged at $0.15 per page. Color and abnormal size copies will be
charged the actual cost of copying.
   (C)   (1)   All written requests shall be responded to within five working
days (5 ILCS/140/3).
      (2)   The five-day count begins the day after the receipt of the FOIA
request by the Department Head, or designee.
      (33)   The requester may be notified of a five-day extension (working
days) if the files are voluminous, at different locations, or if other reasons
make it impossible to assemble and mail the request out within the normal five-
day period.
(Document, “Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Overview”)
§ 36.02 CODE OF CONDUCT; FEDERAL GRANT FUNDS.
   (A)   No officer, employee, or agent of the county shall participate in the
selection, award, or administration of a contract supported by federal grant
funds, if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved. Such a
conflict would arise when any of the following has a financial or other
interest in the firm selected for award:
      (1)   The employee, officer, or agent, any members of his or her family,
or his or her partner; or
      (2)   An organization which employs, or is about to employ, any of those
listed in division (A)(1) above.
   (B)   The county officers, employees, or agents shall neither solicit nor
accept gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from contractors,
potential contractors, or subcontractors.
   (C)   To the extent permitted by federal, state, or local laws or
regulations, violation of this section may cause penalties, sanctions, or other
disciplinary actions to be taken against the officers, employees, or agents, or
the contractors, potential contractors, subcontractors, or their agents.
(Res. passed - -)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER
      
51.   SEWAGE
      
52.   GARBAGE, COLLECTION, AND DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
Water Supplies
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Laws, codes adopted by reference
   
50.03   Public water supply use
   
50.04   Potable water supply required
   
50.05   Sealing of abandoned water wells
   
50.06   Construction of water wells and closed loop well systems
   
50.07   Inspections
   
50.08   Disinfection, analysis
   
50.09   Registration of non-community public water supplies
   
50.10   Hearing before the Health Department Administrator
   
50.11   Hearing before the Board of Health
   
50.12   Injunctions
   
50.13   Notice of violation
 
   
50.99   Penalty
WATER SUPPLIES
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ABANDONED WELL. A water well or monitoring well which is:
      (1)   No longer used to supply water;
      (2)   No longer in use for the purpose for which it was intended; or
      (3)   In such a state of deficient construction or disrepair that the
well or boring has the potential for transmitting contaminants into an aquifer
or otherwise threatens the public health or safety.
   CLOSED LOOP WELL. A sealed, watertight loop of pipe buried outside of a
building foundation intended to re-circulate a liquid solution through a heat
exchanger but is limited to the construction of the borehole, piping in the
borehole, heat exchanger fluid, and the grouting of the borehole and does not
include the piping and appurtenances used in any other capacity. CLOSED LOOP
WELL does not include any horizontal closed loop well systems where grouting is
not necessary by law or standard industry practice. CLOSED LOOP WELLS are also
commonly known as GEOTHERMAL WELLS.
   CLOSED LOOP WELL SYSTEM. A clustered group of closed loop wells that serve
the same facility.
   COMMUNITY PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. A public water system which serves at least
15 service connections used by residents, or regularly serves 25 or more
residents for at least 60 days per year.
   DRIVEN WATER WELL. A well constructed by joining a drive point with lengths
of pipe and then driving or jetting the assembly into the ground with
percussion equipment or by hand. DRIVEN WATER WELLS are also commonly known as
sandpoint wells.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The person or persons designated by the County Board of
Health to enforce this subchapter.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The County Department of Public Health, including its
duly authorized representatives.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATOR. The individual selected by the County Board
of Health to administer and enforce the policies, ordinances, resolutions, and
laws of said Board.
   HORIZONTAL CLOSED LOOP WELL SYSTEM. Any open cut excavation where a
watertight loop of pipe is buried outside of a building foundation that is
intended to re-circulate a liquid solution through a heat exchanger.
   LAWN SPRINKLER SYSTEM. Any irrigation system of lawn, shrubbery, and other
vegetation from all water sources, whether potable or nonpotable. Such system
includes without limitation the water supply piping, valves, and sprinkler
heads or other irrigation outlets. LAWN SPRINKLER SYSTEM does not include an
irrigation system used primarily for agricultural purposes.
   MODIFICATION. The alteration of the structure of an existing water well,
including, but not limited to, deepening installation of a pitless adapter,
elimination of a buried suction line, installation of a liner, replacing,
repairing, or extending casing, or replacement of a well screen. Pertaining to
closed loop wells, MODIFICATION also means any alteration to the construction
of the borehole of an existing closed loop well, including, but not limited to,
regrouting and installation of additional boreholes.
   MONITORING WELL. A water well intended for the purpose of determining
groundwater quality or quantity.
   NON-COMMUNITY PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. A public water system which is not a
community water system, and has at least 15 service connections used by non-
residents, or regularly serves 25 or more non-resident individuals daily for at
least 60 days per year.
   NON-POTABLE WATER.
      (1)   Water that does not meet public health standards for drinking water
and is not suitable for human consumption or culinary use, or is of unknown
quality.
      (2)   Examples of situations where NON-POTABLE WATER sources may be used
include commercial or industrial processing or cooling, irrigation of
agricultural ground, or irrigation of other vegetated areas with or without use
of a lawn sprinkler system.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that is generally fit for human consumption in
accordance with accepted water supply principles and practices.
   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM. Any supply which provides water for drinking,
culinary, and sanitary purposes and serves an owner-occupied single-family
dwelling.
   SEMI-PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM. A water supply which is not a public water
system, yet which serves a segment of the public other than an owner-occupied
single-family dwelling.
   WATER WELL. Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven,
dug, jetted, or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation
is for the location, diversion, artificial recharge, or acquisition of
groundwater.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.02 LAWS, CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   In addition to those provisions set forth, this subchapter shall be
interpreted and enforced in accordance with provisions set forth in the
following statutes, rules, and regulations of the state, Department of Public
Health, and any subsequent amendments or revisions thereto, which publications
are incorporated herein and adopted by reference as part of this subchapter.
      (1)   Illinois Water Well Construction Code (415 ILCS 30; 77 Ill. Adm.
Code 920).
      (2)   Illinois Water Well Pump Installation Code (415 ILCS 35; 77 Ill.
Adm. Code 925).
      (3)   Public Area Sanitary Practice Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 895).
      (4)   Drinking Water Systems Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 900).
      (5)   Surface Source Water Treatment Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 930).
      (6)   Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890).
      (7)   Illinois Groundwater Protection Act (415 ILCS 55).
      (8)   Water Well and Pump Installation Contractor’s License Act (225 ILCS
345).
      (9)   Illinois Water Well Construction Code (415 ILCS 30).
      (10)   Illinois Water Well Pump Installation Code (415 ILCS 35).
   (B)   One copy of each of the above rules and regulations shall be on file
in the office of the County Clerk.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.03 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY USE.
   In those locations where a public water supply is reasonably available, that
supply shall be the sole source of water for drinking and culinary purposes. A
public water supply shall be deemed reasonably available when the subject
property is located within 200 feet of the public water supply to which
connection is practical and is permitted by the controlling authority for said
water supply.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.04 POTABLE WATER SUPPLY REQUIRED.
   All premises intended for human habitation or occupancy shall be provided
with a potable water supply. The potable water supply shall not be connected to
non-potable water and shall be protected against backflow in accordance with
the requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code, being 77 Ill. Adm. Code, Pt.
890. Each potable water supply shall provide quantities of water that are
sufficient for the drinking, culinary, and sanitary needs of the dwelling or
premises served. A minimum system pressure of 20 pounds per square inch shall
be maintained throughout each potable water supply. Any premises intended for
human habitation or occupancy which do not possess a potable water supply or
provide sufficient pressure and quantities of water may be declared as unsafe
or unfit for human occupancy and may be so tagged by the Health Authority. Any
such facility that has been tagged as unsafe or unfit for human occupancy shall
be vacated within the time limit specified by the Health Authority.
   (A)   Surface water supplies. All water systems which receive their source
of water from ponds, lakes, streams, rivers, or other surface collectors shall
be designed, constructed, and operated in accordance with the Surface Source
Water Treatment Code, being 77 Ill. Adm. Code, Pt. 930. No surface water shall
be utilized as a potable water supply unless the Health Authority has reviewed
and approved the supply and its components.
   (B)   Cisterns. Cisterns shall not be used as a potable water supply except
where adequate groundwater resources are not available. Cistern water shall
receive treatment in accordance with the Surface Source Water Treatment Code,
being 77 Ill. Adm. Code, Pt. 930. No surface water shall be utilized as a
potable water supply unless the Health Authority has reviewed and approved the
supply and its components.
   (C)   Pre-existing water wells. All water wells constructed prior to the
effective date of this subchapter shall comply with any provisions of this
subchapter deemed necessary by the Health Authority to protect groundwater and
the public health. After the effective date of this subchapter, whenever a
water well is constructed or a new water source is obtained on a property, any
pre-existing water wells located on said property shall be:
      (1)   In substantial compliance with construction and/or location
provisions contained within this
subchapter;
      (2)   Renovated in order to be in substantial compliance with
construction provisions contained within this subchapter; or
      (3)   Sealed in accordance with provisions contained within this
subchapter.
   (D)   Backflow protection.
      (1)   Where water wells are utilized to act as a non-potable water
source, the groundwater supplying such wells shall be protected against
backflow. Each water outlet shall be protected from backflow by having the
outlet end from which the water flows spaced a distance above the flood-level
rim of the receptacle or body of water into which the water flows sufficient to
provide a minimum fixed air gap. The size of the air gap shall be as specifie
in the Illinois Plumbing Code as it applies to the protection of potable water.
      (2)   Where it is not possible to provide a minimum fixed air gap, the
water outlet shall be equipped with an accessible backflow prevention device
(for example a vacuum breaker or backflow preventer) complying with either:
         (a)   Applicable standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code as it applies
to the protection of potable water; and/or
         (b)   Applicable standards of the Illinois Water Well Pump
Installation Code, being 415 ILCS 35; 77 Ill. Adm. Code, Pt. 925, for
agricultural irrigation as it applies to chemical injection systems. When there
is question as to which type of protection device shall be utilized in a given
situation, the higher standard of protection shall apply as determined by the
Health Authority.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.05 SEALING OF ABANDONED WATER WELLS.
   Water wells and closed loop wells that are abandoned shall be sealed in a
manner prescribed by the Health Authority and the Illinois Water Well
Construction Code, being 415 ILCS 30; 77 Ill. Adm. Code, Pt. 920. In
questionable cases, the Health Authority shall make the determination as to
whether a water well is considered abandoned based upon the definition of an
abandoned well in each particular case.
   (A)   Permit required. No water well or closed loop well shall be sealed
within the county unless a permit has been obtained in advance from the Health
Authority. An application to seal a water well or closed loop well shall be
submitted to the Health Authority on forms prescribed by the Health Department.
Upon submission of the application for permit, the Health Authority shall
review said application prior to issuance of a permit. If the Health Authority,
upon review of said application, finds that such application meets the
requirements of this subchapter, and upon payment of the required fee, a permit
shall be issued to the applicant. A sealing permit shall be valid for a period
of 12 months from the date of issuance.
   (B)   Inspections.
      (1)   The person responsible for sealing an abandoned water well or
closed loop well shall also be responsible for arranging a date and time for
inspection of the well sealing in progress by the Health Authority.
      (2)   This inspection shall be scheduled subject to notification
procedures set forth in §
50.07(B) and the availability of the Health Authority inspection staff.
      (3)   The Health Authority, at its discretion, may waive the inspection
requirement based upon the type of well to be sealed and the availability of
the Health Authority inspection staff.
      (4)   In cases when the Health Authority waives the in-progress
inspection requirement, the person sealing the well shall submit a site drawing
which depicts the specific location of the sealed well using measurements and
landmarks.
   (C)   Permit fee. A permit fee shall be required to seal a water well or a
closed loop well system. Payment of the appropriate permit fee shall accompany
each application. The appropriate fee is established by the Board of Health and
is listed on the Health Department fee schedule.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.06 CONSTRUCTION OF WATER WELLS AND CLOSED LOOP WELL SYSTEMS.
   Water wells and closed loop well systems shall be constructed in a manner
prescribed by the Health Authority and the Illinois Water Well Construction
Code.
   (A)   Permit required. No water well or closed loop well system shall be
constructed or modified within the county unless a permit has been obtained in
advance from the Health Authority. Failure by a person to obtain such permit or
ensure said permit has been obtained shall constitute a violation of this
subchapter, and penalty action may be taken.
   (B)   Application for permit. An application to construct or modify a water
well or closed loop well system shall be made in writing and in such a form as
prescribed by the Health Authority. All applications shall include a plan and
detailed drawing of the proposed construction and shall identify all sources of
contamination. The Health Authority may require additional information, which
may include determining the location of potential sources of contamination and/
or water wells on adjacent properties. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant or an authorized agent to obtain and submit all necessary data as
part of the application.
   (C)   Issuance of permit.
      (1)   Upon submission of the application for permit, the Health Authority
shall review said application prior to issuance of a permit.
      (2)   After review, if the Health Authority finds that such application
meets the requirements of this subchapter, and upon payment of all required
fees, a permit shall be issued.
      (3)   The Health Authority shall include a statement on the approved
application regarding any conditions or restrictions to be imposed relating to
location, materials, or components.
   (D)   Permit validity.
      (1)   A permit to construct or modify a water well or closed loop well
system is valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance.
      (2)   If construction has not started within this period, the permit
shall be void.
   (E)   Permit fee and inspection/sampling fee. A permit fee and an
inspection/sampling fee shall be required for a water well permit. A closed
loop well system permit fee shall also be required; such fee shall be based
upon the number of boreholes drilled. The permit fee and inspection/sampling
fee, if applicable, shall accompany each permit application. The appropriate
fee is established by the Board of Health and is listed on the Health
Department fee schedule.
   (F)   Exception. A permit to construct or modify a water well in the county
shall not be required by the Health Authority when such water well does or will
serve a community public water system or function as a monitoring well.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.07 INSPECTIONS.
   Subject to constitutional limitations, the Health Authority shall have the
authority to enter any property or inspect any applicable facilities at any
reasonable time for public health purposes to determine compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of
a property to give the Health Authority free access to the property at
reasonable times upon the request of the Health Authority.
   (A)   Inspection of completed work. Work done under a permit shall not be
considered approved until the construction or modification of a water well or
closed loop well system and its components have been inspected to verify
compliance with the applicable provisions of this subchapter. To the degree
practical and permitted by the Health Authority, the completed installation
shall remain uncovered and/or accessible for inspection purposes until approved
by the Health Authority. If the Health Authority, upon inspection of the
specified installation or component thereof, finds that such work meets the
provisions of this subchapter, the Health Authority shall approve such work.
However, compliance with §
50.08 shall be obtained prior to utilizing a potable water well system for
drinking and culinary purposes.
   (B)   Notification for inspection. Any person who constructs, modifies, or
seals a water well or closed loop well shall notify the Health Authority at
least two working days prior to commencement of the work.
   (C)   Suspension of permit. Upon inspection by the Health Authority, if it
is found that any provisions of this subchapter or any permit specifications
for a stated property have been violated, the Health Authority shall notify the
contractor or person responsible for the work to make such specified changes in
the work to achieve compliance. If such changes are not made within a period of
time specified by the Health Authority, said permit shall be suspended, and
penalty action may be taken. In such cases, the water well system or closed
loop well system may be deemed unsuitable for use, and the system prohibited
from being put into use. In cases involving a potable water supply, the
premises may also be tagged by the Health Authority in accordance with §
50.04.
   (D)   Special evaluations. The Health Department may conduct special
evaluations concerning the operation of existing water supply systems. These
evaluations are generally done for real estate transactions or mortgage
refinancing. Special evaluations are conducted on a consultative basis upon the
request of the property owner or authorized agent. Payment of a fee is required
in order to conduct a special evaluation. The appropriate fee is established by
the Board of Health and is listed on the Health Department fee schedule.
   (E)   Routine water sampling and shipping. The Health Department may collect
and ship drinking water samples from a property on a request basis for an
analysis, handling, and shipping fee. The Health Department may also accept
drinking water samples from the public for an analysis, handling, and shipping
fee. The appropriate fee is established by the Board of Health and is listed on
the Health Department fee schedule.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.08 DISINFECTION, ANALYSIS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   All components of a new water well construction and/or modification
shall be thoroughly disinfected with a strong chlorine solution which will
yield a dosage of at least 100 parts per million to the water in the well and
piping system. After purging the water system of any chlorine residual, a water
sample shall be taken and analyzed by a certified laboratory and satisfactory
results obtained prior to utilizing the water system for drinking and culinary
purposes. The copy of the analysis shall be filed with the Health Department.
The water obtained from a semi-private water supply shall meet the nitrate/
nitrite chemical and bacteriological requirements of the Primary Drinking Water
Standards (35 Ill. Adm. Code 611), and the water obtained from a private well
shall meet the bacteriological and nitrate/nitrite requirements of the Primary
Drinking Water Standards (35 Ill. Adm. Code 611). The water from a private
water system, having surface water as its source, shall meet the nitrate/
nitrite, bacteriological, and turbidity requirements of the Primary Drinking
Water Standards (35 Ill. Adm. Code 611). A CERTIFIED LABORATORY shall mean a
laboratory operated by the Illinois Department of Public Health or a laboratory
given certification approval by the aforementioned agency for the processing of
official samples of water.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to assure that
a bacteriologically satisfactory water sample is obtained and to provide the
Health Authority with the laboratory report as documentation. This sampling
requirement is waived by the Health Authority for irrigation or other non-
potable water wells.
   (B)   Sampling of new water wells. The Health Authority shall have the
authority to collect water samples from new or modified water wells as provided
in §
50.07.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.09 REGISTRATION OF NON-COMMUNITY PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIES.
   Each non-community public water supply located and operating within the
county shall be registered by the Health Authority.
   (A)   Application for registration certificate. An application to operate a
non-community public water supply shall be submitted to the Health Authority by
the owner, operator, or agent for the water supply. Upon submission of the
application for registration, the Health Authority shall review:
      (1)   Information provided on the application;
      (2)   The previous year’s water sampling history;
      (3)   The most recent water supply facility evaluation; and
      (4)   (a)   Other pertinent information including any outstanding
facility deficiencies and compliance activities, and the overall level of
public health protection of the water supply.
         (b)   If the Health Authority determines that the water supply is in
substantial compliance with applicable regulations and this subchapter, and
upon payment of the required fee, a registration certificate shall be issued
for the facility. Registration certificates are issued annually and shall
expire January 1 of each year.
   (B)   Registration fee. The fee for registration of a non-community public
water supply in the county is established by the Board of Health and is listed
on the Health Department fee schedule.
   (C)   Renewal of registration. Failure of a non-community public water
supply to comply with applicable regulations, including the Drinking Water
Systems Code and this subchapter, will be just cause for the Health Authority
to deny renewal of a registration certificate. A non-community public water
supply shall not offer water to the public for drinking and culinary purposes
if such facility does not possess a valid registration certificate.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.10 HEARING BEFORE THE HEALTH DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATOR.
   Any person affected by any order or notice issued by the Health Department
in connection with the enforcement of any section of this subchapter may file
in the office of the Health Department a written request for a hearing before
the Health Department Administrator. The Health Department Administrator shall
hold a hearing at a time and place designated by him or her within 30 days from
the date on which the written request was filed. The petitioner for the hearing
shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing not less than five days
prior to the date on which the hearing is to be held. If, as a result of the
hearing, the Health Department Administrator finds that strict compliance with
the order or notice would cause undue hardship on the petitioner and that the
public health would be adequately protected and substantial justice done by
varying or withdrawing the order or notice, the Health Department Administrator
may modify or withdraw the order or notice, and as a condition for such action
may make requirements which are additional to those prescribed in this
subchapter for the purpose of properly protecting the public health. The Health
Department Administrator shall render a decision within ten days after the date
of the hearing which shall be reduced to writing and placed on file in the
office of the Health Department, and a copy thereof shall be sent to the
petitioner. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Health Department
Administrator may seek relief therefrom through a hearing before the Board of
Health.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.11 HEARING BEFORE THE BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   (1)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Health Department
Administrator, rendered as the result of a hearing held in accordance with §
50.10, may file in the office of the Health Department a written request for a
hearing at the next regular Board of Health meeting, if the agenda allows.
      (2)   The petitioner for the hearing shall be notified of the time and
place of the hearing not less than five days prior to the date on which the
hearing is to be held.
   (B)   (1)   If, as a result of the hearing, the Board of Health finds that
strict compliance with the decision of the Health Department Administrator
would cause undue hardship on the petitioner and that the public health would
be adequately protected and that substantial justice done by granting a
variance from the decision of the Health Department Administrator, the Board of
Health may grant a variance, and as a condition for such variance, may make
requirements which are additional to those prescribed by this subchapter, all
for the purpose of properly protecting the public health.
      (2)   The Board of Health shall render a decision within ten days after
the date of the hearing which shall be reduced to writing and placed on file in
the office of the Health Department, and a copy thereof shall be sent to the
petitioner.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.12 INJUNCTIONS.
   The state’s Attorney of the county may bring action for an injunction to
restrain any violation of this subchapter or to enjoin the operations of any
such establishment causing such violation.
(Prior Code, § 4-9-15) (Ord. 98-201, passed 2-17-1998; Ord. 2003-821, passed 8-
19-2003)
§ 50.13 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Health Authority determines, through inspections or other
means, that there is a violation of any provision of this subchapter, the
Health Authority shall give notice of such alleged violation. Such notice
shall:
   (A)   Be in writing;
   (B)   Include a statement of the reasons for the issuance of the notice;
   (C)   Contain an outline of remedial action and allow a reasonable time to
effect compliance with this subchapter; and
   (D)   Be served upon the owner, operator, or resident as the case may
require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to have been properly served
when the notice has been personally delivered or sent by registered or
certified mail or if the owner, operator, or resident acknowledges receipt of
such notice.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
50.01 through
50.13 shall be guilty of a petty offense, punishable by a fine of not to exceed
$1,000. Each day’s violation constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
CHAPTER 51: SEWAGE
Section
Private Sewage Disposal
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Laws, codes adopted by reference
   
51.03   Sanitary facilities required
   
51.04   Public sewer
   
51.05   Preliminary plat review
   
51.06   Permit required
   
51.07   Special evaluations
   
51.08   Technical requirements
   
51.09   Inspections
   
51.10   Revocation, suspension of permit
   
51.11   Unsanitary conditions
   
51.12   Notice of violation
   
51.13   Hearing before the Health Department Administrator
   
51.14   Hearing before the Board of Health
   
51.15   Injunctions
 
   
51.99   Penalty
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The County Board of Health, or its representative(s).
   EFFLUENT RECEIVING TRENCH. A seepage line of gravel or gravel-less design
used to receive the treated discharge from an aerobic treatment plant, sand
filter, or lagoon prior to discharge to the ground surface or other location.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Administrator of the County Department of Public
Health, or his or her duly authorized representative(s).
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The County Department of Public Health, including its
duly authorized representative(s).
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATOR. The individual selected by the County Board
of Health to administer and enforce the policies, ordinances, resolutions, or
law of said Board.
   ORDINANCE. The “Rock Island County Private Sewage Disposal Ordinance,” as
codified in this subchapter.
   PERMIT. A written permit issued by the Health Authority allowing the
installation, construction, extension, or repair of a private sewage disposal
system under this subchapter.
   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM INSTALLATION CONTRACTOR. Any person
constructing, installing, repairing, modifying, or maintaining private sewage
disposal systems.
   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PUMPING CONTRACTOR. Any person who cleans or
pumps waste from a private sewage disposal system or hauls or disposes of
wastes removed therefrom.
   SOIL SURVEY. The “Soil Survey of Rock Island County” produced by the United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-2) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.02 LAWS, CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   In addition to the other provisions stated herein, this subchapter shall
adopt by reference and shall be interpreted and enforced in accordance with the
provisions set forth in the current, unabridged form of the State Department of
Public Health, “Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code,” being 225 ILCS
225/1 et seq., and any subsequent amendments or revisions thereto, three copies
of which shall be on file in the office of the County Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-3) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.03 SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   No building, structure, area, or premises shall be constructed or maintained
for human occupancy, use, or assembly without adequate facilities for the
sanitary and safe disposal of all human waste and domestic sewage which could
endanger the public health or create objectionable nuisance conditions. Any
building, structure, area, or premises which does not possess adequate sanitary
facilities may be declared as unsafe or unfit for human occupancy and may be so
tagged by the Health Authority. Any such facility that has been tagged as
unsafe or unfit for human occupancy shall be vacated within the time limit
specific by the Health Authority.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-4) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.04 PUBLIC SEWER.
   (A)   The Health Authority shall refuse to grant a permit for the
construction of a private sewage disposal system where a public sanitary sewer
is available for connection.
   (B)   A public sewer shall be deemed available for connection when the
subject property is located within a reasonable distance from the public sewer
and connection is permitted by the controlling authority.
   (C)   A reasonable distance shall be considered 200 feet from a single-
family residential property or a commercial property discharging less than
1,500 gallons of domestic sewage per day, and 1,000 feet from a commercial
property discharging 1,500 or more gallons of domestic sewage per day or a
multi-family dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-5) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.05 PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW.
   When private sewage disposal systems are to be used for any subdivision or
redivision of any subdivision, tract, parcel, or lot of land into two or more
parts by means of mapping, platting, conveyance, change, or rearrangement of
boundaries, the Health Authority shall review such proposal to ensure that each
proposed lot shall be able to contain a private sewage disposal system approved
under the provisions of this subchapter. No preliminary plat or subdivision
shall be approved unless every proposed lot is considered suitable for an
approved private sewage disposal system. A proposed plat of more than six lots
shall not be designed or situated in such a manner which will require private
sewage disposal systems with surface discharges on more than 20% of the
proposed lots. The adequacy of proposed subdivision lots utilizing private
sewage disposal systems shall be determined in part from the results of the
soil type that is identified by soil borings on each proposed lot and through
utilization of the Soil Survey. Information regarding lot size and
configuration along with topographic and other physical features shall also be
used top determine individual lot suitability.
   (A)   Application for plat review. Application for a plat review shall be
made in writing to the Health Department in such form as prescribed by the
Health Authority. Each application shall be accompanied by the plat or proposed
subdivision identifying each lot and accurately depicting the property lines
and dimensions of each lot. Easements, roads, and rights-of-way which are part
of the proposed plat shall also be shown. Information concerning topography,
proposed wells, and water supply lines shall also be provided to the Health
Authority upon request.
   (B)   Evaluation of application. The site of the plat or proposed
subdivision shall have corner points of each lot clearly identified prior to
evaluation. At the discretion of the Health Authority, the Health Authority, or
a credentialed soil scientist or soil classifier shall conduct an on-site soils
evaluation over the entire tract. The soil evaluation shall consist of soil
borings made a sufficient number of locations to determine major soil types and
conditions present. If the information provided is insufficient to conduct an
adequate evaluation, the Health Authority may require additional information,
including more detailed soil or engineering studies or aerial photographs. On-
site test pits at certain locations may also be required by the Health
Authority. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant or an authorized
agent of the applicant to obtain all requested data and to design a plat or
proposed subdivision which shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.
   (C)   Plat review fee. When the Health Authority conducts the on-site soils
evaluation, a fee of $100 for the first lot and $75 for each additional lot
shall accompany each application for plat review. When the on-site soils
evaluation is conducted by a credentialed soil scientist or soil classifier,
the plat review fee shall be $100 for the first lot and $25 for each additional
lot. Soils evaluations not conducted by the Health Authority are done at the
expense of the applicant.
   (D)   Approval of application. If the Health Authority, upon review of said
application, determines that the plat or proposed subdivision will allow
placement of an approved disposal system on each lot in accordance with this
subchapter, a report of approval shall be submitted by the Health Authority to
the governmental unit charged with overall responsibility for final approval.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-6) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.06 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No private sewage disposal system or component thereof shall be installed,
constructed, extended, or repaired in the county, except in accordance with
this subchapter, and it shall be unlawful to proceed with such work unless a
permit therefor shall have first been obtained from the Health Authority.
However, where connection is to be made to a public sewer, arrangements shall
be made with the municipality owning the sewer rather than the County Health
Department. The routine cleaning of disposal system components, replacing
septic tank covers, adding septic tank access risers, or rodding out the
building sewer or septic tank inlet and outlet do not require a permit.
   (A)   Application for permit. Application for such a permit shall be made in
writing to the Health Department in such form as prescribed by the Health
Authority. Each application shall be accompanied by a plan identifying the
subject property and accurately depicting the property lines and dimensions of
the lot. Within the site plan, all existing and proposed structures, driveways,
patios, easements, and in ground swimming pools shall be located an include
dimensions and distance to property lines. The location of all existing and
proposed wells, sewers, septic tanks, sewage disposal systems, cisterns, water
lines, underground utility lines, drainage tiles, privy vaults, waterways,
lakes, ponds, streams, ravines, wooded areas, and other related entities shall
also be shown along with appropriate separation distances. Similar information
as listed above shall be included for neighboring property which may impact the
location of the proposed private sewage disposal system.
   (B)   Permit fee. For renovation on a developed property, a fee of $125
shall accompany each application, except as herein noted. A permit fee of $65
shall be charged for septic tank repair, septic tank baffle replacement,
building sewer repair or replacement, repair or replacement of any solid
piping, distribution box replacement, or repair of ten linear feet or less of
subsurface seepage fields. For construction of a new building, a fee of $150
shall accompany each application.
   (C)   Evaluation of application.
      (1)   Upon submission of the application for permit, including the site
plan and all necessary components, the Health Authority shall review said
application prior to issuance of a permit. With the addition to the information
contained within the site plan, the Health Authority shall evaluate site
specific soil characteristics.
      (2)   The absorption capabilities of the soil shall be determined from
among percolation test results, soil classification information obtained from
the soil survey, and/or on-site soil borings as determined by the Health
Authority on an individual basis.
      (3)   Soils information may be supplied to the Health Authority by
qualified soil scientists, consulting engineers, sanitarian, or other
individuals approved by the Health Authority.
      (4)   If the information provided is insufficient to conduct an adequate
evaluation, the Health Authority may require additional information, including
more detailed soil or engineering studies or aerial photographs. On-site test
pits on the subject property may also be required by the Health Authority.
      (5)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant or an authorized
agent of the applicant to obtain all requested data and to design a system
which shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.
   (D)   Issuance of permit.
      (1)   If the Health Authority, upon review of said application, finds
that such application meets the requirements of this subchapter, and upon
payment of the required fee, a permit shall be issued to the application.
      (2)   Such permit shall include specifications specific to each private
sewage disposal system and shall include a statement as to any restrictions
relating to the components, type, or a size system that shall be installed. The
permit issued by the Health Authority is in addition to any required building
permit and shall be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.
   (E)   Property owner’s responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to secure a permit before any construction or repair is begun on
the owner’s system. Failure of the property owner to obtain said permit before
construction or repair is begun shall constitute a violation of this
subchapter, and penalty action may be taken.
   (F)   Private sewage disposal system installation contractor’s
responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the private sewage disposal
system installation contractor to ensure that a permit has been issued before
any construction or repair is begun on any system, and to follow the conditions
of said permit. Failure of the private sewage disposal system installation
contractor to ensure said permit has been issued or to violate the conditions
of said permit shall constitute a violation of this subchapter, and penalty
action may be taken.
   (G)   Permit validity. Said permit to construct is valid for a period of 12
months from the date of issuance. If construction has not started within this
period, the permit is void.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-7) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 SPECIAL EVALUATIONS.
   The Health Department may conduct special evaluations concerning the
operation of existing private sewage disposal systems or the feasibility of
constructing a private sewage disposal system on undeveloped property. The
evaluation of existing systems is generally done for real estate transactions
or mortgage refinancing, while the feasibility evaluation is done when an
application for a private sewage disposal system permit is not imminent or
desired. Special evaluations are conducted on a consultative basis upon the
request of the property owner or authorized agent. The fee for a special
evaluation shall be $120. If a person request a statement in letter form
stating known conditions at a site without field inspection, the fee shall be
$50.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-8) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.08 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Minimum subsurface seepage field sizing. The minimum equivalent trench
bottom absorption area for a subsurface seepage field system serving any
dwelling or building shall be 300 square feet.
   (B)   Piping under driveways. Building sewer piping and treatment unit
effluent lines which are located under driveways, parking lots, or other
vehicular traffic areas shall be constructed of Schedule 40 PVC or stronger and
encapsulated within a second pipe of equal strength to prevent crushing and to
improve insulation against freezing.
   (C)   Gravel-less seepage fields. Where a gravel-less subsurface seepage
field system or chambered leach field is to be installed, in conjunction with a
septic tank, the installation contractor shall advise the property owner of
this fact prior to construction. In addition, the installation contractor shall
install one or more access ports within the seepage field system to facilitate
inspection and cleaning.
   (D)   Aerobic treatment plants. Aerobic treatment plants require periodic
maintenance to achieve performance consistent with demonstrated capabilities.
It is recognized that assured professional maintenance is imperative.
   (E)   Continuing service policy required. All aerobic treatment plants shall
have in force, at all times, a service policy from either the manufacturer or
distributor through the dealer, or other person or agency qualified and duly
licensed to perform the necessary service for as long as the unit is in
operation. This service policy shall provide:
      (1)   For an inspection or service call, at least once every six months,
which includes inspection, adjustment, and servicing of the mechanical and
electrical component parts to ensure proper function;
      (2)   For an effluent quality inspection consisting of a visual check for
color, turbidity, scum overflow, and an examination for odors, and a chemical
test for chlorine residual; and
      (3)   For improper operation which cannot be corrected at the time, it
shall be reported to the owner immediately. This shall be followed with a
written report which includes the date for the condition to be corrected.
   (F)   Responsibility of manufacturer and/or service dealer.
      (1)   The manufacturer, distributor, or dealer shall be required to
assure that continuous service policy is available to the property owner for as
long as the unit is in operation.
      (2)   The service dealer shall provide a written statement to the
property owner for each inspection or service call made. The statement shall
indicate the specific type of service performed.
      (3)   The service dealer shall assure that semi-annual inspections are
being conducted on a timely basis. Upon the request of the Health Authority,
the service dealer shall provide the service and inspection history of each
system under the dealer’s care.
      (4)   Service by the dealer shall be available within 48 hours following
a request.
      (5)   An owner’s manual shall be provided by the manufacturer with each
unit. The manual shall include the unit’s model and serial number, warranty,
and service policy, detailed operation and maintenance requirements, and rated
daily service flow. A clearly visible, permanently attached label or plate
giving instructions for obtaining service shall be placed at the visible and
audible alarm.
      (6)   When a continuing service policy is not renewed by a property
owner, the service dealer shall notify the Health Authority within 30 days
after expiration of the policy. The service dealer shall identify the name of
the property owner and the property address.
   (G)   Responsibility of the property owner.
      (1)   The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and
operating the aerobic treatment plant in accordance with this subchapter and
the manufacturer’s specifications.
      (2)   Property owners of aerobic treatment plants shall be required to
obtain and maintain at all times a continuing service policy which provides
qualified service.
   (H)   Sizing of aerobic treatment plant. A four-bedroom residential property
shall be sized with an NSF listed, Class 1 Aerobic Treatment Plant with a
minimum rated treatment capacity of 600 gallons per day.
   (I)   Surface discharges.
      (1)   Surface discharges from buried sand filters and Class 1 aerobic
treatments plants shall be permitted only on properties which are deemed
unsuitable for a subsurface seepage field or seepage bed system based upon on-
site investigation by the Health Authority.
      (2)   Factors which could qualify a lot as unsuitable for a subsurface
seepage field or seepage bed system include: inadequate soil permeability,
insufficient usable area, inadequate separation distances from wells, the
presence of shallow creviced limestone formations, an excessively high seasonal
groundwater table, request flooding, or poor surface draining. Other limiting
factors will be considered by the Health Authority on an individual basis.
   (J)   Effluent receiving trenches and beds. If the final discharge point of
the effluent from a buried sand filter or Class 1 aerobic treatment plant is to
be ground surface or body of water with limited inflow, then an effluent
receiving trench or bed shall be installed prior to discharge in order to
minimize potential adverse health or nuisance conditions. The effluent
receiving trench or bed shall be designed as a conventional subsurface seepage
field or bed, except that the entire trench or bed shall be designed to
completely fill with liquid prior to discharge. The sizing of the effluent
receiving trench or bed shall be determined by the Health Authority and based
up on soil and other physical site conditions.
   (K)   Common drains. The use of common drains for the discharge of effluent
from a buried sand filter or Class 1 aerobic treatment plant shall be
prohibited, except in cases when a variance is granted by the Health Authority.
A COMMON DRAIN is defined as an underground, enclosed conduit designed to carry
liquids. Examples of common drains include storm tiles, field tiles and village
tiles.
   (L)   Disinfection. The effluent from any buried sand filter or Class 1
aerobic treatment plant discharged to a watercourse, lake, pond, or to the
ground surface shall be disinfected in the manner provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-9) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.09 INSPECTIONS.
   The Health Authority shall have the authority to enter any property or
building at any reasonable time to inspect for health and sanitation purposes
to determine compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. It shall be the
duty of the owner or occupant of a property to give the Health Authority free
access to the property upon request of the Health Authority.
   (A)   Sample collection and testing. The Health Authority shall be permitted
to collect water samples or conduct any necessary tests, including dye tests,
upon any property to determine compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Recover inspections required.
      (1)   The Health Advisory shall be permitted to inspect the installation
of a private sewage disposal system at any stage of construction. Before
backfilling is started, but after complete installation of the private sewage
disposal system or portion thereof, an inspection shall be made by the Health
Authority to determine compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Any person who shall backfill or cover any portion of a private
sewage disposal system without authorization by the Health Authority shall be
in violation of this subchapter. In such case, the Health Authority may require
uncovering of the covered portion, and all costs inclined by such action shall
be the responsibility of the violator.
      (3)   The permit holder or installer shall provide advance notice of at
least one working day to the Health Department for a recover inspection.
   (C)   Approval of installation. If the Health Advisory, upon inspection,
finds that the specified work meets the requirements of this subchapter, the
Health Authority shall approve the installation, complete the permit form, and
authorize backfilling to be done.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-10) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.10 REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   Upon inspection by the Health Authority, if it is found that the permit
holder or installer has violated any provisions of this subchapter, the Health
Authority shall be empowered to revoke or suspend the permit, or the Health
Authority may notify the owner or installer to make such specified changes in
the work to allow compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. If such
changes are not made within a reasonable time as set forth by the Health
Authority, said permit shall then be revoked by the Health Authority, and it
shall be unlawful to use such private sewage disposal system. A permit may also
be revoked or suspended when it is issued in error or when information
contained within a permit application is later found to be inaccurate.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-11) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.11 UNSANITARY CONDITIONS.
   Each private sewage disposal system shall be maintained in proper sanitary
condition and repair by the property owner. It shall be unlawful for any
property owner, agent, occupant, or person in control of any building or
private sewage disposal system to permit or cause human wastes, excreta,
untreated sewage, domestic sewage, laundry wastes, industrial wastes, or the
effluent from septic tanks, septic system seepage fields, or other component of
a private sewage treatment and disposal, to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, onto the ground surface, into any stream, ditch river, artificial
watercourse, lake, field drain tile, road drain tile, abandoned well, cave,
tunnel, or mineshaft, or to allow the contents of any privy, vault, septic
tank, cesspool, seepage pit, or any other part of a private sewage disposal
system to omit offensive odors or become dangerous or prejudicial to health,
and all such acts or omissions are hereby declared violations of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-12) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.12 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Health Authority determines, through inspections or other
means, that there is a violation of any provision of this subchapter, the
Health Authority shall give notice of such alleged violation. Such notice
shall:
   (A)   Be in writing;
   (B)   Include a statement of the reasons for the issuance of the notice;
   (C)   Contain an outline of remedial action and allow a reasonable time to
effect compliance with this subchapter; and
   (D)   Be served upon the owner, operator, or resident as the case may
require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to have been properly served
when the notice has been personally delivered or sent by registered or
certified mail.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-16) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.13 HEARING BEFORE THE HEALTH DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATOR.
   Any person affected by any order or notice issued by the Health Department
in connection with the enforcement of any section of this subchapter may file
in the office of the Health Department a written request for a hearing before
the Health Department Administrator. The Health Department Administrator shall
hold a hearing at a time and place designated by him or her within 30 days from
the date on which the written request was filed. The petitioner for the hearing
shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing not less than five days
prior to the date on which the hearing is to be held. If, as a result of the
hearing, the Health Department Administrator finds that strict compliance with
the order, or notice, would cause undue hardship on the petitioner, and that
the public health would be adequately protected and substantial justice done by
varying or withdrawing the order or notice, the Health Department Administrator
may modify or withdraw the order or notice and, as a condition for such action
may, where he or she deems it necessary, make requirements which are additional
to those prescribed in this subchapter for th purpose of properly protecting
the public health. The Health Department Administrator shall render a decision
within ten days after the date of the hearing which shall be reduced to writing
and placed on file in the office of the Health Department, and a copy thereof
shall be sent to the petitioner. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Health Department Administrator may seek relief therefrom through a hearing
before the Board of Health.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-17) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.14 HEARING BEFORE THE BOARD OF HEALTH.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Health Department Administrator,
rendered as the result of a hearing held in accordance with §
51.13, may file in the office of the Health Department a written request for a
hearing at a time and place designated by the Secretary of the Board of Health
within 30 days of the date on which written request was filed. The petitioner
for the hearing shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing not less
than five days prior to the date on which the hearing is to be held. If, as a
result of the facts elicited as result of the hearing, the Board of Health
finds that strict compliance with the decision of the Health Department
Administrator would cause undue hardship on the petitioner, and that the public
health would be adequately protected and substantial justice done by granting a
variance from the decision of the Health Department Administrator, the Board of
Health may grant a variance and as a condition for such variance, and may,
where it deems necessary, make requirements which are additional to those
prescribed by this subchapter, all for the purpose of properly protecting the
public health. The Board of Health shall render a decision with ten days after
the date of the hearing which shall be reduced to writing and placed on file in
the office of the Health Department, and a copy thereof shall be sent to the
petitioner.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-18) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.15 INJUNCTIONS.
   The state’s Attorney of the county may bring action for an injunction to
restrain any violation of this subchapter or to enjoin the operations of any
such establishment causing such violation.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-20) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter, which
violation constitutes a violation of the Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act,
being 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq., or any rule, regulation, order, or determination
of the Department of Public Health of the state, adopted or made by said
Department pursuant to said Act, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and
fined not less than $100. Any other violation of this subchapter shall be
deemed a petty offense. Each day’s violation constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-19) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
CHAPTER 52: GARBAGE, COLLECTION, AND DISPOSAL
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Unlawful dumping; exceptions
   
52.03   Accumulation, storage, disposal of refuse
   
52.04   Transportation of refuse
   
52.05   Refuse containers required
   
52.06   Inspections
   
52.07   Injunctions
Accumulated Garbage
   
52.20   Authority
   
52.21   Definitions
   
52.22   Removal of accumulated garbage, debris
   
52.23   Limitation on authority
   
52.24   Notice
   
52.25   Funding
   
52.26   Recovery of costs
   
52.27   Appeal of determination
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Health nuisances, see §§
90.30 through
90.39
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. A landfill or other site used for the proper
disposal of solid waste or wastes as permitted and approved by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The County Board of Health or its authorized representative
(s).
   GARBAGE. Organic waste products resulting from the handling, storage,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of any food, or any matter that may
decompose and become offensive or dangerous to health.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Administrator of the County Department of Public
Health, or his or her duly authorized representative(s).
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The County Department of Public Health, including its
duly authorized representative(s).
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATOR. The individual selected by the County Board
of Health to administer and enforce the policies, ordinances, resolutions, or
law of said Board.
   LICENSE. A written permit issued by the County Department of Public Health
permitting the collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste within
the county.
   ORDINANCE. The “Rock Island County Solid Waste Ordinance,” as codified in
this subchapter.
   PERSON. Any individual, group of individuals, association, trust,
partnership, corporation, person doing business under an assumed name, the
state, or any Department thereof, or any other entity.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person in whose name legal title to the real estate is
recorded.
   REFUSE. Any discarded, used, or consumed substance or waste material. REFUSE
may include, but is not limited to, any:
      (1)   Garbage, trash, debris, or rubbish;
      (2)   Sticks, brush, branches, tree limbs, grass clippings, or other lawn
or garden waste;
      (3)   Newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic, or paper containers,
or other packaging construction material;
      (4)   Inoperative, dismantled, partially dismantled, wrecked, or
abandoned motor vehicles or vehicle parts;
      (5)   Discarded, dismantled, unusable, or dilapidated appliances,
furniture, equipment, machinery, or parts thereof;
      (6)   Discarded, unusable, broken, or dilapidated household articles;
      (7)   Construction or demolition waste, or materials including, but not
limited to, wood, plaster, metals, plastics, tile, brick, concrete, and mineral
or oil;
      (8)   Carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or offensive matter of any
kind, any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard; or
      (9)   Anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been
discarded, abandoned, or otherwise disposed of improperly.
   SOLID WASTE. The term shall mean REFUSE.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-2) (Ord. passed 4-16-1985; Ord. passed 4-21-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 52.02 UNLAWFUL DUMPING; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause, or
permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding, or leaving of
refuse upon any public or private property in the county, or upon or into any
river, lake, pond, or other stream or body of water in the county, unless:
      (1)   The property has been designated waste disposal site by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency;
      (2)   The refuse is placed into a receptacle or other container, as
prescribed in §
52.05 intended by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for
the depositing of refuse;
      (3)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public officials
during special cleanup days; or
      (4)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency
situation where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly
disposes of such refuse when the emergency situation no longer exists.
   (B)   No person shall transport refuse from any dwelling, residence, place,
or business, farm, or other site to deposit such material in, around, or on top
of refuse containers on any other property, public or private.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-3) (Ord. passed 4-16-1985; Ord. passed 4-21-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 ACCUMULATION, STORAGE, DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   No person shall cause or permit refuse to accumulate in any building or on
any property, improved or vacant, public or private, within the county, except
such properties or facilities which are zoned as authorized junk yards or
salvage yards by the County Zoning Department. The occupant, tenant, owner, or
his or her agent, of any building or property shall be responsible for placing
all refuse in containers, as prescribed in §
52.05, and for subsequent removal from such property. No person shall remove
the covers from or open refuse containers, except as permitted in this
subchapter, or to place or disturb such containers so as their contents might
be spilled or scattered. Refuse shall be removed from any building or property
not less than once every two weeks.
   (A)   Burning of refuse. No person shall be permitted to burn refuse in the
county except as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   Infected refuse. No person shall place or cause to be placed in refuse
containers any bedding, clothing, or other articles contaminated by infectious
or contagious disease. All such refuse shall be burned on the premises, and the
ashes shall be placed in suitable containers, or such infectious waste shall be
disposed of according to law off the premises.
   (C)   Highly flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials. No person shall
place or cause to be placed in refuse containers highly flammable, explosive,
or hazardous materials. All such materials shall be disposed of according to
law off the premises.
   (D)   Vacated premises.
      (1)   Any person occupying or controlling any property or building shall
cause to be removed therefrom all refuse before vacating the premises.
      (2)   In the event refuse is not removed from said building or property
and the previous occupant or tenant cannot be located responsibility for
removing all refuse shall become the responsibility of the building or property
owner.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-4) (Ord. passed 4-16-1985; Ord. passed 4-21-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
Cross-reference:
   Accumulation of garbage, removal, see §§
52.20 through
52.27
§ 52.04 TRANSPORTATION OF REFUSE.
   No person shall transport or cause to be transported within the county any
refuse except within a closed or covered container or specially constructed
conveyance approved by the Health Authority. Exceptions to this section may be
granted by the Health Authority such as for transportation of certain types of
refuse which will not present a health or safety hazard or create littering of
properties and roadways.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-5) (Ord. passed 4-16-1985; Ord. passed 4-21-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 52.05 REFUSE CONTAINERS REQUIRED.
   Containers as prescribed in divisions (A), (B), and (C) below shall be
provided at each building or property where refuse is generated or stored.
   (A)   Refuse containers for residential properties or small businesses.
      (1)   The occupant, tenant, owner, or his or her agent, of any house,
building, apartment, or tenement where persons reside, board, lodge, or work
shall provide and maintain in good repair approved containers for refuse
storage and collection. A sufficient number of containers shall be provided to
accommodate all refuse generated between regular collection or disposal dates.
However, one container of at least 20 gallons capacity shall be provided for
any small business or for each two persons residing in any premises. All
containers shall be:
         (a)   Of rigid design;
         (b)   Corrosion resistant;
         (c)   Constructed of metal or plastic; and
         (d)   Leakproof and fly-proof with tight-fitting lids and handles at
the sides.
      (2)   All hand-emptied containers shall have a capacity of at least 20
gallons, but shall not exceed a capacity of 30 gallons. Plastic bags shall not
be accepted for the storage and collection of refuse except as provided in
division (B) below.
   (B)   Use of plastic bags. The use of plastic bags for refuse storage and
collection shall only be permitted if such bagged and sealed refuse is stored
within a relatively fly-proof or vermin-proof location such as a shed, garage,
or other outbuilding, or within the dwelling. Only bags specifically designed
for refuse storage which are leakproof and relatively strong shall be
permitted. Bags filled with refuse shall be tied and shall be placed in the
out-of-doors only on the date of collection as close to the time of pick-up as
practical. The use of plastic bags for refuse storage and collection shall only
be permitted for a single-family dwelling or duplex apartment.
   (C)   Refuse containers for apartments or larger businesses. The owner or
agent of any apartment building or larger business where eight or more 20
gallon refuse containers are provided or needed shall provide container(s) of
one cubic yard capacity or larger. A sufficient amount of total refuse storage
capacity shall be provided to accommodate all refuse generated between regular
collection dates. Such large containers shall be:
      (1)   Stable while loaded or empty;
      (2)   Equipped with lids with hinges, or sliding doors;
      (3)   Equipped for mechanical dumping;
      (4)   Durable;
      (5)   Leakproof and relatively fly- and vermin-proof; and
      (6)   Maintained in good repair.
   (D)   Removal of covers and cleaning of refuse containers.
      (1)   The covers of refuse containers shall be removed or opened only for
the purpose of depositing or collecting refuse containers shall be maintained
in clean and sanitary conditions.
      (2)   All such containers shall be cleaned as often as necessary to
minimize the attraction of vermin or other animals, or the creation of
unsanitary conditions or offensive odors.
      (3)   Refuse containers may be cleaned by thorough scrubbing with
detergent and water, followed by application of a suitable disinfectant. Refuse
containers may also be steam and/or pressure cleaned with cleaning solutions.
      (4)   Large, mechanically dumped containers shall be cleaned at a
properly designed and operated facility, or if cleaning is done on the
premises, the debris and washings generated from the cleaning operations shall
not be discharged onto the ground surface. In all cleaning of large
mechanically dumped refuse containers, cleaning solutions, lashings, and
residue shall be collected and disposed of in a proper manner.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-6) (Ord. passed 4-16-1985; Ord. passed 4-21-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 52.06 INSPECTIONS.
   The Health Authority shall have the authority to enter any property or
inspect any applicable facilities at any reasonable time for health and
sanitation purposes to determine compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-8) (Ord. passed 4-16-1985; Ord. passed 4-21-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 52.07 INJUNCTIONS.
   The state’s Attorney of the county may bring action for an injunction to
restrain such violations or to enjoin the operations of any such establishment
causing such violation.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-11) (Ord. passed 4-16-1985; Ord. passed 4-21-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
ACCUMULATED GARBAGE
§ 52.20 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted under the authority and in furtherance of 55 ILCS
5/5-1118 (2023), 55 ILCS 5/5-1052 (2023), and 55 ILCS 5/5-1113 (2023). The
County Board intends that all provisions of this subchapter be interpreted to
carry out its intent of promoting the health, safety, and welfare of the people
of the county by allowing the proper county officials to remove accumulated
garbage and/or debris from properties within the jurisdiction of the county
when the owner refuses to do so.
(Ord. passed - -2023)
§ 52.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND/OR DEBRIS AND ACCUMULATION.
      (1)   Any significant buildup of garbage and/or debris which is not
placed within a receptacle or other container intended to be used for the
deposit of garbage and/or debris by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of
the real property where the buildup occurs.
      (2)   The authority to determine whether a buildup of garbage and/or
debris is significant shall be vested solely and exclusively in the County
Authority.
   COUNTY. Rock Island County, Illinois.
   COUNTY AUTHORITY. The County Director of Zoning and Building Safety, and any
duly appointed subordinate of that person who is authorized by that person to
perform tasks under the authority of this subchapter.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Rock Island County, Illinois.
   DEBRIS. Any inorganic substance which is not a discrete building, structure,
work of art, decoration, landscape feature, or other construction or a material
incorporated into any of the same.
   EXEMPT PROPERTY. Any parcel of real estate which has been designated as a
site for depositing garbage and/or debris by the appropriate federal, state, or
local governmental entities.
   GARBAGE. Any organic or biological substance other than:
      (1)   Living plants or animals;
      (2)   Properly created and utilized compost or other fertilizer; or
      (3)   A discrete building, structure, work of art, decoration, landscape
feature, or other construction or a material incorporated into any of the same.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
(Ord. passed - -2023)
§ 52.22 REMOVAL OF ACCUMULATED GARBAGE, DEBRIS.
   (A)   Whenever the County Authority finds that an accumulation of garbage
and/or debris exists on any parcel of real property—other than an exempt
property—within the county and outside of the territory of each incorporated
local governmental entity, the County Authority shall provide notice of such
accumulation to the owner or owners of that property as set out in this
subchapter.
   (B)   If the accumulation is not removed from the real property before the
date set out in the notice, the County Authority shall cause the accumulation
to be removed from that property.
(Ord. passed - -2023)
§ 52.23 LIMITATION ON AUTHORITY.
   The County Authority shall not take any action under this subchapter
against:
   (A)   A person who is acting under the direction of a proper governmental
official during special cleanup days; or
   (B)   During a declared emergency situation.
(Ord. passed - -2023)
§ 52.24 NOTICE.
   (A)   (1)   A notice of accumulation of garbage and/or debris sent under
this subchapter shall be in writing and specifically state:
         (a)   The identity of the County Authority;
         (b)   The County Authority determined an accumulation of garbage and/
or debris exists on the real property;
         (c)   The mailing address and property index number of the real
property where the accumulation was found to exist;
         (d)   The person receiving the notice is required to remove the
accumulation; and
         (e)   A date by which the accumulation must be removed, which shall be
no earlier than 15 days following the mailing or posting date of the notice.
      (2)   Should the person fail to remove the accumulation, the County
Authority intends to remove the accumulation and assess the costs of that
removal to the person receiving notice.
   (B)   A notice of accumulation of garbage and/or debris sent under this
subchapter shall be sent by mailing a copy of the notice to the address of the
real property where the accumulation exists and to the last known address of
each owner of the real property where the accumulation exists. In the event any
owner of the real property where the accumulation exists is deceased, the
notice shall also be mailed to the last known address of each identifiable heir
of that owner. This provision shall not require the mailing of more than one
notice to any given property address. In addition to all mailed notices, a copy
of the notice shall be posted physically in a prominent location on the real
property.
   (C)   If any mailed notice is returned undeliverable, the County Authority
shall determine whether the notice was returned due to mislabeling the address
on the mailing. If the return is due to such an error, that notice shall be
mailed with the corrected address, and this new notice shall indicate a new
date by which the accumulation must be removed which shall be no earlier than
15 days following the date the new notice is mailed. If the return is not due
to any such error, the notice shall be deemed properly sent notwithstanding the
fact it was returned.
(Ord. passed - -2023)
§ 52.25 FUNDING.
   (A)   The County Board hereby creates a standing fund for the County
Authority to use solely to remove any accumulation of garbage and/or debris
under this subchapter.
   (B)   Any costs of removing any accumulation of garbage and/or debris under
this subchapter which are successfully recovered from the owner or owners of
the real property where the accumulation exists shall be deposited into this
standing fund.
(Ord. passed - -2023)
§ 52.26 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   (1)   All costs and expenses actually incurred by the County Authority
to remove any accumulation of garbage and/or debris under this subchapter shall
be documented by the County
      (2)   Authority and shall be recoverable from any owner of the real
property where the accumulation existed. Costs and expenses under this
provision shall include the reasonable value of the time any county employees
spend in conducting the cleanup of the property, calculated as either:
         (a)   The number of total employee hours spent on the project
multiplied by those employees’ ordinary hourly salary; or
         (b)   The amount which the county department employees work in would
charge a private entity to perform such work, if such a service is offered to
the public by that department.
      (3)   Any claim of the county under this provision shall be enforceable
as a general unsecured debt of the owner or owners of that property.
   (B)   (1)   Additionally, all costs and expenses actually incurred by the
County Authority shall be a lien on the real property where the accumulation
existed if, within 60 days after the costs are incurred, the County Authority
files a notice of lien in the office of the County Recorder. This notice of
lien shall be a sworn statement setting out:
         (a)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
         (b)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the service; and
         (c)   The date or dates when the costs were incurred by the county.
      (2)   This lien shall be superior to all other liens except tax liens,
but shall not be valid or enforceable against:
         (a)   Any purchaser whose rights in and to the real estate have arisen
after the removal of the garbage and/or debris and before the filing of the
notice of lien; or
         (b)   Any mortgagee, judgment creditor, or other lien holder whose
rights in and to the real estate arose before the filing of the notice of lien.
The County Authority shall file a release of this lien in the office of the
County Recorder if and when the debt the lien secures is paid in full.
   (C)   Any lien obtained under this subchapter may be enforced by proceedings
to foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanics’ liens. An action to
foreclose this lien shall be commenced within two years after the date of
filing notice of the lien.
(Ord. passed - -2023)
§ 52.27 APPEAL OF DETERMINATION.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who receives a notice of accumulation of garbage and/
or debris under this subchapter may, prior to the deadline to remove the
accumulation set out in that notice, submit a written appeal of the County
Authority’s decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (2)   Appeals should be submitted in accordance with and subject to the
Zoning Board of Appeals’ standard practices and rules of procedure.
      (3)   The County Authority shall take no action to remove the
accumulation until any decision or order of the Zoning Board of Appeals or any
reviewing court becomes final and not subject to further appeal.
   (B)   A one-time appropriation is hereby made in the amount of $ ______ , to
be transferred from the county’s General Fund, for the creation of a standing
fund to be used by the County Director of Zoning and Building Safety solely for
the removal of accumulated garbage and/or debris from properties within the
county jurisdiction pursuant to the terms of the newly adopted subchapter set
forth herein.
(Ord. passed - -2023)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provisions of §§
52.01 through
52.07 shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not more than $500.
Each day’s violation constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-10) (Ord. passed 4-16-1985; Ord. passed 4-21-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
73.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Riding in cargo area of motor vehicles prohibited
   
70.02   Violations of the State Vehicle Code
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 RIDING IN CARGO AREA OF MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall ride in or on any portion of a vehicle that was not
primarily designed, manufactured, and intended for use by motor vehicle
passengers. This section shall preclude persons from riding within truck bodies
in space designed, manufactured, or intended for hauling goods or merchandise,
enclosed or unenclosed pick up truck beds, luggage racks, and similar device
areas. This section shall not apply to employees, 18 years of age or older,
actively engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty that requires the
employee to ride within the unenclosed body of a truck or an enclosed bed of a
pick up truck, or upon private property within the county, or while such
vehicle is participating in an organized and permitted parade or special event
within the county.
   (B)   A driver who operates a motor vehicle while any passenger of said
vehicle is riding the vehicle in violation of division (A) above is guilty of
reckless driving.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-1) (Ord. 2000-10, passed 10-17-2000) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 VIOLATIONS OF THE STATE VEHICLE CODE.
   (A)   A fee of $30 shall be added to all fines imposed for violations of 625
ILCS 5/11-501, or the similar provisions of county or municipal ordinances,
committed in the county.
   (B)   The proceeds of such fees shall be used to finance the court system.
(Prior Code, § 5-14-1) (Res. passed 10-21-1986)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The County Sheriff’s Department is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce §
70.01 to the fullest extent. Violation of §
70.01 is punishable by a fine of $50 per passenger.
(Prior Code, § 5-6-1)
(Ord. 2000-10, passed 10-17-2000)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Stopping, standing, parking
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING.
   (A)   Any vehicle in the county shall not:
      (1)   Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet
of points on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   On any railroad tracks;
         (I)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         (j)   On any controlled-access highway; or
         (k)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of such entrance (when properly sign posted); or
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or
         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as it unlawful.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand
wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb, or as close as
practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
   (D)   Except when otherwise provided by local ordinance, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel
to the curb or edge of the roadway in the direction of authorized traffic
movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or
as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with
its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or as close as
practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
   (E)   Local authorities may permit angle parking on any roadway, except the
angle parking shall not be permitted on any federal-aid or state highway unless
the Department has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit
angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
   (F)   The Department, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, may
place signs prohibiting, limiting or restricting the stopping, standing, or
parking of vehicles on any highway where, in its opinion, such stopping,
standing, or parking is dangerous to those using the highway or where the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free
movement of traffic thereon. No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle
in violation of the restrictions indicated by such devices.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-1) (Ord. passed 11-19-1991) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
71.01 shall be fined $5 if the fine is paid within 72 hours from the issuance
of the ticket, and if not paid within 72 hours, the fine will be increased to
$20. Unless you pay the fine as notified, application will be made to the court
for a warrant for the driver’s arrest. All parking violations must be made to
or brought to the County Sheriff’s office at 1317 Third Avenue, Rock Island, IL
61201.
(Prior Code, § 7-1-1)
(Ord. passed 11-19-1991)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   U-turns prohibited
      
II.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. U-TURNS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Automobiles, trucks, and other vehicles shall be prohibited from
making U-turns on the section of County Highway 10 (Turkey Hollow Road) that
lies within the area from the intersection of State Route 192 and County
Highway 10 (Turkey Hollow Road) northerly a distance of approximately 700 feet.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this schedule shall be fined $25 for each offense.
(Prior Code, Title 7, Chapter 8) (Ord. passed 12-17-2003)
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS.
 
Schedule of Altered Speed Zones
Name of Street or Exact Limits of Zone                 Maximum Speed Limits
Highway           From         To
51st St. W.       85th Ave. W. 1.25 miles of 85th Ave. 40
                               W.
178th Ave. N.     River Road   IL 84                   30
 
(Ord. passed 4-16-2013; Ord. passed 1-19-2016)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking prohibited
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Automobiles, trucks, and other vehicles shall be prohibited from
parking along the west side of the portion of County Highway 10 (Turkey Hollow
Road) that lies within the area from the intersection of State Route 192 and
County Highway 10 (Turkey Hollow Road), northerly a distance of approximately
700 feet.
(Prior Code, Title 7, Chapter 8)
   (B)   (1)   Automobiles, trucks, and other vehicles shall be prohibited from
parking from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m., Monday through Friday, long the west side
of the portion of County Highway 9 (140th Street West), that lies within the
area from the intersection of State Route 92 and County Highway 9 (140th Street
West) southerly to the entrance to the fire station, a distance of
approximately 200 feet.
      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
division (B)(1) above shall be fined $25 for each offense.
(Prior Code, Title 7, Chapter 2)
   (C)   (1)   The property located at the south one-half of Block 15 Old Town,
Town of Rock Island, excepting the following: the south 98 feet of Lot 8 Block
15 and except the west 30 feet of Sub Lot 2 and except the west 30 feet of the
south 20 feet Out Lot 1 Block 15, also excepting the east 43 feet of Sub Lot 2
and excepting the east 50 feet of the south 20 feet of Out Lot 1 Block 15 shall
have the prohibited parking provisions as listed in division (C)(2) below.
(Prior Code, § 7-3-1)
      (2)   (a)   The provisions of this division (C) shall be applicable to
the parking lot, located immediately west of the County Courthouse bordered on
the west by 14th Street, on the north by 2nd Avenue, and on the south by 3rd
Avenue, including property owned by the county adjacent to 14th Street on its
east side, all of which is located in the City of Rock Island within the
county. The provisions of this division (C) are limited to property owned by
the county.
         (b)   The provisions of this division (C) shall be enforced by the
County Sheriff, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, except on those days when the courthouse and County Office Building are
not open for the transaction of public business.
         (c)   The parking spaces on the aisle located on the east side of the
parking lot, adjacent to the courthouse, shall be individually reserved for the
following:
            1.   Members of the judiciary;
            2.   Elected county officials and county department heads;
            3.   Employees of designated county offices and departments; and
            4.   Persons with a disability.
         (d)   Each parking space in the parking area described in division (C)
(2)(c) above shall be marked with a sign which designates the category of
personnel for which this space is reserved.
         (e)   The parking area of each side of the center divider of the
parking lot shall be reserved for individuals or categories of persons.
         (f)   Signs shall be erected at each parking space along the center
divider indicating the category of persons for whom the space is reserved.
Signs shall be erected at each entrance to the parking lot stating that use
thereof is restricted and violators are subject to fine.
         (g)   The parking area adjacent to the east side of 14th Street and
the area on the east side of the west divider of the parking lot shall be
reserved for county employees. Signs so indicating shall be placed at each end
of the west divider of the parking lot, and signs so indicating shall be placed
every five feet along the west divider. Individual spaces shall not be assigned
to individual employees.
         (h)   All employees of the county, whose regular place of employment
is the courthouse or the County Office Building, shall be provided with a decal
which shall be affixed to the upper left hand comer of the rear window of the
motor vehicle, indicating their status as such. Such decals shall be available
in the office of the Sheriff. Any such person temporarily using a vehicle which
is not so identified has the responsibility of notifying the Sheriff’s office
of this fact.
         (i)   Only angle parking shall be permitted in the courthouse parking
lot. Each parking space shall be designated by clearly visible lines painted on
the improved surface of the parking lot. All motor vehicles must be parked
within the lines indicating a parking space.
         (j)   No motor vehicle shall be parked in the parking lot in such a
manner as to prevent entry or departure from a parking space.
         (k)   No motor vehicle shall be parked in any area which is designated
as a “No Parking” area in the parking lot. Such areas shall be clearly
designated as such by visible signs and/or markings on the improved surface of
the parking lot.
         (l)   For purposes of this division (C), the term VISITORS shall be
construed to mean all persons who have public business to conduct at the
courthouse or County Office Building, including witnesses and parties to legal
proceedings, grand and petit jurors, attorneys, representatives of the news
media, and county officials and employees who are not employed at the
courthouse or County Office Building. County employees whose place of
employment is the courthouse or the County Office Building shall not park in an
area reserved for VISITORS.
         (m)   The provisions of this division (C) shall be applicable to the
parking lot or motor vehicles and motorcycles in the County Office Building
parking lot. The terms MOTOR VEHICLE and MOTORCYCLE shall be defined in the
manner set forth in the State Vehicle Code (Chapter 95 and 625 ILCS 5/1-146 and
625 ILCS 5/1-147).
         (n)   The following acts shall be deemed to be violations of this
division (C):
            1.   Unauthorized parking in a space reserved pursuant to division
(C)(2)(c) above;
            2.   Unauthorized parking in an area designated as being reserved
for parking for specified classes of persons by divisions (C)(2)(d) and (C)(2)
(e) above;
            3.   Improper parking (not within lines designating parking space),
as required by division (C)(2)(I) above;
            4.   Improper parking (blocking parking spaces), as prohibited by
division (C)(2)(j) above; and
            5.   Improper parking (no parking area), as prohibited by division
(C)(2)(k) above.
         (o)   The term UNAUTHORIZED, as used in divisions (C)(2)(n)1. and (c)
(2)(n)2. above shall be construed as meaning that the motor vehicle or
motorcycle is not that of an individual or class of individuals for whom a
space or area is designated for purposes of parking.
         (p)   The Sheriff, or the Sheriff’s designee, who observes a motor
vehicle or motorcycle parked in violation of the provisions of this division
(C) shall issue a notice, which shall be placed upon the windshield of such
motor vehicle or motorcycle in such a manner as to be plainly visible to the
driver thereof, such notice stating that the motor vehicle or motorcycle has
been illegally parked. The Sheriff is authorized to arrange for the removal of
motor vehicles or motorcycles parked in violation of this division (C). The
expenses thereof shall be paid by the owner of the offending vehicle.
         (q)   Violations of this division (C) shall be punished by a fine of
$20. However, in the event that the violator appears in person at the office of
the Sheriff in response to notice, within 72 hours after the issuance thereof,
the fine shall be $5. In the event that an appearance is made after the
expiration of 72 hours from the issuance of the notice, or in the event that it
becomes necessary to mail additional notices, the full amount of the fine shall
be paid. The fine for parking a vehicle not bearing plates or a decal or device
authorized by Chapter 95-1/2, 624 ILCS 5/3-616, pertaining to such for persons
with a disability, in a space so reserved, shall in all cases be $50.
         (r)   Each county office and department shall be supplied with forms
which state that an individual appeared at that office or department for the
purpose of conducting public business, and the time during which such business
was conducted. If such person’s motor vehicle or motorcycle was parked in the
courthouse parking lot, in the area reserved for visitors, during that period
of time, and for the 30 minutes immediately before and after the period of time
such business was being conducted, and if a notice as issued by the Sheriff for
violation of the provisions of this division (C) relating to parking in an area
reserved for visitors, such individual may present the executed form to the
Sheriff, or his or her representative, with the notice and no fine need be paid
and no further proceedings with respect to the violations will be commenced.
         (s)   Individuals serving on grand or petit juries, or who are parties
to or witnesses noticed or subpoenaed with respect to matters being litigated
shall be excused from paying any fine with respect to notices issued for
violations of the provisions of this division (C) relating to parking in the
area reserved for visitors. Such individuals may present to the Sheriff, or his
or her representative, a copy of their notice or subpoena, a statement by the
Clerk of the Court, or any statement of an attorney with respect to the above.
         (t)   The provisions of this division (C) shall not be applicable
emergency vehicles. Motor vehicles or motorcycles owned by the United States, a
state, or any unit of local government of any state may be parked in any
available parking space, except an individually-reserved space.
         (u)   The Sheriff is authorized to adopt appropriate enforcement
policies when snow accumulation or other conditions render literal compliance
with the provisions of this division (C) impossible.
         (v)   This division (C) shall not be interpreted in any manner which
conflicts with any law of the state or applicable ordinance of the City of Rock
Island.
(Prior Code, § 7-4-1)
   (D)   (1)   Automobiles, trucks, and other vehicles shall be prohibited from
parking along either side of the portion of Hubbard Road (County Highway 79),
that lies within the area from State Route 84 easterly to 15th Avenue, within
the Village of Hampton.
      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this division (D) shall be fined $25 for each offense.
(Prior Code, Title 7, Chapter 5)
   (E)   (1)   Automobiles, trucks, and other vehicles shall be prohibited from
parking along the west side of the portion of the frontage road which runs
parallel to Routes 2 and 92 within the unincorporated area of the county; near
the Quad City Downs and in front of the establishment known as Two Rivers
Eatery.
      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this division (E) shall be fined $25 for each offense.
(Prior Code, Title 7, Chapter 6)
   (F)   (1)   Automobiles, trucks, and other vehicles shall be prohibited from
parking along the portion of 176th Avenue (County Highway 18) that lies between
500 feet east of the east entrance into the Sherrard Community Unit 200 High
School and westerly to 45th Street.
      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this division (F) shall be fined $25 for each offense.
(Prior Code, Title 7, Chapter 7)
(Ord. passed 8-20-1991; Ord. passed 6-15-1993; Ord. passed 12-19-1995; Ord.
passed 3-18-1997; Ord. passed 4-16-2002; Ord. passed 12-17-2003)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 90: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Nuisances
   
90.02   Notice; prosecution
   
90.03   Inoperable vehicles
   
90.04   Weeds, grasses
Public Transportation; Nuisances
   
90.15   Interpretation
   
90.16   Definitions
   
90.17   Prohibited acts
Health Nuisances
   
90.30   Definitions
   
90.31   Heath nuisances defined
   
90.32   Health nuisances prohibited
   
90.33   Inspections
   
90.34   Weeds and grasses
   
90.35   Notice of violation
   
90.36   Abatement of nuisances
   
90.37   Hearing before the Health Department Administrator
   
90.38   Hearing before the Board of Health
   
90.39   Injunctions
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to cause, permit, or
maintain the existence of any nuisance upon any property, public or private,
under the ownership, leasehold, or control of such person or corporation in the
unincorporated area of the county.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-3) (Ord. passed 7-19-1994) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 NOTICE; PROSECUTION.
   (A)   Notice regarding violation of this chapter shall be given to the
owner, lessee, or occupant of the property upon which the nuisance is alleged
to exist by one or more of the following methods:
      (1)   In person by the Sheriff or authorized Deputy Sheriff;
      (2)   In person by the Administrative Officer or authorized
representative of the Zoning and Building Department; and/or
      (3)   By mail, certified return receipt requested.
   (B)   No prosecution shall be commenced until 30 days after the defendant
has been notified of the existence of the violations, and directed to abate the
same.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-4) (Ord. passed 7-19-1994)
§ 90.03 INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   The following acts are hereby declared to be nuisances:
   (A)   The storing, keeping, or maintaining of inoperable motor vehicles,
outside of an enclosed building, after notice has been given to a person,
corporation, or other such controlling agent for removal of such vehicles.
      (1)   Nothing in division (A) above shall apply to any motor vehicle kept
within an enclosed building when not in use.
      (2)   Nothing in division (A) above shall apply to motor vehicles on the
premises of a place of businesses properly engaged in the wrecking or junking
of motor vehicles.
   (B)   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES shall, for the purpose of this section, be
defined as:
      (1)   Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of not less than 15
days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or on which the
engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power; and
      (2)   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES shall not include a motor vehicle which
has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its motor power
in order to perform ordinary and routine service or repair operations.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-3) (Ord. passed 7-19-1994)
§ 90.04 WEEDS, GRASSES.
   (A)   All weeds growing on private property of five acres or less in area
shall be kept cut by the owner, lessee, or occupant of such property.
   (B)   (1)   In the event weeds are permitted to grow on any such property,
it shall be the duty of the Health Department Administrator to give written
notice to the owner, lessee, or occupant of said property.
      (2)   If the premises are occupied said notice may be mailed to the
owner, lessee, or occupant at the address of said premises, and if the property
if vacant, notice may be given by posting on the property.
      (3)   Said notice shall contain a description of the property
sufficiently definite so that the same be identified, and shall state that
unless the weeds thereon are cut within ten days from the date of said notice,
the same will be cut and the cost thereof charged to the property owner, and a
lien for such costs filed against the property.
   (C)   (1)   If the weeds on any such property are not cut or destroyed
within ten days from the date of mailing or posting said notice, the Health
Department Administrator shall proceed to have said weeds cut at the expense of
the county and shall collect the reasonable costs thereof from the owner.
      (2)   If the owner shall fail to pay such reasonable cost within ten days
after the same is incurred, the Health Department Administrator, in the name of
the county, shall prepare and file a notice of lien in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of the county, as provided by statute.
   (D)   Failure of the owner, lessee, or occupant to receive the notice
provided to be given under division (B) above shall not impair the owner’s
obligation to reimburse the county for cutting weeds on his or her property,
nor invalidate the lien securing said obligation.
(Prior Code, § 4-7-1)
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION; NUISANCES
§ 90.15 INTERPRETATION.
   In interpreting or applying this subchapter, the following provisions shall
apply: Any act otherwise prohibited by this subchapter is lawful if performed
by an officer, employee, or designated agent of the agency, acting within the
scope of his or her employment or agency.
(Prior Code, § 1-12-1) (Ord. passed 4-20-1999)
§ 90.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The County Metropolitan Mass Transit District.
   CONVEYANCE. Includes bus, paratransit vehicle, rapid transit, or other
vehicle used or held for use by the agency as a means of transportation of
passengers.
   FACILITIES. Includes all property and equipment, including, without
limitation, stations, terminals, signage, storage yards, maintenance shops,
yards, offices, parking lots, and other real estate or personal property used
or held by the agency for or incidental to the operation, rehabilitation, or
improvement of the public mass transportation system of the agency.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation,
association, or company.
(Prior Code, § 1-12-1) (Ord. passed 4-20-1999)
§ 90.17 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   The following acts are prohibited to the extent provided in this section.
   (A)   No person shall perform any act which interferes with the provision of
transit service or obstructs the flow of traffic on facilities or conveyances,
or which would in any way interfere or tend to interfere with the safe and
efficient operation of the facilities or conveyances of the agency.
   (B)   No person on or in any facility or conveyance shall litter, dump
garbage, liquids, or other matter, or create a nuisance, hazard, or unsanitary
condition, including, but not limited to, spitting and urinating, except in
facilities provided and designated for such acts by the agency.
   (C)   No person on or in any facility or conveyance shall drink any
alcoholic beverage or possess any opened or unsealed container of alcoholic
beverage, except on premises duly licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages,
such as bars and restaurants.
   (D)   No person on or in any facility or conveyance shall do any act in such
unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of
the peace.
   (E)   No person on or in any facility or conveyance shall transmit or cause
to be transmitted a false report to any public safety agency without the
reasonable grounds necessary to believe that transmitting such a report is
necessary for the safety and welfare of the public.
   (F)   No person on or in any facility or conveyance shall destroy, mark,
soil, or paint, or draw, inscribe, write, spray paint or place graffiti upon,
or remove, injure, or tamper with any facility, conveyance, sign,
advertisement, or notice of the agency or authorized by the agency.
   (G)   No weapon or other instrument intended for use as a weapon may be
carried in or on any facility or conveyance, except by law enforcement
personnel. For the purposes hereof, a WEAPON shall include, but not limited to,
a firearm, switchblade knife, sword, or any instrument of any kind known as
blackjack, billy club, club, sandbag, metal knuckles, leather bands studded
with metal, wood impregnated with metal filings, or razor blades.
(Prior Code, § 1-12-2) (Ord. passed 4-20-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly conduct, false report, see 720 ILCS 5/26-1(a)(5)
   Disorderly conduct, peeping, see 720 ILCS 5/26-1(a)(11)
   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, or markings, see 625 ILCS 5/11-310
   Dumping, etc., litter, see 415 ILCS 105/4
   Fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer, see 625 ILCS 5/11-204
   Graffiti, see 55 ILCS 5/5-1078.5
   Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or
signals, see 625 ILCS 5/11-311
   Liquor Control Act of 1934, see 235 ILCS 5/1-1
   Transportation or possession of alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle, see 625
ILCS 5/11-502
   Unlawful use of weapons, see 720 ILCS 5/24-1
HEALTH NUISANCES
§ 90.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The County Board of Health or its authorized representative
(s).
   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The person or persons designated by the County Board of
Health to enforce this subchapter.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The County Department of Public Health, including its
duly authorized representative(s).
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATOR. The individual selected by the County Board
of Health to administer and enforce the policies, ordinances, resolutions, and
laws of said Board.
   ORDINANCE. The “Rock island County Health Nuisances Ordinance.”
   WEEDS. All grasses, annual plants and vegetation, but not trees, shrubs,
bushes, or similar woody vegetation.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 90.31 HEATH NUISANCES DEFINED.
   (A)   A health nuisance includes any act, omission to act, or condition on
any property which may:
      (1)   Cause injury;
      (2)   Prejudice health or safety; or
      (3)   Diminish the quality of life of one or more persons or may degrade
the environment.
   (B)   Such acts, omissions, or conditions include, but shall not be limited
to, the following:
      (1)   To allow weeds and grasses to grow without periodic cutting as
provided in §
90.34;
      (2)   The storage, accumulation, or deposition of any animal carcass,
offal, fecal material, filth, refuse, garbage, or other offensive or noxious
substances in any place or on any property;
      (3)   To discharge or deposit any offal, animal carcass, liquid waste,
sewage effluent, or other polluting material into or upon any watercourse,
river, lake, pond, stream, spring, well, drainage ditch, or drain tile;
      (4)   To corrupt or render impure the water of any spring, river, stream,
pond, lake, or well;
      (5)   The presence of pest infestations, rats, flies, or other vermin on
a property or within a structure;
      (6)   To emit noxious or offensive odors from a property, excepting
livestock operations on agricultural property as permitted;
      (7)   To keep in a foul, offensive, or filthy condition any grounds,
premises, buildings, or yards, excepting livestock operations on agricultural
property as permitted;
      (8)   To own or operate a dwelling unit that is unfit for human
habitation or dangerous or detrimental to life, safety, or health because of
lack of repair, defects in the sewage system, plumbing facility, water supply,
lighting , heating or ventilation system, or due to unsanitary conditions;
      (9)   To dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle, or burn upon any public or
private property any garbage, refuse, junked or wrecked motor vehicles or non-
motorized equipment or parts thereof, or other discarded solid waste;
      (10)   (a)   Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to life,
safety, or health whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon
an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned well, cistern, basement or
excavation, motor vehicle, discarded, abandoned, or unattended refrigerators
and similar containers equipped with airtight door or lid, snap lock, or other
locking device which may not be released from the inside.
         (b)   The duties of these items are imposed alike on the owner of the
nuisance and the owner or occupant of the premises where the nuisance is
permitted to remain;
      (11)   To store, dump, or permit the accumulation of debris, refuse,
garbage, trash, tires, buckets, cans, wheelbarrows, garbage cans, or other
containers in a manner that may harbor mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents,
nuisance birds, or other animal pests that are offensive, injurious, or
dangerous to the health of individuals or the public;
      (12)   To create a condition, through the improper maintenance of a
swimming pool or wading pool, or by causing an action that alters the condition
of a natural body of water, so that it harbors mosquitoes, flies, or other
animal pests that are offensive, injurious, or dangerous to the health of
individuals or the public;
      (13)   To operate a tanning facility without a valid permit under the
State Tanning Facility Permit Act; and
      (14)   All other uses and conditions of property which, due to their
existence, create an environment deemed by the Health Authority to be
prejudicial to public health.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 90.32 HEALTH NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to cause or allow a health nuisance, as defined in §
90.31, to occur or continue to occur on any property, public or private, within
the county. The Health Authority shall be empowered to investigate, upon
complaint of any person or on its own initiative, any health nuisance
allegations in the county.
(Ord. passed - -2016) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.33 INSPECTIONS.
   Subject to constitutional limitations, the Health Authority shall have the
authority to enter any property or inspect any applicable facility at any
reasonable time to inspect for health, sanitation, or safety purposes to
determine compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. It shall be the
duty of the owner or occupant of a property to give the Health Authority free
access to the property at reasonable times upon request of the Health
Authority.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 90.34 WEEDS AND GRASSES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of a property to
permit weeds, grass, or other plant growth to grow to a height exceeding ten
inches on a parcel of property of two acres or less in size. For any property
exceeding two acres in size that adjoins on any side a parcel containing a
residential or business structure, weeds or grass shall not exceed ten inches
in height for a lateral distance of at least 50 feet from the adjoining
residential or business property line in order to create a mowed buffer zone.
In such cases, the Health Authority may also require that weeds and grass be
periodically mowed across the frontage of said property to a point at least 50
feet in lateral depth from the front property line.
      (2)   Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants, and
vegetation, but not trees, shrubs, bushes, or similar woody vegetation.
   (B)   Exceptions. The term WEEDS shall not include agricultural crops,
ornamental plants, or cultivated flowers or gardens, including, but not limited
to, native species plantings used for aesthetic and/or wildlife promotion, and/
or to offset and control soil loss from erosion. The cutting of weeds and
grasses shall also not apply to conservation areas, wildlife preserves, and
public lands, or ravines, terraced slopes, and other areas with steep slopes
requiring dense vegetation for erosion control.
   (C)   Noxious weeds. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. A NOXIOUS WEED
means any plant declared by the state to be a noxious weed pursuant to 505 ILCS
100/1 et seq.
(Ord. passed - -2016) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.35 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Health Authority determines, through inspections or other
means, that there is a violation of any provision of this subchapter, the
Health Authority shall give notice of such alleged violation. Such notice
shall:
   (A)   Be in writing;
   (B)   Include a statement of the reasons for the issuance of the notice;
   (C)   Contain an outline of remedial action and allow a reasonable time to
effect compliance with this subchapter. When a weed abatement notice is issued,
such weeds and grasses shall be cut within ten days of the date of mailing or
posting of said notice;
   (D)   Be served upon the owner, operator, or resident as the case may
require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to have been properly served
when the notice has been personally delivered or sent by registered or
certified mail or if the owner, operator, or resident acknowledges receipt of
such notice; and
   (E)   In cases when the subject property is vacant or unoccupied, notice
shall be sent to the owner or occupant’s last known address. If the name or
address of the last known owner or occupant cannot be ascertained upon due
diligence, service of said notice shall be made by posting the notice on the
property. Such a notice is considered to be properly served.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 90.36 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)   When a notice of violation is served as outlined in §
90.35 and the responsible person does not abate the nuisance within the
specified time and manner required, the Health Authority may take any of the
following enforcement actions:
      (1)   Seek to impose a monetary penalty as defined in §
90.99 by instituting enforcement action;
      (2)   Seek to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by the filing of a
lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction as stated in §
90.39; and/or
      (3)   On properties where abatement of a weed violation has not occurred
as required in §
90.34, the Health Authority shall be empowered to authorize the cutting of
weeds and grasses at the expense of the Health Department. The Health
Department shall then bill the responsible owner or occupant of said property
for all applicable costs for the service. If the responsible owner or occupant
fails to pay such costs within a reasonable period of time after billing has
occurred, the Health Department may file a notice of lien against the subject
property.
   (B)   In addition to the above abatement remedies, whenever, in the opinion
of the Health Authority, a nuisance creates an imminent threat to life, safety,
or health to persons or creates an imminent threat to a property or the
environment, the Health Authority shall be empowered to abate such nuisance
without notice if the owner or occupant is not known or cannot be readily
found. All expenses incurred by the Health Department shall be paid by the
responsible owner or occupant of the subject property. If the responsible owner
or occupant fails to pay such costs within a reasonable period of time after
billing has occurred, the Health Department may file a notice of lien against
the subject property.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 90.37 HEARING BEFORE THE HEALTH DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATOR.
   Any person affected by any order or notice issued by the Health Department
in connection with the enforcement of any section of this subchapter may file
in the office of the Health Department a written request for a hearing before
the Health Department Administrator. The Health Department Administrator shall
hold a hearing at a time and place designated by him or her within 30 days from
the date on which the written request was filed. The petitioner for the hearing
shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing not less than five days
prior to the date on which the hearing is to be held. If, as a result of the
hearing, the Health Department Administrator finds that strict compliance with
the order or notice would cause undue hardship on the petitioner and that the
public health would be adequately protected and substantial justice done by
varying or withdrawing the order or notice, the Health Department Administrator
may modify or withdraw the order or notice, and as a condition for such action
may make requirements which are additional to those prescribed in this
subchapter for the purpose of properly protecting the public health. The Health
Department Administrator shall render a decision within ten days after the date
of the hearing which shall be reduced to writing and placed on file in the
office of the Health Department, and a copy thereof shall be sent to the
petitioner. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Health Department
Administrator may seek relief therefrom through a hearing before the Board of
Health.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 90.38 HEARING BEFORE THE BOARD OF HEALTH.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Health Department Administrator,
rendered as the result of a hearing held in accordance with §
90.37, may file in the office of the Health Department a written request for a
hearing at the next regular Board of Health meeting, if the agenda allows. The
petitioner for the hearing shall be notified of the time and place of the
hearing not less than five days prior to the date on which the hearing is to be
held. If, as a result of the hearing, the Board of Health finds that strict
compliance with the decision of the Health Department Administrator would cause
undue hardship on the petitioner and that the public health would be adequately
protected and substantial justice done by granting a variance from the decision
of the Health Department Administrator, the Board of Health may grant a
variance, and as a condition for such variance, may make requirements which are
additional to those prescribed by this subchapter, all for the purpose of
properly protecting the public health. The Board of Health shall render a
decision within ten days after the date of the hearing which shall be reduced
to writing and placed on file in the office of the Health Department, and a
copy thereof shall be sent to the petitioner.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 90.39 INJUNCTIONS.
   The state’s Attorney of the county may bring action for an injunction to
restrain any violation of this subchapter or to enjoin the operations of any
such establishment causing such violation.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or corporation who shall violate §§
90.01 through
90.03 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500. After expiration of 30
days from receipt of notice that §§
90.01 through
90.03 is being violated, each day the nuisance is permitted to continue to
exist may be prosecuted as a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 3-7-4)
   (C)   Any person committing a violation of §§
90.15 through
90.17 shall be subject to arrest, and upon conviction in a court of competent
jurisdiction, shall pay a fine in an amount not less than $25 and no greater
than $500 per violation.
(Prior Code, § 1-12-3)
   (D)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §
90.31 shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not more than $100,
and for a subsequent offense such person is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
Every nuisance described in §
90.31, upon conviction, may, by order of the court in that action, be abated by
the Sheriff or other proper officer at the expense of the defendant. It is not
a defense to a proceeding under §
90.31 that the nuisance is erected or continued by virtue or permission of a
law of the state.
      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of §
90.34 shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not more than $100
for the first offense and not more than $200 for each subsequent offense.
      (3)   For any violations of the provisions of §§
90.30 through
90.39, each day’s violation constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 7-19-1994; Ord. passed 4-20-1999; Ord. passed - -2016)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Short title
   
91.002   Policy and purpose
   
91.003   Scope
   
91.004   Reporting
   
91.005   Definitions
   
91.006   Rules, restrictions
   
91.007   Collection of monies
   
91.008   Fees
Vaccinations of Dogs and Cats
   
91.020   Vaccinations
   
91.021   Registration
Biting Animals
   
91.035   Report of bite
   
91.036   Confinement of biting animals
   
91.037   Liability of owner
   
91.038   Special procedures
Dangerous, Vicious Dogs
   
91.050   Dangerous dogs
   
91.051   Vicious dogs
At Large; Public Nuisance
   
91.065   Running at large; impoundment
   
91.066   Public nuisance
   
91.067   Provoking animals
   
91.068   Trapping
   
91.069   Dead animals
   
91.070   Dogs, cats in heat
   
91.071   Responsibility of owner
   
91.072   Collar, harness; registration of tags
   
91.073   Excessive, habitual violations
Humane Care for Animals
   
91.085   Human care, treatment
   
91.086   Adequate shelter
   
91.087   Sufficient room
 
   
91.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Animal Control Ordinance” or
“this chapter.”
(Prior Code, § 5-1-1) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
§ 91.002 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   (1)   It has been found by the County Board of Health and the County
Animal Care and Control, that animals that are not controlled by responsible
owners become a hazard to the safety and health of persons.
      (2)   It has also been established that rabies could be present in
wildlife in the county and that rabies vaccination of dog and cat pets is an
important barrier to preventing an epidemic of the disease in pets and thereby
preventing a potential disease problem in the susceptible population of the
county.
   (B)   Registration provides an important means of identifying owners of
biting animals and thereby establishes responsibilities for ten-day
quarantines. The registration fees and fines provide money to pay the costs of
effectuating the Animal Care and Control Program in the county.
   (C)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide harmonious relations in the
interaction between person and animal by:
      (1)   Protecting the citizens of the county from rabies by specifying
such prevention and control measures as may be necessary;
      (2)   Providing security to residents from annoyance, intimidation, and
injury from dogs or other animals;
      (3)   Encouraging responsible pet ownership through education;
      (4)   Protecting animals from improper use, abuse, neglect, inhumane
treatment, and health hazards, particularly rabies; and
      (5)   Providing for the assessment of penalties for violations and for
the enforcement and administration of this chapter, the State Animal Control
Act, being 510 ILCS 5/1, Humane Care for Animals Act, being 510 ILCS 70/1,
Animal Welfare Act, being 225 ILCS 605/1, and the State and Federal Wildlife
Codes.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-1) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
§ 91.003 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall include the following provisions:
   (A)   Duties of the owners to vaccinate dogs and cats in their custody
against rabies and to register said dogs and cats with the County Animal Care
and Control;
   (B)   Provisions for impoundment or confinement of biting animals;
   (C)   Duties of owners to responsibly control all domestic animals in their
custody;
   (D)   Duties of owners to treat humanely all domestic animals in their
custody; and
   (E)   Provisions for penalties to persons who violate this chapter, the
State Animal Control Act, Humane Care of Animals Act, Animal Welfare Act, and
the State or Federal Wildlife Code.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-1) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
§ 91.004 REPORTING.
   Any person, dog dealer, kennel operator, cattery operator, animal shelter,
foster home, or pet shop operator selling, adopting, or fostering dogs or cats
or keeping registries of dogs or cats shall cooperate and provide information
to the Administrator including sales, adoptions, source, dispositions, number
of litters, microchip numbers, and ownership of dogs or cats.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-1) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
§ 91.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ABANDONED. Any animal left deserted, forsaken, or unrestrained where it may
become a public charge or may suffer injury, hunger, or exposure.
   ANIMAL. Any living creature, other than humans, domestic or wild.
   ANIMAL CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR. A person appointed by the County Board
Chairperson and approved by the County Board and to perform duties and exercise
police powers of enforcement in order to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter, the State Animal Control Act, Humane Care for Animals Act, Animal
Welfare Act, and the State and Federal Wildlife Codes.
   ANIMAL CONTROLLED or RESTRAINED. A dog or cat, off the premises of its
owner’s real property, is under control or restraint if it is controlled by a
leash or lead not more than six feet in length when said line is held by a
competent person; when at “heel” of a competent person; when under voice
control of competent person; when confined within a crate, cage, or other
animal carrier; when confined within a vehicle; or when utilized in the sport
of hunting. A dog or cat is UNDER RESTRAINT or CONTROL when within the premises
of its owner or another person, with consent of the other person, and is
prevented from leaving said premises by some suitable barrier or restriction.
   AT LARGE. Any animal shall be deemed at large when it is off the premises of
its owner’s real property or property where it has permission to be, and not
restrained or controlled by a competent person.
   BOARD. The County Board in each county, defined by § 5-1004 of the Counties
Code.
   CAT. Felis catus (510 ILCS 5/2.04a).
   COMPETENT PERSON. A person of the mental and physical capability to control
the animal in question and to whose command the animal is obedient.
   CONFINE. The restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his or
her agent, to an escape-proof building, house or other enclosure away from
other animals and the public (510 ILCS 5/2.05).
   DANGEROUS DOG.
      (1)   Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of the
owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its
owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or companion animal; or
      (2)   A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not
cause serious physical injury.
   DOG (CANINE). All domestic members of the family Canidae (510 ILCS 5/2.11).
   ENCLOSURE. A fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or
causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of other domestic animals or
young children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other
measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the
vicious dog within the enclosure. Such ENCLOSURE shall be securely enclosed and
locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom, and shall be designed to
prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. This should not be
construed to mean cement floor only; other suitable means such as cement poured
directly below or inside the perimeter or railroad ties buried or placed around
the perimeter to a depth or in manner to prevent the animal from escaping. If
the ENCLOSURE is a room within a residence, it cannot have direct ingress from
or egress to the outdoors unless it leads directly to an enclosed pen and the
door must be locked. A vicious dog may be allowed to move about freely within
the entire residence if it is muzzled at all times.
   IMPOUNDED. An animal apprehended and taken into custody of the public animal
control facility located within the county.
   OWNER. Any person having right of property in an animal or who acts, keeps,
or harbors an animal, or who has it in his or her care, or acts as its
custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog to remain on any premises occupied by
him or her. OWNER does not include a feral cat caretaker participating in a
trap, spay/neuter, return, or release program (510 ILCS 5/2.16).
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, society,
association, or other legal entity, any public or private institution, the
state, municipal corporation, or political subdivision of the state, or any
other business unit (510 ILCS 5/2.17).
   RETURN TO OWNER (RTO) or REDEMPTION FEE. Costs incurred when impounding an
animal which includes processing an animal entry and exit at the shelter. This
also includes boarding and transportation fees and may include vaccination fees
and/or registration fees.
   VICIOUS DOG. In order to have a dog deemed VICIOUS, the Administrator,
Deputy Administrator, or law enforcement officer must give notice of the
infraction that is the basis of the investigation to the owner, conduct a
thorough investigation, interview any witnesses, including the owner, gather
any existing medical records, veterinary medical records, or behavioral
evidence, and make a detailed report recommending a finding that the dog is a
vicious dog and give the report to the state’s Attorney’s office and the owner.
The Administrator, state’s Attorney, Director, or any citizen of the county in
which the dog exists may file a complaint in the Circuit Court in the name of
the people of the state to deem a dog to be a VICIOUS DOG. The Administrator
shall determine where the animal shall be confined while the case is pending.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-2) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
Statutory reference:
   Animal Control Administrator, see 510 ILCS 5/3
   County Board, see 510 ILCS 5/2.04
   Dogs found running at large, limitations, see 510 ILCS 5/9, 5/24
   Impoundment; redemption, fees, see 510 ILCS 5/10
§ 91.006 RULES, RESTRICTIONS.
   No person may set rules and/or restrictions that shall cause a pet owner to
be in direct violation of any statute, resolution, or ordinances of the state,
county, or municipalities.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-7) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
§ 91.007 COLLECTION OF MONIES.
   The office of the County Animal Care and Control shall have and perform the
following duties enumerated in this section in cases involving violations of §§
91.008,
91.035 through
91.038,
91.050,
91.051,
91.065 through
91.073, and
91.999:
   (A)   Accept payments for registration and issue tags;
   (B)   Accept and collect registrations fees collected by veterinarian
clinics issuing registration tags;
   (C)   Maintain records of all violations of the provisions of this chapter
of which each person has been guilty during the preceding 24 months; whether
such guilt was established in court or by payment of fine; and
   (D)   Any person charged with an offense requiring payment of a fine shall
pay such fine at the County Circuit Clerk’s office. Whenever any person charged
with an offense requiring payment of a fine fails to appear and pay his or her
fine in seven working days, a formal county ordinance violation complaint shall
be initiated in the Circuit Court. All fines, forfeitures, penalties, and fees
collected as a result of the enforcement of this chapter shall be paid into the
Animal Control Fund per 510 ILCS 5/7.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-10) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
§ 91.008 FEES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of 510 ILCS 5/3 the following license fees
shall be charged by the county as an annual fee:
 
Altered dog or cat       $10
Late fee (after 30 days) $5
Police canine            $0
Service/guide dog        $0
Unaltered dog or cat     $50
 
   (B)   Fees shall be due within 30 days of the anniversary date of the rabies
inoculation.
   (C)   Pursuant to the provisions of 510 ILCS 5/10, the following redemption
fees shall be charged by the county:
 
Boarding (per day)             $10
Impoundment fee (licensed)     $25
Impoundment fee (not licensed) $50
Microchip                      $15
Rabies vaccination             $15
 
   (D)   If an owner’s dog is required to be quarantined for a ten-day rabies
observation, the owner shall pay a rabies observation fee of $150 in addition
to any other fees that may be required.
   (E)   If an owner’s dog is required to be surrendered or euthanized per the
owner’s request for any reason, the owner shall pay a release fee of $20 or
euthanasia fee of $20.
   (F)   If an owner’s dog is found running at large, the dog’s owner shall pay
a $25 public safety fine, $20 of which shall be deposited into the Pet
Population Control Fund and $5 of which shall be retained by the county.
   (G)   The owner of any impounded dog or cat who desires to make redemption
thereof shall pay a $25 public safety fine to be deposited into the Pet
Population Control Fund; the fine shall be waived if it is the dog’s or cat’s
first impoundment and the owner has the animal spayed or neutered within 14
days.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-11) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
Statutory reference:
   Dog found running at large, fine, see 510 ILCS 5/9
   Impoundment; redemption, fees, see 510 ILCS 5/10
VACCINATIONS OF DOGS AND CATS
§ 91.020 VACCINATIONS.
   (A)   Every owner of a dog or cat four months of age, within the county,
shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian as established by regulations set forth in 510 ILCS 5/8.
   (B)   Evidence of such vaccination shall be entered upon a certificate which
shall be signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine and the name of
the clinic, hospital, or facility with which said veterinarian is affiliated.
   (C)   (1)   Evidence of such rabies inoculation shall be entered on a
certificate which shall be signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine
and the name of the clinic, hospital, or facility with which said veterinarian
is affiliated. Veterinarians who inoculate a dog or cat shall procure from the
County Animal Control in the county where their office is located serially
numbered tags, one to be issued with each inoculation certificate. Only one dog
shall be included on each certificate.
      (2)   The veterinarian immunizing or micro chipping an animal shall
provide the Administrator with a certificate of immunization and microchip
number if it has one. The Board shall cause a rabies inoculation tag to be
issued, at a fee established by the Board for each dog or cat inoculated
against rabies by providing inoculation tags to veterinarians located within
the county or by request of veterinarians outside the county. Established fees
shall be collected by the veterinarians and submitted to the County Animal
Control Facility in a manner agreed upon by the Administrator and the
individual veterinarians.
   (D)   The vaccination registration certificate shall contain information
pertaining to one pet only.
   (E)   Further rabies control shall be earned out as established in the state
Animal Control Act.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-3) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
Statutory reference:
   Confinement of animals exhibiting signs of rabies, see 510 ILCS 5/13 et seq.
§ 91.021 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Every owner of a dog or cat four months or more in age shall register
such dog or cat and pay an annual registration fee for said dog or cat to the
County Animal Control Office, as established in the State Animal Control Act
(510 ILCS 5/8 et seq.).
   (B)   Three-year rabies vaccinations are recognized by the state. Whenever a
pet owner has a vaccination registration certificate that shows a three-year
vaccine has been administered by the veterinarian, the owner will be
responsible for obtaining one-year registration tags within 30 days of each
anniversary of the date of rabies inoculation.
   (C)   Change of ownership information should be made to the County Animal
Control Office.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-3) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
BITING ANIMALS
§ 91.035 REPORT OF BITE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowing that an individual has
been bitten by an animal to refuse to notify, within 24 hours, the County
Animal Care and Control Office, Sheriff’s Department, local Police Department,
or other officer with the delegated authority who are responsible for the area
in which the bite occurred.
   (B)   A bite report shall be completed and forwarded to the County Animal
Care and Control Office within 24 hours. Bite reports shall be furnished by the
County Animal Care and Control Office identifying required information.
   (C)   The owner of any dog, cat, or other animal, which shall have been
bitten by another dog, cat, or other animal, shall immediately inform the
County Animal Care and Control Office, giving the name, address, owner,
registration number, description, and location of such animal if known.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-4) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.036 CONFINEMENT OF BITING ANIMALS.
   (A)   When the County Animal Care and Control receives information that a
human being or other animal has been bitten by a dog, cat, or other animal, the
Administrator or Deputy Administrator, or his or her authorized representative,
shall have such dog, cat, or other animal confined under the observation of a
veterinarian for a period of ten days.
   (B)   (1)   When evidence is presented that such dog, cat, or other animal
was vaccinated within the time prescribed by law, it may be confined in the
house of its owner, or in a manner which will prohibit it from biting any human
being or other animal for a period of ten days, if the administrator, other
licensed veterinarian or animal control officer declares such confinement
satisfactory.
      (2)   At the end of the confinement period, such dog, cat, or other
animal shall be examined by the administrator or other licensed veterinarian.
   (C)   (1)   The owner of a biting animal shall be provided a form
(“VETERINARIAN RELEASE”), which must be presented to and signed/dated by the
examining veterinarian.
      (2)   This signed release must be returned to the County Animal Care and
Control office within 24 hours of release.
   (D)   When the owner of a biting dog is unknown, such dog shall be taken to
the public animal control facility located within the county and placed under
observation for ten days or until an owner may be located.
   (E)   Further enforcement of biting animals and confinement may be carried
out as established under the Animal Control Act.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-4) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
Statutory reference:
   Confinement of animals exhibiting signs of rabies, see 510 ILCS 5/13 et seq.
§ 91.037 LIABILITY OF OWNER.
   (A)   (1)   If a dog or other animal, without provocation, attacks, bites,
or injuries any person or domestic animal who is peacefully conducting
themselves in any place where they may lawfully be, the owner of such dog or
other animal is liable in civil damages to such person for the full amount of
the injury proximately caused thereby (510 ILCS 5/16).
      (2)   This liability to include death or injury to wildlife animals and
birds kept under a state or federal license permit.
   (B)   The owner of a biting animal must also remit to the Department of
Public Health, for deposit into the Pet Population Control Fund, a $25 public
safety fine within 30 days after notice.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-4) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
Statutory reference:
   Dog or other animal bites; observation of animal, see 510 ILCS 5/13
§ 91.038 SPECIAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Family members bitten.
      (1)   Owners of animals that have bitten members of immediate family
residing at the same address are encouraged to submit the biting animal for
veterinary examination. The biting animal shall be confined in a manner which
will prohibit it from biting other people or animals.
      (2)   Multiple bite reports of same family members may show the need for
investigation under the Humane Care for Animals Act for possible abuse or
neglect.
   (B)   Caged animals. Owners of caged rabbits, ferrets, guinea pigs,
hamsters, gerbils, rats, and mice that have been owned over 30 days shall not
be required to obtain a veterinary examination when their caged animal has
bitten a human being or other animal, but shall report the health of the biting
animal by telephone or in person to the County Animal Care and Control Office
on the first and tenth days following the bite.
   (C)   Guard dogs. Owners of guard dogs that have bitten a person in
performance of guard duty and have been officially vaccinated and registered
shall not be required to confinement or to obtain veterinary examination; but
shall report the health of biting animal to the County Animal Care and Control
Office on the first and tenth days following the bite.
   (D)   Large animals. Cattle, sheep, swine, and horses that have bitten a
human being or other animal shall be confined to the owner’s property and
examined by a veterinarian on the first and tenth days after the bite.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-4) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
DANGEROUS, VICIOUS DOGS
§ 91.050 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   After a thorough investigation, including: sending, within ten
business days of the Administrator or Director becoming aware of the alleged
infraction, notifications to the owner of the alleged infractions, the fact of
the initiation of an investigation, and affording the owner an opportunity to
meet with the Administrator or Director prior to the making of a determination;
gathering of any medical or veterinary evidence; interviewing witnesses; and
making a detailed written report, an animal control warden, deputy
administrator, or law enforcement agent may ask the Administrator, or his or
her designee, or the Director, to deem a dog to be “dangerous.” No dog shall be
deemed a “dangerous dog” unless shown to be a dangerous dog by a preponderance
of evidence. The owner shall be sent immediate notification of the
determination by registered or certified mail that includes a complete
description of the appeal process.
   (B)   (1)   A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the Administrator, or
his or her designee, or the Director determines the conduct of the dog was
justified because:
         (a)   The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was
committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog, or was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property
occupied by the owner of the animal;
         (b)   The threatened person was abusing, assaulting, or physically
threatening the dog or its offspring;
         (c)   The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was
attacking or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring; or
         (d)   The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting
itself, its owner, custodian, or a member of its household, kennel, or
offspring.
      (2)   Testimony of a certified applied behaviorist, a board certified
veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert may be relevant to the
determination of whether the dog’s behavior was justified pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
   (C)   (1)   If deemed dangerous, the Administrator, or his or her designee,
or the Director shall order:
         (a)   The dog’s owner to pay a $50 public safety fine to be deposited
into the Pet Population Control Fund;
         (b)   The dog to be spayed or neutered within 14 days at the owner’s
expense and micro chipped, if not already; and
         (c)   One or more of the following as deemed appropriate under the
circumstances and necessary for the protection of the public:
            1.   Evaluation of the dog by a certified applied behaviorist, a
board-certified veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert in the
field and completion of training or other treatment as deemed appropriate by
the expert. The owner of the dog shall be responsible for all costs associated
with evaluations and training ordered under this section;
            2.   Direct supervision by an adult 18 years of age or older
whenever the animal is on public premises; and
            3.   The Administrator may order a dangerous dog to be muzzled
whenever it is on public premises in a manner that will prevent it from biting
any person or animal, but that shall not injure the dog or interfere with its
vision or respiration.
      (2)   (a)   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs
for the physically handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police-owned dogs are
exempt from this section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs
while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under
this section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in
accordance with §§
91.085 through
91.087 and performing duties as expected.
         (b)   It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog to notify
the Administrator of changes of address.
         (c)   In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the
Administrator advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The
Administrator shall provide the Police and Fire Departments with a categorized
list of such exempted dogs, and shall promptly notify such Departments of any
address changes reported to him or her.
      (3)   The Administrator has the right to impound a dangerous dog if the
owner fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   An owner/custodian who wishes to appeal a determination may submit in
writing, by certified mail or in person, their intent to do so the County
Administrator of Animal Care and Control within ten days of notification that
the dog has been deemed dangerous.
      (1)   The Administrator will schedule a hearing before a hearing officer
appointed by the County Board.
      (2)   Notification will be sent to the owner or custodian by certified
mail or in person indicating the date, time, and location of the hearing.
      (3)   (a)   An owner or custodian may present evidence or testimony at
the hearing on their behalf to support a determination that the dog not be
deemed dangerous.
         (b)   The county Administrator may present evidence or testimony
before the hearing officer to support a determination that the dog be deemed
dangerous.
      (4)   A determination will be provided by the hearing officer at the
conclusion of all testimony.
      (5)   An owner/custodian of a dog deemed dangerous must comply with any
current city and county ordinances, and any applicable state statues that
address dangerous dogs.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-5) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
§ 91.051 VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   In order to have a dog deemed vicious, the Administrator, Deputy
Administrator, or law enforcement officer must give notice of the infraction
that is the basis of the investigation to the owner, conduct a thorough
investigation, interview any witnesses, including the owner, gather any
existing medical records, veterinary medical records, or behavioral evidence,
and make a detailed report recommending a finding that the dog is a vicious
dog, and give the report to the state’s Attorney’s office and the owner. The
Administrator, state’s Attorney, Director, or any citizen of the county in
which the dog exists may file a complaint in the Circuit Court in the name of
the people of the state to deem a dog to be a vicious dog. Testimony of a
certified applied behaviorist, a board-certified veterinary behaviorist, or
another recognized expert may be relevant to the court’s determination of
whether the dog’s behavior was justified. The petitioner must prove the dog is
a vicious dog by clear and convincing evidence. The Administrator shall
determine where the animal shall be confined during the pendency of the case.
   (B)   (1)   A dog may not be declared vicious if the court determines the
conduct of the dog was justified because:
         (a)   The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at
the time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the
dog, or was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises or
property owned or occupied by the owner of the animal;
         (b)   The injured, threatened, or killed person was abusing,
assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its offspring, or has in the
past abused, assaulted, or physically threatened the dog or its offspring; and/
or
         (c)   The dog was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting
itself, its owner, custodian, or member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
      (2)   No dog shall be deemed vicious if it is a professionally trained
dog for law enforcement or guard duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified
in the manner that is specific as to breed.
   (C)   If the burden of proof has been met, the court shall deem the dog to
be a vicious dog.
   (D)   If the dog is found to be a vicious dog, the owner shall pay a $100
public safety fine to be deposited into the Pet Population Control Fund, the
dog shall be spayed or neutered within ten days of the finding at the expense
of its owner and micro chipped, if not already, and the dog is subject to
enclosure.
   (E)   If an owner fails to comply with these requirements, the animal
control agency shall impound the dog and the owner shall pay a $500 fine plus
impoundment fees to the animal control agency impounding the dog. The judge has
the discretion to order a vicious dog be euthanized.
   (F)   A dog found to be a vicious dog shall not be released to the owner
until the Administrator, an Animal Control Warden, or the Director approves the
enclosure. No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away the dog
without approval from the Administrator or court. Whenever an owner of a
vicious dog relocates, he or she shall notify both the Administrator of the
County Animal Control where he or she has relocated and the Administrator of
the County Animal Control where he or she formerly resided.
   (G)   Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not
confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the Administrator, an animal
control warden, or the law enforcement authority having jurisdiction in such
area.
   (H)   If the owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order to the
Circuit Court in the county in which the animal was impounded within 15 working
days, the dog may be euthanized.
   (I)   Upon filing a notice of appeal, the order of euthanasia shall be
automatically stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. The owner shall bear
the burden of timely notification to animal control in writing.
   (J)   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the
physically handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police-owned dogs are exempt from
this section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this Section,
each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with §
91.020 and 510 ILCS 5/8. It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog
to notify the Administrator of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or
guard dog, the owner shall keep the Administrator advised of the location where
such dog will be stationed. The Administrator shall provide the Police and Fire
Departments with a categorized list of such exempted dogs, and shall promptly
notify such Departments of any address changes reported to him or her.
   (K)   (1)   If the animal control agency has custody of the dog, the agency
may file a petition with the court requesting that the owner be ordered to post
security.
      (2)   The security must be in an amount sufficient to secure payment of
all reasonable expenses expected to be incurred by the animal control agency or
animal shelter in caring for and providing for the dog pending the
determination.
      (3)   Reasonable expenses include, but are not limited to, estimated
medical care and boarding of the animal for 30 days. If security has been
posted in accordance with this section, the animal control agency may draw from
the security the actual costs incurred by the agency in caring for the dog.
   (L)   Upon receipt of a petition, the court must set a hearing on the
petition, to be conducted within five business days after the petition is
filed. The petitioner must serve a true copy of the petition upon the
defendant.
   (M)   If the court orders the posting of security, the security must be
posted with the Clerk of the Court within five business days after the hearing.
If the person ordered to post security does not do so, the dog is forfeited by
operation of law and the animal control agency must dispose of the animal
through adoption or humane euthanization.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-6) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
AT LARGE; PUBLIC NUISANCE
§ 91.065 RUNNING AT LARGE; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The owner of any dog, cat, or other animal shall not permit such
animal to run at large within the county.
   (B)   No person shall cause or permit any animal owned by him or her to run
at large on any public place or on any privately owned premises, other than the
owner’s.
   (C)   Whenever the Administrator or Deputy Administrator, or his or her
authorized representative, observes or is informed that any dog, cat, or
domestic animal is roaming freely and not under control of the owner, it shall
be considered running at large within the county and shall be deemed and
considered to be a public nuisance. The animal shall immediately be apprehended
and impounded.
   (D)   Any person may apprehend an at large animal and inform local police or
an animal control officer and hold so that such animal may be impounded.
   (E)   All stray/at large animals impounded shall be scanned for the presence
of a microchip upon arrival, and a record of impoundment entered into a
database containing but not limited to location of apprehension, time and date
of impoundment, license/tag information, species, owners information, and the
physical condition of the animal.
   (F)   When a stray/at large animal is impounded, notice shall be made by
telephone, if unattainable by phone, given by mail to the last known address of
the owner. Stray/at large animals shall be held not less than seven days. All
unclaimed animals deemed adoptable by the animal control facility shall be
offered for adoption, or made available to a licensed humane society or rescue
group. If no placement is available, it shall be humanely dispatched pursuant
to the Humane Euthanasia in Animal Shelters Act, being 510 ILCS 72/1 et seq.
   (G)   The owner of a stray/at large animal is responsible for all costs
relating to the apprehension and impoundment of the animal.
   (H)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Dogs being used in hunting or field trials;
      (2)   Dog shows while on public lands set aside for those purposes;
      (3)   While on private property of others with the actual, implied,
customary, or constructive consent of the owner of such private premises;
      (4)   While going to or from a hunting, field trial, or dog show site;
      (5)   Dogs used in tracking in conjunction with police activities; and
      (6)   Dogs of the Canine Corp of any law enforcement agency or Armed
Forces while being used to conduct official business.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-7) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.066 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   It is unlawful for any person to create a nuisance by allowing or permitting
any of the following:
   (A)   To allow any dog, cat, or domestic animal to pass without permission
upon the premises of another, thereby causing substantial damage to or
interference with the premises;
   (B)   To allow any dog, cat, or domestic animal to cause serious annoyance
or disturbance to any person or persons by frequent, habitual, excessive
howling, barking, meowing, caterwauling, or other noise making;
   (C)   To allow unsanitary, dangerous, or unreasonable offensive conditions.
Every owner maintaining an animal run or yard shall keep the same clean and
sanitary, and free from all refuse. Such yards shall be thoroughly cleaned at
least once every 24 hours. It shall be unlawful to permit feces, decaying food,
or refuse of any kind to remain in such yards. When swept up or collected, such
refuse shall be kept in air-tight containers until disposed of in accordance
with the ordinances of the county. It shall be unlawful to permit such refuse
to remain uncovered;
   (D)   To allow any animal to run after or chase persons, other animals,
bicycles, or vehicles while off the premises of the owner;
   (E)   To allow any animal to molest, attack, bite, interfere with, or
physically intimidate persons or other animals off the premises of the owner;
   (F)   To allow any dangerous or vicious animal to leave the premises of its
owner when not under a recognized method of control or restraint; and
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or any person to direct, encourage,
or knowingly allow a dog or other animal to attack or bite any person or
domestic animal when that person or domestic animal is peacefully conducting
themselves where they may legally be.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-7) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.067 PROVOKING ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally provoke any animal so
as to create a nuisance to the neighborhood or cause a violation of any
provision of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-7) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.068 TRAPPING.
   (A)   No person shall set or allow to be set any trap to catch any domestic
animal (whether the trap is owned by him or her or not) on his or her property
unless approved by the animal control officer.
   (B)   The indoor trapping of mice and rats is permitted.
   (C)   Live traps which do not injure animals will be permitted unless there
is a designated trapping season which prevents its use.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-7) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.069 DEAD ANIMALS.
   (A)   The owner of an animal shall be responsible for the disposal of such
animal’s remains upon its death, from whatever cause, and regardless of the
location of the remains.
   (B)   No person shall allow the body of, or any part thereof, of any dead
animal to decompose and putrefy by remaining on his or her property.
   (C)   No person shall skin, dismember, butcher, dress, or exhibit dead
animals in view of the public in residentially-used areas of the county.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-7) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.070 DOGS, CATS IN HEAT.
   (A)   The owner of every female dog or cat in heat shall confine such animal
in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that it cannot come into
contact with another animal except for planned breeding.
   (B)   The owner of any male dog or cat running at large shall be held
financially responsible for miss-mating injection or other remedy determined by
a veterinarian when such male dog mates with a female dog or cat that is
confined as required in division (A) above. The owner of the male animal shall
also be financially responsible for the care and cost of adoption of the
resulting litter.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-7) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.071 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   The owner of any dog or cat running at large shall be responsible for the
manual and physical clean up or pick up in a timely manner, or mess or damage
done by such animal at large as well as any monetary liability.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-7) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
§ 91.072 COLLAR, HARNESS; REGISTRATION OF TAGS.
   (A)   (1)   Every pet owner within the county shall provide such pet with a
collar or harness to be worn when said animal is outside a secure enclosure.
      (2)   Collars shall be of sufficient strength to control and restrain the
animal without causing injury to the animal.
      (3)   Animals restrained by rope or chains must have collars or
harnesses.
   (B)   No person shall, without the consent of the owner or keeper of any
animal, take away or otherwise remove the registration tag, identification tag,
or collar/harness from any dog or cat except in an emergency or for the welfare
of the animal.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-7) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.073 EXCESSIVE, HABITUAL VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   When a pet owner has three or more violations of the same type, or
violations in combination regarding one or more pets, the Administrator may
have one or more such pets removed from an owner or custodian and place for
adoption, or otherwise dispose of such animals in a humane manner.
   (B)   When the violation is regarding inhumane treatment of animals, the
Administrator may deem the owner unfit and ban from owning or having pets in
his or her care for a set period of time. After that time has elapsed, he or
she will again be allowed to own or care for animals after a thorough
investigation by an animal control officer or the State Humane Investigator.
   (C)   When an owner has been banned from owning or having animals in his or
her care, information shall be provided to all other Animal Control Officers,
shelters, and Humane Investigators.
   (D)   An owner/custodian may appeal a decision pursuant to §
91.050(D), to the Administrator of the County Animal Care and Control, or his
or her designee.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-7) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
HUMANE CARE FOR ANIMALS
§ 91.085 HUMAN CARE, TREATMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abuse or neglect, or in any way
treat inhumanely any animal within the county.
   (B)   (1)   This chapter shall cause all persons within the county to abide
by the Humane Care for Animals Act as established in 510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.
      (2)    No person shall cruelly treat any animal as established under the
State Humane Care for Animals Act; this shall include the prohibition of
persons to crop any animals ears, dock an animals tail, or perform any similar
surgeries except by a licensed veterinarian.
      (3)   (a)   No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor
vehicle or enclosed trailer, kennel, dog house, or any type of container or
structure used for confinement in such a manner that places it in a life or
health threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat
or cold.
         (b)   In order to protect the health and safety of an animal, an
animal control officer, law enforcement officer, or Department Investigator who
has probable cause to believe that this division (B) is being violated shall
have authority to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means under the
circumstances after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person.
      (4)   No person driving a motor vehicle shall transport any animal in the
back of the vehicle for any load on the vehicle unless the space is enclosed or
has side and tail racks to the height of at least 46 inches extending
vertically from the floor, the vehicle has installed means of preventing the
animal from being discharged, or the animal is cross tethered to the vehicle or
is protected by secured container or cage in the manner which will prevent the
animal from being thrown, falling, or jumping from the vehicle.
      (5)   No person shall abandon any animal on any public or private
property or roadway within the county.
      (6)   Any person striking, injuring, or killing any dog, cat, or domestic
animal with a vehicle shall render assistance when possible and/or notify the
owner, police, or an animal control officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-8) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005) Penalty, see §
91.999
Statutory reference:
   Animal torture, see 510 ILCS 70/30.3
   Cruel treatment, see 510 ILCS 70/3.01
§ 91.086 ADEQUATE SHELTER.
   (A)   The owner’s duties as listed in the State Humane Care for Animals Act
(510 ILCS 70/3) and as pertains to this chapter, under adequate shelter and
protection for weather, shall include:
      (1)   Shelter from sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause overheating
or discomfort, sufficient shade shall be provided to allow all animals/pets
kept outdoors to protect themselves from the direct rays of the sun;
      (2)   Shelter from rain or snow. Animals/pets kept outdoors shall be
provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during rain or
snow;
      (3)   Shelter from cold weather. Shelter shall be provided for all
animals/pets kept outdoors to afford comfort and protection to such animals
appropriate for the local climatic conditions and the animal/pet species
concerned;
      (4)   Shelter from extreme heat or cold. Shelter that is provided in an
enclosed area, such as enclosed porch or vehicle, shall not cause danger,
distress, or discomfort to the animal; and
      (5)   Shelter from drainage. A suitable method shall be provided to
rapidly eliminate excess water to prevent a damp, wet, or muddy environment.
   (B)   PROPER SHELTER shall be defined as protection from weather for a dog
or cat as a moisture proof building, with dry floor and adequate clean bedding
material. A horse shall have a building of at least three walls and a roof. It
shall have a dry floor with clean and adequate bedding of straw, chips, or
other suitable material.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-8) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
§ 91.087 SUFFICIENT ROOM.
   (A)   A pen or kennel shall be of sufficient room to provide adequate
exercise.
   (B)   A cable, lead line, tie line, or any line used to secure an animal in
a yard or pen shall be of sufficient length and placement to provide tangle-
free exercise.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-8) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating or aiding in the violation of any provision of
this chapter, or resisting, obstructing, or impeding the Animal Control
Authority or any authorized officer in enforcing this chapter, shall be fined
no less than $50 or no more than $500. For the first offense, a warning
citation may be issued. Each day a person fails to comply constitutes a
separate offense. Violators may also be charged with a Class C misdemeanor.
   (B)   As an alternative remedy, the Administrator in this chapter, or in any
statute, may issue a ticket in those instances where an owner violates this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-1-9) (Ord. 2005-1116, passed 11-15-2005)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Forest Preserve District
   
92.01   Public use
   
92.02   Protection of property structures, natural resources
   
92.03   Regulation of sports and games
   
92.04   Regulation of motorized vehicles, traffic, parking
   
92.05   Regulation of personal conduct, behavior
   
92.06   Enforcement
   
92.07   Definitions
 
   
92.99   Penalty
FOREST PRESERVE DISTRICT
§ 92.01 PUBLIC USE.
   (A)   Public use and purpose of the District. Forest preserves are for the
use by the general public. One of the functions of the District is to acquire,
protect, restore, restock, develop, and interpret a well-balanced system of
areas with scenic, ecological, recreational, and historic values for the
inspiration, education, use, and enjoyment by the public. This subchapter is
intended to help carry out this function.
   (B)   Hours of use. Forest preserves shall be open to the public from
sunrise to 10:00 p.m. local time. No person shall remain in the forest
preserves when the forest preserves are not open to the public without written
permission of the District.
   (C)   Permits.
      (1)   No person shall conduct, operate, present, manage, or take part in
the following activities in a forest preserve unless a permit is obtained from
the District or Board prior to the start of the activity:
         (a)   Any contest, show, exhibit, dramatic performance, play, act,
motion picture, acrobatic feat, bazaar, sporting event, musical event,
ceremony, children’s day camp, or any public meeting, assembly, or parade
including, but not limited to, drills or maneuvers, rallies, picketing,
speeches and addresses, marches or political meetings;
         (b)   Any use of any preserve area or facility by a certain person or
group of persons to the exclusion of others; and/or
         (c)   Camping on lands of the District or inhabiting any structure or
facility overnight.
      (2)   Persons desiring the above activity may apply to the District for a
written permit under the following categories and subject to fees set by the
Board.
         (a)   Picnic. No permit is required to have a picnic, however, if a
person desires to reserve a designated area or areas to the exclusion of others
or desires to conduct, in conjunction with the public, related controlled
activities such as, but not limited to, sound amplification, special vehicle
access, animal rides, and the like, then a picnic permit, valid for one day, is
required.
         (b)   Camping. A permit is required. The permit reserves a designates
area of areas to the exclusion of others and allows permitted to remain in the
preserve overnight.
         (c)   Special event. A permit is required for any of the other
activities listed in division (C)(1)(a) above. The permit may provide for use
of an area or areas to the exclusion of others and for other permit controlled
activities pursuant to this subchapter.
      (3)   Permits are not transferable and fees paid are not refundable.
Permits must be applied for at least 24 hours in advance of the event. Minor
changes in the permit may be made upon written permission of the District for
no additional fee, providing that the specific forest preserve designated is
not changed, the date or dates involved are not changed, the number of the
designated areas is not increased, and the request for change is made at least
24 hours prior to the event. Permits may also be required for other activities.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-1) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 PROTECTION OF PROPERTY STRUCTURES, NATURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   Destruction or misuse of property and structures. No person shall,
upon or in connection with any property of the District:
      (1)   Remove, take, deface, mutilate, or destroy any property, equipment,
improvement, sign, building or other construction owned by the District in or
upon any land owned by the District;
      (2)   Take, appropriate, excavate, injure, destroy, or remove any
historical or prehistorical ruin or parts thereof, or any object of antiquity,
without written permission of the District;
      (3)   Throw, carry, cast, drag, push, or deposit any refuse container,
picnic table, barricade, or any other moveable or non-moveable property into
any lake, pond, slough, stream, or lagoon, or upon frozen waters thereof or to
otherwise move, stack, or hide such property in such a way as to render it
unavailable to the general public for its intended use, to cause a hazard to
public safety or to damage or destroy such property;
      (4)   Occupy or inhabit, or cause to be occupied or inhabited, any house,
barn, shelter, shed, or other structure or use for any storage, or cause to be
used for the storage of any goods any house, barn, shelter, shed, or other
structure without approval of the Board and written permission of the District;
      (5)   (a)   Enter into or upon any preserves or waters or areas thereof
or structure closed or posted against trespass, without written permission of
the District.
         (b)   These structures or areas may be, but not be limited to,
employee residences or their immediately surrounding area, construction areas,
work safety zones, equipment or material storage structures or areas, workshops
or stations, tree nurseries, or areas under going intensive reforestation or
other soil vegetative treatment or areas hazardous to the public safety or
health;
      (6)   Tamper with in any way, climb, or enter upon, damage, or remove
anything from any District vehicle, watercraft, machine, or implement without
written permission of the District; and/or
      (7)   Misuse any refuse container or receptacle by depositing into it any
hot coals or any other hot or burning substances; or by depositing into it any
garbage, trash, refuse, or other unwanted material that was not generated on
the site in the course of normal, lawful use of forest preserve facilities.
   (B)   Destruction or misuse of natural resources. No person shall upon or in
connection with any property of the District:
      (1)   Cut, remove, uproot, or wantonly destroy any tree, sapling,
seedling, bush, shrub, flower, or plant, whether alive or dead, or chip, blaze,
box, girdle, trim, or otherwise deface or injure any tree, shrub, or bush, or
break or remove any branch or foliage thereof, or pick or gather any seed of
any tree or other plant without the written permission of the District;
      (2)   Remove or cause to be removed any sod, humus, downed timber, wood
chips, peat, rock, sand, or gravel, or remove or cause to be removed any other
natural material of the forest floor or earth without written permission of the
District;
      (3)   Hunt, pursue, trap, capture, catch, molest, poison, wound, or kill,
or attempt to hunt, trap, capture, catch, molest, poison, wound, or kill any
invertebrate animal, mammal or bird, or reptile or amphibian without written
permission of the District;
      (4)   Fish in any waters of the District posted against fishing or by
using a bow and arrow, spear, or slingshot; or with any device using more than
two hooks per line, or any net seine or trap, or with attended or unattended
lines during the hours that forest preserves are closed as defined by
provisions of this subchapter, or in violation of any applicable laws of the
state as administered by the Conservation Department thereof or in violation of
any regulations or restrictions posted by the District controlling the size,
species, and number of fish that can be taken from a designated body of water;
      (5)   Release or cause to be released any wild, domestic, or pet animal,
bird, fish, or reptile, or bring in or plant or distribute the seeds or spores
of any flowering or non-flowering plant brought into or upon District lands, or
waters from any outside source whatsoever, without written permission of the
District;
      (6)   Use or cause to be used any chemical or biological pesticide, or
any other substance, measure, or process designed to alter the anatomy or
physiology of any organism for the purpose of directly manipulating their
populations without written permission of the District and then only in
compliance with all applicable laws of the state and the United States;
      (7)   Drive or cause to be driven, or allow to enter on District property
any livestock to graze or browse without written permission of the District;
and/or
      (8)   Deposit, dump, throw, cast, lay, or place, nor cause to be
deposited, dumped, thrown, cast, laid, or placed any ashes, trash, rubbish,
paper, garbage, refuse, debris, or junk.
   (C)   Contraband. All animals, plants, birds, fish or reptiles, or parts
thereof, killed, captured, trapped, or taken or brought, sold, or bartered, or
had in possession contrary to any provision of this subchapter or applicable
laws of the state shall be, and are hereby declared contraband and as such,
shall be subject to seizure by any ranger, ranger police, caretaker, or
employee of the District, or by any duly sworn peace officer.
   (D)   Destruction by or misuse of fire. No person shall upon or in
connection with any property of the District:
      (1)   Set fires, or cause to be set on fire any tree, forest, brush land,
grassland, meadow, prairie, marsh, slash, refuse, refuse container, or
structure;
      (2)   Build a fire anywhere for any purpose, except in provided
fireplaces, or provided or privately owned fire receptacles, without written
permission from the District;
      (3)   Build a fire or cause a fire to start in or out of a receptacle
close to or in any structure whatsoever, or close to any tree or other plants
in such a way as to deface, damage, or destroy that structure or scar, injure,
or destroy any tree or plants, or their foliage;
      (4)   Drop, throw away, or scatter any burning, lighted or hot coals,
ashes, cigarette, cigar, firecracker, or match; and/or
      (5)   (a)   Build any fire whatsoever for any purpose in or out of a
receptacle or fireplace and leave it unattended, unless such fire is properly
extinguished.
         (b)   For the purpose of this subchapter, a fire shall be deemed
properly extinguished when its ashes, residue, coals, and unburned substance is
cold to human touch.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-2)
§ 92.03 REGULATION OF SPORTS AND GAMES.
   No person shall upon or in connection with any property of the District:
   (A)   Swim, wade, or bodily enter the water at any time in any lakes, ponds,
streams, sloughs, or watercourses except at such place or places as may be
designated by the District, and then only in accordance with the rules,
regulations, and restrictions promulgated and posted;
   (B)   (1)   Bring into, attempt to launch, or use or navigate any boar,
yacht, canoe, raft, or other watercraft upon the waters of any watercourse,
lake, lagoon, pond, or slough, except at such place or places as may be
designated by the District.
      (2)   Where allowed, watercraft shall be used in accordance with District
rules, regulations, and restrictions duly set forth and posted, as well as all
applicable statutes of the state and the United States.
      (3)   Lake George is restricted to electric trolling motors only.
However, District employees operating watercraft in carrying out official
duties and personnel of cooperating agents or agencies operating watercraft as
authorized by the District or the Department of Conservation maybe exempt from
the boating regulations in this section;
   (C)   Start, fly, or use any fuel-powered engine or jet-type or electric-
powered model aircraft, boat, or rocket, or like power toys or model, except at
those areas or waters designated by the District for such use and then only in
accordance with such rules, regulations, and restrictions promulgated and
posted by the District;
   (D)   (1)   Bring into, unload, use, or ride any horse, except on those
fields, lots, arenas, areas, trails, paths, or roadways designated by the
District for horse use.
      (2)   Where allowed, horses shall be used in accordance with the rules,
regulations, and restrictions duly set forth as part of such permit or posted;
   (E)   (1)   Ride a bicycle on any path, trail, roadway, or other area
designated and posted prohibiting bicycles or on any path, trail, or area
designated and posted as being a horse or equestrian trail or area by the
District;
      (2)   Fail to ride a bicycle as closely as possible to the right-hand
side of any road, trail, or path as conditions shall permit;
      (3)   Carry another on the handlebars, frame, fender, or so ride on a
bicycle except on a suitable seat attached to such bicycle for such purpose, or
to operate a bicycle in such a manner as to be reckless or to endanger
pedestrians; and/or
      (4)   Ride a bicycle on any path or trail more than two abreast or on any
roadway or road used by the public for regular motor vehicle access in any
other manner than single file.
   (F)   Play or operate any sound amplification device, including radios,
televison sets, public address systems, musical instruments, and the like, or
operate any other energy amplification device in such a way as to be audible
beyond the immediate vicinity of such device or musical instrument or in such a
manner as to disturb the quiet of camps, picnic areas, or other public
gathering places without written permission of the District;
   (G)   (1)   Sled, toboggan, ski, or slide on any area posted by the District
as being unsafe or hazardous or as being closed due to inadequate snow cover or
other environmental conditions, or upon being duly notified of such by the
District;
      (2)   Enter on or upon any frozen waters to skate, fish, slide, or walk
or for any purpose whatsoever when such waters are posted “closed” or “unsafe”
or “hazardous” by the District, or when notified of such conditions by the
District; and/or
      (3)   Bring onto or upon the frozen waters of any lake, pond, or
watercourse any iceboat or wind-driven-like device or other vehicle.
   (H)   Play or engage in any team sport or game such as, but not limited to
baseball, football, field hockey, volleyball, lacrosse, or horseshoes, except
in those areas designated by the District as athletic fields, or if none are
available, only on those areas and for such period of time determined by, and
permitted by, the ranger in charge of the area or preserve involved in order to
ensure the safe and equal use of the preserve by others;
   (I)   Bring in, set up, construct, manage, or operate any amusement or
entertainment contraption, device, or gadget, without written permission of the
District;
   (J)   Make any ascent in a balloon, airplane, glider, hang glider, kite, or
any descent in or from any balloon, airplane, glider, hang glider, kite, or
parachute, without written permission of the Board of Commissioners;
   (K)   (1)   Manage, operate, or engage in gambling of any form; and/or
      (2)   Have in their possession any clock, wheel, tape machine, slot
machine, pin machine, or other machine or device for the reception of money or
other thing of value on chance or skill, or upon the action of which money is
skated, bet, hazarded, won, or lost. Any such machine or device shall be
subject to seizure, confiscation, and destruction by any duly sworn peace
officer.
   (L)   (1)   Camping will be permitted only in designated campgrounds in
preserves where camping is allowed. Camping is prohibited in any other area;
      (2)   A written permit is required to camp in any preserve. Fees and
regulations vary in campgrounds according to the facilities available. A
responsible person from the camping part must register for the party and
thereby acknowledge compliance to the rules and restrictions of the preserve;
      (3)   Visitors and guests of registered campers must leave the preserve
by the 10:00 p.m. closing time;
      (4)   Time limits vary between preserves. No camper, or his or her
equipment, is allowed to exceed the camping time limit. In addition, tent
campers must move their tent after a period of one week in order to prevent
grass kill;
      (5)   (a)   Campgrounds are not provided as locations for large group
gatherings or parties which are disruptive to the normal atmosphere of the
campground.
         (b)   Such activities will not be permitted and violators who persist
will be evicted; and
      (6)   (a)   Quiet hours shall prevail in campgrounds between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
         (b)   No person shall allow music or any sound from any mechanical
device or person to emit outside the individuals immediate campsite between the
above hours that would be disturbing to other campers.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-3) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 REGULATION OF MOTORIZED VEHICLES, TRAFFIC, PARKING.
   No person shall upon or in connection with any property of the District:
   (A)   Operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle that does not comply
with or in a manner that does not comply with the Vehicle Code of the state or
other laws or laws of the state having to do with the equipment, control,
licensing, registering, and use of motorized vehicles and/or the licensing of
operators of such vehicles;
   (B)   (1)   Operate or case to be operated any motorized vehicle anywhere
except on the roads, drives, and parking areas provided without written
permission of the District and then not in compliance with the directions and
restrictions of the ranger in charge of the area or ranger police;
      (2)   Operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle anywhere that is
not licensed or permitted to be operated on the roads, streets, and highways of
the state without written permission of the District. Vehicles not so licensed
and therefore subject to the provisions of this section include, but are not
limited to, snowmobiles, go carts, trail bikes, mini bikes, and such other all
terrain off-the-road vehicles;
      (3)   Operate or move or cause to be operated or moved, any motor vehicle
locked in as a result of the closing of the forest preserves at the proper
posted time without written permission of the District or until such time that
the preserve is officially opened;
      (4)   Operate a motorized vehicle on any road, drive, or parking area
posted, gated, or barricaded as closed to public traffic; and
      (5)   At Indian Bluff Golf Course, only golf carts that are authorized by
the District and are furnished and provided by the golf pro are allowed.
   (C)   Operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to fail to yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians and equestrians;
   (D)   (1)   Park a vehicle overnight, without written permission of the
District;
      (2)   Park a vehicle in such a way as to block in another parked vehicle;
      (3)   Park a vehicle in such a way as to block, restrict, or impede the
normal flow of traffic;
      (4)   Park a vehicle in a zone or area with signs posted prohibiting
parking;
      (5)   Park a vehicle on turf, meadow, prairie, marsh, field in a woodland
or on the exposed roots of any tree or shrub, except in an emergency or when
directed to do so by the ranger police or a matter of public safety;
      (6)   Park a vehicle for the purpose of washing it or for the marking of
any repairs or alterations to any vehicle, except those of an emergency nature;
and
      (7)   Vehicles in violation of any of the above subject to towing at the
owner’s expense.
   (E)   Operate or propel a vehicle or cause a vehicle to be propelled on any
road, drive, or parking area at a speed greater than the speed limit posted
along the right-of-way or in the absence of such posted limit at a speed in
excess of ten mph.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-4) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 REGULATION OF PERSONAL CONDUCT, BEHAVIOR.
   No person shall upon or in connection with any property of the District:
   (A)   (1)   Expose or offer for sale to the general public any articles or
things, or conduct or solicit any business trade or occupation or profession
without a valid concession contract agreement approved by the Board and then
only in accordance with the terms and conditions thereof, it being the
intention to control commercial enterprises or sales on District lands; and
      (2)   Display, distribute, post, or fix any placard, sign, handbill,
pamphlet, circular, or any other writing or printed material or objects
containing advertising matter or announcements, or any kind whatsoever without
written permission of the Board and then only in compliance with the terms of
such permit or in compliance with the terms of a valid concession contract
approved by the Board, except those groups holding a valid picnic. Camping or
special event permit may display signs to identify their location or direct
others to it, providing such signs are temporary and are removed by the
permitted at the termination of the activity, and providing that such signs are
no larger than 24 inches by 30 inches and are not attached to any tree or shrub
or any post, building, District sign, gate, or other structure.
   (B)   (1)   Set or place or cause to be set or placed any goods, wares, or
merchandise, or any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation or vending
of such goods, wares, or merchandise, or any other article upon any property of
the District to the obstruction of use of any preserve or to the detriment of
the appearance of any preserve;
      (2)   By force, threats, intimidations or by any unlawful fencing or
enclosing, or any other unlawful means prevent or obstruct, or combine and
confederate with others to prevent or obstruct, any person from peacefully
entering up on any property of the District or preventing or obstructing free
passage or transit over or through any lands or waters of the District, or
obstruct the entrance of any enclosure with the District, except that nothing
in this section shall be construed to deny lawful enforcement of a valid permit
granting a certain person or persons use to the exclusion of others as defined
and provided for in this subchapter; and
      (3)   For groups of 15 or more minor persons under the age of 18 to
gather in any area of the District unless at least one responsible adult
accompanies each such group of 15 individuals.
   (C)   Erect, construct, install, or perform any maintenance on below, over,
or across a preserve, except by proper authorization of the District
authorizing such activity and then only in accordance with written permission
of the District specifying the detail the work to be done and the conditions to
be fulfilled pursuant to the terms of such authorization;
   (D)   (1)   Be present in an intoxicated state, condition, or under the
influence of any liquor, beer, drug, or narcotic to the extent of being unable
to perform normal body functions, such as maintaining balance and coherent
speech, or because the influence of such or like substances engage in behavior
or speech that intimidated others or interferes with or unreasonably disrupts
others in the normal, safe use of the forest preserves or any facility thereof;
      (2)   No person shall bring intoxicating beverages of any kind for sale
into any of the preserves, provided however, nothing contained herein shall
prevent the possession and transportation of alcoholic liquors for the personal
use of the possessor, or his or her family and guests, in the forest preserves
lying within the territorial limits of towns, townships, villages,
municipalities, or precincts wherein the sale of beverages is, by law,
permitted; and
      (3)   The dispensation of alcoholic liquor from the type of container
commonly referred to as a “keg” is prohibited on the lands of any preserve,
unless in conjunction with an organized picnic or group outing for which a
permit has been issued.
   (E)   (1)   (a)   At any time have in his or her possession or on or about
their person concealed or otherwise any firearm, pistol, revolver, rifle,
shotgun, bow and arrow, slingshot, crossbow, spear, spear gun, switchblade
knife, stiletto, sword, blackjack, billy club, any weapon capable of
discharging a projectile by air, spirit, gas, or explosive, any explosive
substance or harmful solid, liquid, gaseous substance, or any other dangerous
weapon.
         (b)   Exception to division (E)(1)(a) above shall be at such ranges or
areas designated for their use by the District and then only in accordance with
the rules and restrictions duly set forth for the proper use of such ranges or
areas.
      (2)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent any ranger
police, deputy sheriff, coroner, game warden, state police officer, or any
other duly sworn peace officer from carrying such weapons as may be authorized
and necessary in the discharge of their duties, nor shall it apply to any
persons summoned by any such officer to assist in making arrests or preserving
the peace while such person is engaged in assisting;
   (F)   (1)   Interfere with, unreasonable disrupt or delay, or in any manner
hinder any employee engaged in the performance of his or her duties; and
      (2)   Give or offer to give any employee any money, gift, privilege, or
article of value on or off District property in order to violate the provisions
of this subchapter, contract, permit, or statute of the state and the United
States, or in order to gain or receive special consideration in applying for
any use or privilege or to gain special consideration and treatment in the use
of any District property or facility.
   (G)   (1)   No person shall allow, keep, or otherwise permit any unleashed
dog, cat, or other domesticated animal in any area of any preserve.
      (2)   All leashed animals should be at all times under the direct
physical control of a responsible person;
      (3)   No person shall torture, whip, beat, or cruelly treat or neglect
any animal;
      (4)   No person shall keep a noisy, vicious, or dangerous dog or other
animal or one which is disturbing to other persons on District-owned property
and to remain therein after being asked to leave by an employee of the
District;
      (5)   No person shall cause or permit any horse or other animal to stand
in any preserve unless securely hitched or in charge of some competent person,
and that no horse or other animal shall be hitched to any tree or shrub in any
preserve;
      (6)   No person shall ride, lead, or allow any animal in any public
building within any preserve; and
      (7)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the
controlled use of certain animals approved by the District for purposes of
public safety, such as, but not limited to, the protection of District property
or the protection of employees in the performance of their duties or search and
rescue.
   (H)   Take or cause to be taken any still or motion pictures, or make
sketches or paintings for commercial purposes or for use in commercial
advertising without written permission from the District and then only in
accordance with the rules and restrictions duly set forth as part of such
permit;
   (I)   By act or speech willfully unreasonable hinder, interrupt, or
interfere with any duly permitted activity or unreasonably or willfully intrude
on any area or into any structures designated for the use of a certain person
or persons to the exclusion of others by the written permission of the
District; and
   (J)   Set off or attempt to set off or ignite any firecracker, fireworks,
smoke bombs, rockets, black powder guns, or other pyrotechnics without the
written permission of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-5) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Police.
      (1)   Law enforcement officers have the power and are authorized to
arrest, with or without process, any persons found in the act of violating any
ordinance of the District or law of the state; and
      (2)   District rangers are authorized to enforce the regulations of the
District.
   (B)   Two penalties, one judgment. In all cases where the same offense shall
be made punishable or shall be created by different clauses or sections of this
or any other ordinance or statute, the duly sworn peace officer or person
prosecuting may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one judgment
shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
   (C)   Authority of other agencies. Nothing in this subchapter shall be
construed to prevent other officers from carrying out their sworn duties within
the territories of the District as defined by applicable laws of the state and
the United States or ordinances of the county, or in accord with any other
policing agreement approved by the Board.
   (D)   Eviction. For violation of any of these rules and regulations, a
person or persons is subject to a fine and/or immediate eviction whether or not
a permit has been granted or fee paid. No refunds will be granted in such
cases.
   (E)   Permits and designated areas, authority.
      (1)   To carry out the terms of this subchapter, the Director is hereby
given authority to issue the permits, post notices, or to take the other action
as called for herein, subject to the guidelines herein set forth.
      (2)   The Director shall have the authority to designate areas,
facilities, or waters suitable for various activities or use, to close
preserves or parts thereof in the interest of public health, safety, or general
welfare or in order to protect the natural resources from unreasonable harm,
and to promulgate and issue permits where required by this subchapter and
collect such fees as established by the District in accordance with the
following guidelines:
         (a)   No person be discriminated against because of race, sex, creed,
color, or national origin;
         (b)   The proposed use or activity will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the general public’s use and enjoyment of the preserve and
surrounding property or facilities;
         (c)   The proposed use or activity is not reasonably likely to result
in violence or in serious harm to property or persons;
         (d)   The proposed use or activity will not entail extraordinary
expense of operation costs by the District or expose it to unusability or
extreme liability;
         (e)   The area desired has not been reserved for another activity at
the same time;
         (f)   The proposed activity is reasonably expected to detract from the
promotion of public health; and
         (g)   The proposed activity is reasonable compatible with the type of
preserve, the size, and character of the area or waters involved and the
facilities available, and that it is not reasonably expected to cause
irreparable harm or extreme damage to the natural environment of the preserve.
      (3)   The Director may impose reasonable restrictions on the granting of
a permit including, but not limited to, any of the following:
         (a)   Restricting the open dates for reserved area use, the length of
time an area will be held for reserved use, the use of ground fires, sound, and
energy amplification devices, amusement devices, off-the-road vehicle access,
the number of persons present, location and type of any tents, bandstands,
stages, or temporary structures, the use of domestic, pet, or trained animals,
the use of shelters or structures, the collecting for any purpose of any water,
soils, minerals, flora, or fauna, the type and location of sports and games, or
any other activity which appears likely ro create a risk of unreasonable harm
to the use and enjoyment of the preserve by others or of damage to District
property;
         (b)   Requiring proof of and establishing the amount of liability
insurance required and/or requiring a hold harmless agreement, or requiring a
certificate of insurance naming the District as an additional insured when the
activity is deemed by the Director to require such;
         (c)   Requiring the name, address, telephone number, and driver
license number of a legal adult responsible for the use and activity requested,
as well as the name, address, and telephone number of the group represented by
the applicant; and
         (d)   Requiring that the applicant furnish additional security forces
at the applicant’s expense, such forces to act under District supervision.
      (4)   All permits required by this subchapter and issued by the Director
shall be issued at the District headquarters at the County Building, on a
first-come, first-served basis beginning the first working day of each calendar
year for open dates or for such total number allowed during that calendar year.
All applications for permits shall be submitted at least 72 hours in advance of
the earliest requested date, provided that the Director may waive the 72-hour
period in the interest of public health or safety, or for such events that are
of a significant civic nature.
      (5)   The Director is authorized to seek reasonable information regarding
any proposed use, activity, or privilege and require a record of such
information on a permit application.
      (6)   No person shall misrepresent, falsify, or withhold such required
information.
      (7)   No person granted a permit shall violate the requirements, terms,
conditions, restrictions, or rules duly set forth under the authority of this
subchapter as part of any granted permit or registration.
      (8)   The Board of Commissioners of the District may set forth in other
ordinances such permit or registration fees as it deems proper, and may change
them from time to time.
      (9)   No person shall obtain or use any permit without first having paid
the fee established by ordinance for such permit.
      (10)   (a)   All designated areas, waters, and facilities and all permit
restrictions, rules, regulations, or conditions are subject to review at any
time by the Board of Forest Preserve Commissioners.
         (b)   Any aggrieved person shall have the right to petition the Board,
in writing, regarding denial or restriction of use or activity, and be properly
heard by the Board as the President shall direct.
   (F)   Civil suits. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent
or preclude the lawful use by the District of a civil remedy at law, to correct
an abuse or loss suffered by the District as a result of a violation of this
subchapter or any law of the state.
   (G)   State, United States, and local laws.
      (1)   All persons within the forest preserves of the county are subject
to all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the District as well as all
applicable laws of the United States, the state, and local statutes and
ordinances, as amended and changed from time to time.
      (2)   These laws include, but are not limited to, the Downstate Forest
Preserve District Act for the state, the State Vehicle Code, the Criminal Code
of the state, and the Game and Fish Codes of the state, as amended and changed
from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-6)
Statutory reference:
   Downstate Forest Preserve District Act, see 70 ILCS 805/0.001 et seq.
   State Criminal Code, see 720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
   State Vehicle Code, see 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
§ 92.07 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT CONTRAPTIONS. Any contrivance, device, gadget, machine, or
structure designed to test the skill or strength of the user with any sort of
ride, lift, swing, or fall experience including, but not limited to, ball
throwing contest devices, pinball-type devices, animal ride devices, ball and
hammer devices, trampoline devices, and the like.
   AREA(S). A specific place within a forest preserve.
   BOARD. The Board of Commissioners of the District.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the District.
   DISTRICT. The Forest Preserve District of the county.
   EMPLOYEE. Any full- or part-time, regular or temporary worker in the employ
of the District under the supervision of the District.
   EXCLUSION OF OTHERS. Prohibiting use or behavior by others which disrupts or
prevents the authorized and lawful use of designated area or structure in a
preserve by a person or persons holding a valid permit for such area or
structure and activity.
   FOREST PRESERVE or PRESERVE. Lands and waters or property holdings of the
District.
   LEGAL ADULT. One who has reached the age of majority as designated by the
laws of the state.
   PERSON or PERSONS. Individuals, firms, corporations, societies, or any group
or gathering whatsoever.
   PERMIT. The written permission that must be obtained from the Director to
carry out a given activity.
   POSTED. A notice is posted, either by a sign in a forest preserve, at the
entrance to a forest preserve, or at a headquarters, the location being at the
discretion of the Director.
   PRESIDENT. The President of the Forest Preserve Commissioners.
   PROPERTY. Any lands, waters, facilities, or possessions of the District.
   SOUND AND ENERGY AMPLIFICATION. Music, speech, or any sound or noise
transmitted by artificial means, including, but not limited to, amplifiers,
loudspeakers, radios, and any similar devices or lights, rays, lenses, mirrors,
or laser beams, or the like.
   VEHICLE. Any device of conveyance on the land using wheels or belt type
track or tracks, skids, or skis and propelled by an engine or motor, and
includes such land conveyances that are able to float and operate on water.
   WATERCRAFT. Any device of conveyance on the water whether propelled by
motor, engine, wind, or human power.
   WATERS. Waters within the jurisdiction of the District.
   WRITTEN PERMISSION OF THE DIRECTOR. To permit written permission being
granted by authorized agents of the Director.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-7)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of §§
92.01 through
92.07 shall be fined an amount not less than $25 but not more than $200 for
each offense. Restitution may also be asked for in addition to the fine in the
case of damage to District properties.
(Prior Code, § 8-1-6)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LIQUOR REGULATIONS
      
111.   PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTORS
      
112.   AMUSEMENT AND LEISURE
      
113.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
114.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS
      
115.   PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY
      
116.   BICYCLE SALES, REGISTRATION
      
117.   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 110: LIQUOR REGULATIONS
Section
Construction
   
110.001   Title
   
110.002   Liberal construction
   
110.003   Definitions
   
110.004   Incorporation of Illinois Act
Scope of Chapter
   
110.015   Unauthorized sales prohibited
   
110.016   Power to license
Liquor Control Commissioner
   
110.030   Commission
   
110.031   Powers and duties
   
110.032   Compensation
   
110.033   Regulations
   
110.034   Assistant Commissioner
   
110.035   Deposition of fees
Licenses
   
110.050   Application
   
110.051   Managers
   
110.052   Bond
   
110.053   Approval of bond
   
110.054   Leased premises
   
110.055   Multiple premises
   
110.056   Eligibility for a license
   
110.057   Classification
   
110.058   Limitation on number of licenses
   
110.059   Decrease in limitation
   
110.060   License fees
   
110.061   Partial fees
   
110.062   Refund of fees
   
110.063   Payment of fee
   
110.064   Duration of licenses
   
110.065   Hearing
   
110.066   Ruling within 45 days
   
110.067   Refusal to grant license
   
110.068   Form of license
   
110.069   Display
Restrictions
   
110.075   Business hours
   
110.076   New Year’s Eve
   
110.077   Carrying alcoholic liquor in unsealed or open containers from
premises
   
110.078   Persons under legal age
   
110.079   Sale to intoxicated person
   
110.080   Change of ownership
   
110.081   Gambling, prostitution, lewd entertainment, and the like
   
110.082   Sanitation
   
110.083   Telephones
Suspension and Revocation
   
110.095   Grounds
   
110.096   Complaint
   
110.097   Notice
   
110.098   Complaint by Commissioner
   
110.099   Hearing
   
110.100   Appeal
   
110.101   Record of hearings
Violations and Penalties
   
110.997   Acts of agent or employee
   
110.998   Separate offenses
 
   
110.999   Penalties
CONSTRUCTION
§ 110.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “County of Rock Island
Liquor Control Ordinance of 2024,” or “this chapter.”
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.002 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that
the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the county shall be protected.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.003 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, all words and phrases used
in this chapter shall have the same meaning and definition as given to such
words and phrases in the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.),
hereafter referred to as the “Illinois Liquor Control Act”.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.004 INCORPORATION OF ILLINOIS ACT.
   All provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act shall and are hereby made
a part of this chapter, insofar as the provisions of the Act pertain to Rock
Island County.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
SCOPE OF CHAPTER
§ 110.015 UNAUTHORIZED SALES PROHIBITED.
   No person, partnership, club, firm, association, corporation, or any person
acting as an agent, barkeeper, clerk, servant, or employee, or another, shall
sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor within the county, and
outside the corporate limits of any city, village, or incorporated town except
as specifically provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.016 POWER TO LICENSE.
   Subject to the limitations and restrictions provided in this chapter and in
the Illinois Liquor Control Act, the Liquor Control Commission of the county,
hereinafter called the “Commissioner,” may grant licenses for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor within the county and outside the corporate limits of any
city, village, or incorporated town to any person, partnership, club, firm,
association, or corporation qualified to receive such license upon written
application, accompanied by a bond and check as herein set forth.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER
§ 110.030 COMMISSION.
   The Liquor Control Commissioner may appoint a member or members of the
County Board to assist him or her in the exercise of powers and the performance
of the duties herein provided for such Commissioner, and such person(s) shall
be known as the Liquor Control Commission of the county.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.031 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In the event the Commissioner appoints a Liquor Control Commission of the
county, in this chapter when the Commissioner is referred to it shall include
the Liquor Control Commission.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.032 COMPENSATION.
   The compensation and expenses of the Commissioner and his deputies,
assistants, or employees, if any, shall be as authorized by the County Board.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.033 REGULATIONS.
   The Commissioner may adopt such rules and regulations consistent with
provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act, the rules and regulations of the
Illinois Liquor Control Commissioner, and the provisions of this chapter as may
be required to perform properly the functions, duties, and responsibilities of
his or her office for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the
people of the county.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.034 ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER.
   In the event the Commissioner appoints a Liquor Control Commission of the
county, the Commissioner may appoint an Assistant Commissioner who, in the
event the Commissioner is absent from the county or incapacitated, shall
preside at Commission meetings and act for the Commissioner.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.035 DEPOSITION OF FEES.
   All fees collected by the Commissioner hereunder shall be deposited with the
County Treasurer to the credit of the County General Fund.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
LICENSES
§ 110.050 APPLICATION.
   Application for a license or for renewal of a license to sell alcoholic
liquor at retail shall be made in writing under oath on a form prescribed by
the Commissioner. All applications for renewal of licenses must be submitted
not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the licensing period as herein
established. All applications for Class D licenses shall be submitted to the
Commissioner 14 calendar days prior to the date for which said license is to be
in effect. The County Clerk shall prepare a sufficient quantity of the forms
and shall provide the same to the applicant at no additional charge. Each
applicant shall answer all questions on the application form.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.051 MANAGERS.
   Each licensee shall have at least one manager on record with the
Commissioner and include contact information for said manager. Any person in
charge of the day-to-day operations of a licensed establishment shall be
considered a manager of said establishment. Any person acting as manager of a
licensed establishment shall submit to fingerprinting and pay all applicable
fees for said fingerprinting.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.052 BOND.
      Every applicant for a license shall furnish a good and sufficient bond,
the form of which shall be prescribed by the Commissioner, payable to the
people of the state for the use of the county in the sum of $1,000.
      The condition of such bond shall be that if the licensee, or his or her
executor, administrator, or trustee, as the case may be, violates the
provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act, the regulations of the Illinois
Liquor Control Commission, or the provisions of this chapter, said bond
thereupon shall be forfeited.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.053 APPROVAL OF BOND.
   The bond furnished by an applicant must be submitted with the application
for a license and must be approved by the Commissioner prior to the issuance of
a license.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.054 LEASED PREMISES.
      In all cases where the applicant is a lessee of the premises sought to be
licensed, a copy of the applicant’s lease shall be submitted to the
Commissioner with the application for a license.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.055 MULTIPLE PREMISES.
   A separate license shall be required for each individual place of business
operated by a licensee. Such license shall not be transferable from one license
to another except in conformance with the laws of this state.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.056 ELIGIBILITY FOR A LICENSE.
   No license shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the county;
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, unless the Commission determines that such person has been sufficiently
rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth
in such person’s application and the Commission’s investigation. The burden of
proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of prostitution or
keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, promoting prostitution that involves
keeping a place of prostitution, or promoting juvenile prostitution that
involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   (G)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;
   (H)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
   (I)   A copartnership if any general partnership thereof, or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than 5% of the aggregate limited partner
interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than residence within the political subdivision,
unless residency is required by local ordinance;
   (J)   (1)   A corporation or limited liability company if any member,
officer, manager, or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders
owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such corporation, would
not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than
citizenship and residence within the political subdivision;
      (2)   A corporation or limited liability company unless it is
incorporated or organized in the state, or unless it is a foreign corporation
or foreign limited liability company which is qualified under the Business
Corporation Act of 1983 (805 ILCS 511.01 et seq.) or the Limited Liability
Company Act (805 ILCS 18011-1 et seq.) to transact business in the state. The
Commission shall permit and accept from an applicant for a license under this
Act proof prepared from the Secretary of State’s website that the corporation
or limited liability company is in good standing and is qualified under the
Business Corporation Act of 1983 or the Limited Liability Company Act to
transact business in the state;
   (K)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee;
   (L)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this Act or who has forfeited his or her bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
   (M)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;
   (N)   (1)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of local
liquor control commissions; any mayor, alderman, or member of the a city
council or commission; any president of a village board of trustees; any member
of a village board of trustees; or any president or member of a county board;
and no such official shall have a direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a license may be granted to such
official in relation to premises that are not located within the territory
subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is
approved by the State Liquor Control Commission, and except that a license may
be granted in a city or village with a population of 55,000 or less to any
alderman, member of a city council, or member of a village board of trustees in
relation to premises that are located within the territory subject to the
jurisdiction of that official if:
         (a)   The sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is
incidental to the selling of food;
         (b)   The issuance of the license is approved by the State Commission;
         (c)   The issuance of the license is in accordance with all applicable
local ordinances in effect where the premises are located; and
         (d)   The official granted a license does not vote on alcoholic liquor
issues pending before the board or council to which the license holder is
elected.
      (2)   (a)   Notwithstanding any provision of this division (N) to the
contrary, an alderman or member of a city council or commission, a member of a
village board of trustees other than the president of the village board of
trustees, or a member of a county board other than the president of a county
board may have a direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of
alcoholic liquor as long as he or she is not a law enforcing public official, a
mayor, a village board president, or president of a county board.
         (b)   To prevent any conflict of interest, the elected official with
the direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic
liquor shall not participate in any meetings, hearings, or decisions on matters
impacting the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
         (c)   Furthermore, the mayor of a city with a population of 55,000 or
less or the president of a village with a population of 55,000 or less may have
an interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor as
long as the council or board over which he or she presides has made a local
liquor control commissioner appointment that complies with the requirements of
§ 4-2 of the State Liquor Act (235 ILCS 516-2 et seq.);
   (O)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   (P)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of § 28-1 of, or as proscribed by, §
28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012 (720
ILCS 5/28-1,720 ILCS 5/28-1.1, or 720 ILCS 5/28-3), or as proscribed by a
statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;
   (Q)   A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a
license under the Raffles and Poker Runs Act (230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.) or the
Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act (230 ILCS 20/1.1 et seq.);
   (R)   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption
on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts set out in subsection (a) of § 6-21 (235 ILCS 5/6-21
(a));
   (S)   A person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a manufacturer
of beer, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust,
or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business
enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer, having any legal, equitable, or
beneficial interest, directly or indirectly, in a person licensed in the state
as a distributor or importing distributor. For purposes of this division (S), a
person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a “manufacturer of beer”
shall also mean a brewer and a non-resident dealer who is also a manufacturer
of beer, including a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or
trust, or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of
business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer;
   (T)   (1)   A person who is licensed in the state as a distributor or
importing distributor, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, or trust, or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other
form of business enterprise licensed in this state as a distributor or
importing distributor having any legal, equitable, or beneficial interest,
directly or indirectly, in a person licensed as a manufacturer of beer by any
licensing authority, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, or trust, or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other
form of business enterprise, except for a person who owns, on or after the
effective date of this amendatory act of the 98th General Assembly (Pub. Act
98-21), no more than 5% of the outstanding shares of a manufacturer of beer
whose shares are publicly traded on an exchange within the meaning of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934. For the purposes of this division (T), a
person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a “manufacturer of beer”
shall also mean a brewer and a non-resident dealer who is also a manufacturer
of beer, including a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or
trust, or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of
business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer.
      (2)   A criminal conviction of a corporation is not grounds for the
denial, suspension, or revocation of a license applied for or held by the
corporation if the criminal conviction was not the result of a violation of any
federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of
alcoholic liquor, the offense that led to the conviction did not result in any
financial gain to the corporation, and the corporation has terminated its
relationship with each director, officer, employee, or controlling
shareholder whose actions directly contributed to the conviction of the
corporation. The Commission shall determine if all provisions of this division
(T) have been met before any action on the corporation’s license is initiated.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provision, see 235 ILCS 5/3-4.5(a)
§ 110.057 CLASSIFICATION.
   Licenses issued by the Commissioner shall be classified as follows.
   (A)   (1)   A Class A license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for on premises consumption in an establishment wherein a portion of the
premises is reserved for dancing or other entertainment of patrons, or wherein
any such dancing or entertainment is contemplated or customarily provided.
      (2)   Any establishment eligible for a Class AA license shall not be
eligible for a Class A license.
   (B)   A Class AA license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
for on premises consumption on premises operated as a restaurant or other place
for the service of food and operated in connection with a hotel or motel,
provided that said hotel or motel consists of 50 or more rental units, and
provided that a portion of the premises may or may not be reserved for dancing
or other entertainment.
   (C)   A Class AAA license shall authorize the retail sale of liquor for on
premises consumption on premises operated as a restaurant or night club in
which food is served as a major portion of the business and in which live
entertainment is presented.
   (D)   (1)   A Class AAA-1 license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor to be consumed at events outside of establishments possessing
any county liquor license except Class D.
      (2)   The alcoholic beverage shall be consumed only within a beer garden
clearly designated by rope, fence, or other barrier. This license shall be
valid only for the event for which the fee is paid.
   (E)   (1)   A Class B license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption on premises in an establishment wherein no portion of
the premises is reserved for dancing or other entertainment and wherein no
dancing or other entertainment is contemplated or permitted.
      (2)   Any establishment eligible for a Class AA license shall not be
eligible for a Class B license.
   (F)   A Class C license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
in an establishment operated by a club for consumption on the premises by
members of the club and their guests.
   (G)   A Class D license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on premises in a building, temporary structure, or open area
which is being used in connection with an organized picnic, outing, or
entertainment event. A Class D license shall have a duration not to exceed 24
hours and shall be subject to the restrictions set forth in §
110.075.
   (H)   A Class E license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
in an establishment wherein sales are made of the unbroken or original package,
commonly called “package stores”, and wherein no facilities are maintained for
the consumption of alcoholic liquor by patrons, and where no such consumption
is contemplated or permitted on the premises.
   (I)   (1)   A Class E-E license shall authorize the licensee to sell to the
general public, alcoholic liquor in original packages only for the consumption
off the premises where sold and shall authorize beer and wine, in conjunction
with video gaming, be sold for consumption on the specified premises. Class E-
E license holders are allowed to apply for a video gaming license through the
state and county. A Class E-E license is exclusive to gas stations/convenience
that are not considered a licensed truck stop. The operation of video gaming
terminals shall be ancillary to the operation of the premises as a gas station
or convenience store. Convenience stores shall be defined as a small sized
mercantile store or shop that offers a limited range of grocery and other items
that people are likely to need or want as a matter of a convenient supplement
to larger stores.
      (2)   The service of beer and wine is limited to one drink per hour per
video gaming customer or patron of the premises, and no such customer or patron
shall be served more than two beer or wine beverages during the permitted hours
of video gaming and retail sale of beer or wine during any one calendar day.
      (3)   It is intended that the service of beer and wine is ancillary to
the operation of a gas station or convenience store that holds a valid video
gaming license with the state and the county and shall not be advertised or
otherwise held out to be a drinking establishment. The license holder shall not
serve beer or wine to a patron without their age having been first verified.
All beer or wine beverages shall be poured from their original containers into
a clear container before serving to a patron. No cans or glass containers shall
be allowed.
      (4)   Beer or wine service shall only be provided to patrons who are
actively playing on video gaming terminals. Beer or wine beverages may not be
removed from the designated gaming area at any time.
      (5)   No happy hour practices shall be allowed on the licensed premises.
No patio, beer garden, or similar area is allowed on the licensed premises for
alcohol consumption. The license holder shall adhere to the county’s closing
hours.
      (6)   No window or any other signage shall be permitted on the specified
premises or surrounding property that indicates that alcoholic beverages are
available for consumption at the specified premises.
      (7)   Establishments shall be subject to all building and zoning
regulations, current adopted county, state and accessibility codes; including
review and approval of site plans.
   (J)   A Class F license shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor and for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a golf
clubhouse and on the golf course grounds, including from beverage carts in an
establishment operated in conjunction with a golf course consisting of nine or
more holes or in conjunction with other seasonal recreational sites such as ski
parks.
   (K)   A Class G license shall authorize the retail sale of packaged
alcoholic liquor on a seasonal basis, such as at a farmer’s market. Class G
licenses are only issued to state-licensed liquor retailers to transfer a
portion of their alcoholic liquor inventory from their licensed premises to a
designated site for a special event. A Class G special use permit liquor
license must be obtained for each location and cannot exceed 15 days in
duration. Class G licenses shall be subject to the restrictions set forth in §
110.075.
   (L)   A Class H license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
on premises operated as a restaurant or other place for the service of food,
and connected patio or deck areas confined as such, wherein the consumption of
packaged goods is prohibited, and operated in connection with a resort/camp
ground, provided that said resort/camp ground consists of 25 or more rental
spaces, and shall further authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in a
separate establishment within the same resort/camp ground aforementioned
wherein are made of unbroken or original package, commonly called “package
stores.”
   (M)   A Class I catering license allows catering companies or restaurants,
whether located within or outside of Rock Island County, to cater and serve and
engage in the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages for sale and consumption at
a specified private function located exclusively within Rock Island County only
jurisdiction.
      (1)   The fee for a Class I license shall be $200 per day (§
110.060). Events lasting for more than one calendar day must obtain and pay for
a new license for each day of the event.
      (2)   Such license shall not be transferable from one license to another,
except in conformance with the laws of this state.
      (3)   The catering business must abide by all county liquor licensing
requirements; prior to the issuance of an original or renewal Class I catering
license; the licensee must provide a copy of their State of Illinois Liquor
License, and their State of Illinois seller’s license.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024; Ord. 2024-06-A, passed 6-18-2024)
§ 110.058 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF LICENSING.
   (A)   The total number of liquor licenses in effect at any one time for each
respective class shall be limited as follows:
      (1)   The total number of Class A, Class B, and Class E licenses shall
not exceed 30 in total, provided that there shall be no limitation in such
classes separately;
      (2)   The total number of Class AA licenses shall not exceed five;
      (3)   The total number of Class AAA licenses shall not exceed five;
      (4)   The total number of Class F licenses shall not exceed eight; and
      (5)   Class G licenses shall not be issued in such a manner as to permit
the sale of alcoholic liquor in excess of 15 days as per state statute.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.059 DECREASE IN LIMITATION.
   Reserved.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.060 LICENSE FEES.
   The amount of the license fees for the respective classes herein shall be as
follows:
Class A $1,320
Class A     $1,320
Class AA    $1,694
Class AAA   $2,057
Class AAA-1 $35 per event
Class B     $1,100
Class C     $550
Class D     $82.50
Class E     $1,100
Class E-E   $1,320
Class F     $907.50
Class G     $100 per five events
Class H     $2,794
Class I     $200 per day
 
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024; Ord. 2024-07-A, passed 7-16-2024)
§ 110.061 PARTIAL FEES.
   If a new license is issued by the Commissioner between April 30 and October
30 of any year, the full amount of fees provided herein shall be paid. If a new
license is issued between November 1 and April 30 of any year, only half of
such fees shall be paid. This section shall not apply to any Class D licenses
or to renewals of licenses of any class.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.062 REFUND OF FEES.
   Licensees who have paid the entire amount of license fees as provided herein
shall be entitled to a refund of half of the license fee paid only in the
following instances:
   (A)   When the premises licensed is located in an area which is lawfully
annexed to any city or village and when such annexation is completed during the
first six months of a licensing period; or
   (B)   When the licensee dies and, under 235 ILCS 5/6-1 of the Illinois
Liquor Control Act, the licensed business is terminated during the first six
months of a licensing period, or when in such case, the licensed business
continues to operate under a new license and such new license is issued during
the first six months of a licensing period.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.063 PAYMENT OF FEE.
   Every application for a license or renewal of a license shall be accompanied
by full payment of the required license fee by check, cashier’s check, money
order, or cash. No license shall be issued or renewed until such fee has been
fully paid. Application fees shall be refunded if the application for a license
or renewal is denied. In the event any check, cashier’s check, or money order
accepted in payment is not paid by the bank or other entity upon which it is
drawn for any reason, the license of the applicant shall be subject to
revocation by the Commissioner unless the applicant makes full payment of the
license fee in cash with a penalty of an additional $10 within five days of
having been notified of nonpayment by the Commissioner.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.064 DURATION OF LICENSES.
   All licenses, except Class D licenses, shall expire at 12:00 midnight on
April 30 following issuance of the license each year. No license shall be valid
for a period greater than one year. Class D licenses shall be valid for a
period not to exceed 24 hours.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.065 HEARING.
      Whenever the Commissioner receives an application for a new license other
than for a Class D license, he or she shall hold a public hearing and afford
all persons interested therein an opportunity to be heard. The Commissioner
shall cause to be published once a notice of the time and place of such
hearing, the name of the applicant, and the proposed location of the premises.
Said notice shall appear in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
not more than ten days, nor fewer than five days prior to the date of said
hearing.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.066 RULING WITHIN 45 DAYS.
   The Commissioner shall grant or refuse to grant a license no later than 45
days after the receipt of the prescribed application for said license.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.067 REFUSAL TO GRANT LICENSE.
   (A)   The Commissioner may deny any liquor license authorized under this
chapter and state law. Such denial shall be in writing specifying the reason
therefor.
   (B)   The applicant may request a hearing to dispute the Commissioner’s
denial. Such hearing shall be made public and held upon notice to all
interested parties and such other persons or entities required to be notified.
   (C)   The decision of the Commissioner shall be rendered in a written order
granting or denying the license. A copy of the order shall be mailed to the
applicant.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.068 FORM OF LICENSE.
   All liquor licenses issued by the Commissioner shall be in such form as he
or she may prescribe, subject to the provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control
Act.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.069 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee shall cause his or her license to be framed and hung in plain
view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
RESTRICTIONS
§ 110.075 BUSINESS HOURS.
   (A)   (1)   No licensee shall sell, offer for sale, give, or permit the
consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises from 2:00 a.m. until
7:00 a.m. each day. Class AAA licensees shall be permitted to remain open every
day until 3:00 a.m., except on those days on which licensees are prohibited
from selling liquor.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to be open for business,
admit the public to, permit the public to remain within, or permit the
consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises during the hours in
which the sale of liquor is prohibited. The term PUBLIC shall not be construed
in such a manner as to include the licensee or employee of any licensee.
Hotels, motels, and airports may conduct business during those hours in which
the sale, gift, or consumption of alcoholic liquor is prohibited as set forth
in division (A)(1) above but are subject to that provision as it relates to the
sale, gift, or consumption of alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.076 NEW YEAR’S EVE.
   (A)   The closing hours provided for in this chapter are hereby extended for
a period of one hour on New Year’s Eve provided that the licensed establishment
not permit any additional patrons on its premises after the normal closing
hours provided for in this chapter and further provided that the licensed
establishment not advertise or indicate in any manner that it is still open for
business after the normal closing hours provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   If, during the hour referred to in division (A) above, any disturbance
occurs on the licensed premises which appears to endanger the lives, property,
or person of the patrons of a licensed premise, the Sheriff or Commissioner or
his/her delegates may order the licensed establishment to close its business
until the next business day and may order all patrons to leave the premises
immediately.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.077 CARRYING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN UNSEALED OR OPEN CONTAINERS FROM
PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any alcoholic liquors in an
unsealed or opened container from the licensed premises where such alcoholic
liquor was purchased. No licensee, agent, or employee shall knowingly permit
any patron to violate this section or sell alcoholic liquors to such person
knowing that such person intends to carry the alcoholic liquor from the
premises in an open or unsealed container.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.078 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
   (A)   (1)   No person under 21 years of age shall be employed in any
premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor except for the
purposes of preparing or serving food, providing entertainment, and/or
providing maintenance or cleanup services.
      (2)   At no time shall a person under 21 years of age tend any bar or
pour, handle, mix, draw, sell, or serve any alcoholic liquor on any premises
licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No licensee, agent, or employee of a licensee shall permit a person
less than 21 years of age to enter into or remain within any portion, room, or
compartment within a licensed premises wherein alcoholic liquor is drawn,
poured, or mixed. For any violation of this section, it shall be an affirmative
defense if the licensee qualifies under the following:
      (1)   A person under 21 years of age may be in a liquor licensed premises
which is also a motor fuel station or store which receives 51% or more of its
annual gross revenue from the sale of food, other services, or commodities, for
the purpose of obtaining and/or consuming food or purchasing items other than
alcoholic liquor. If the alcohol is stored or stocked in a separate section
from the rest of the store, persons under 21 years of age may not be in that
section.
      (2)   A person under 21 years of age may be in a liquor licensed premises
which is also a restaurant with a full service kitchen, diverse menu, and food
being prepared on the premises for the purpose of consuming food and
nonalcoholic beverages. A person under 21 years of age may not be seated at the
bar of the premises. This qualification shall be applicable only until the time
at which the premises stops serving a full menu. If the premises serves a full
menu at all hours, persons under 21 years of age must leave the premises by 11:
00 p.m. All persons under 21 must be accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   (C)   No person under the age of 21 shall buy, attempt to buy, accept,
receive, or consume any alcoholic liquor in or around any licensed premises.
   (D)   (1)   If a licensee, agent, or employee of a licensee believes that
sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the minority of
the prospective recipient, he or she shall, before making such sale or
delivery, demand presentation of some form of acceptable identification
containing proof of age. The acceptance must be made in reasonable reliance
that the person presenting the identification is, in fact, of legal age and the
same person pictured on the ID.
      (2)   The following are acceptable forms of identification for the
purposes of entering a licensed establishment and/or purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor: vehicle operator’s license, state photo identification card,
passport, or visa. No person on a licensed premises shall refuse to show proof
of his or her age when asked to do so by the licensee, agent, or employee. Any
person who fails to produce positive proof of age when requested shall
immediately leave the premises.
      (3)   With respect to any identifying document containing proof of age,
no person shall:
         (a)   Alter or deface such identifying document;
         (b)   Present identifying documents belonging to another person as his
or her own;
         (c)   Carry or use a false or forged identification document; or
         (d)   Obtain any document establishing identity by means of false
information.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.079 SALE TO INTOXICATED PERSON.
   No licensee, agent, or employee shall sell, give, or deliver alcohol to any
person known to him or her to be intoxicated.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.080 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.
   All licensees shall report to the Commissioner in writing within 30 days any
changes in ownership of the licensed business, provided that the corporate
licensees shall report internal changes by officers and stockholders owning in
the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such corporation. With any change in
ownership, the liquor license shall expire and any new owners must apply for a
new license in compliance with this chapter and the Liquor Control Act.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.081 GAMBLING, PROSTITUTION, LEWD ENTERTAINMENT, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No gambling devices shall be kept on premises or used for the purpose
of gambling upon the licensed premises, nor shall any gambling be allowed upon
the licensed premises, except as allowed under the Illinois Gaming Act and the
county video gaming ordinance, and unless such premises holds a current license
for each such device.
   (B)   No pinball machines, video games, jukeboxes, or other coin-in slot
mechanical amusement devices shall be kept on a licensed premises unless such
premises holds a current license for such device.
   (C)   No licensee, officer, agent, partner, or employee of any licensee
shall possess a Federal Occupational Wagering Stamp or a $250 Annual
Occupational Gaming Device Stamp issued by the internal revenue authorities of
the United States for the licensed premises.
   (D)   No licensee shall knowingly permit or commit upon the licensed
premises any act of prostitution, soliciting a prostitute, patronizing a
prostitute, or pimping as defined by statute.
   (E)   No licensee shall permit indecent, lewd, or obscene entertainment to
be performed upon the licensed premises.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.082 SANITATION.
   All premises, equipment, and utensils used shall be kept in a sanitary
condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions of all
ordinances of the county regulating the condition of premises. All licensed
premises shall have running water at any service bar, and shall have and
maintain clean and sanitary toilets and toilet rooms with separate toilet
facilities for men and women. All licensees shall keep and maintain the
licensed premises in full compliance with the law of the state regulating the
condition of premises used for storage or sale of food for human consumption.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.083 TELEPHONES.
   (A)   Each licensee shall maintain on each licensed premises not less than
one telephone in operating order.
   (B)   The telephone must be within easy access of the bartender or other
responsible person in charge of the premises for the purpose of reporting to
the Sheriff’s Department any fights, riots, or disturbances of the peace.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION
§ 110.095 GROUNDS.
   Any license issued by the Commissioner under the authority of this chapter
may be revoked or suspended for a period nor to exceed 30 days for any of the
following reasons:
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter or the regulations
promulgated by the Commissioner;
   (B)   Violation of any provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Law or
rules and regulations of the State Liquor Control Commission;
   (C)   Violation of any provisions of the Illinois Criminal Code as amended
(720 ILCS 5/ et seq.);
   (D)   Making a false statement as to any material fact in the application
for a license;
   (E)   Any act, occurrence, or event which would cause the licensee to be
ineligible for a new license under the provisions of this chapter;
   (F)   Closure, abandonment, or cessation of the licensed business for a
period of more than 30 days; and
   (G)   Failure to pay the application fee for issuance or renewal of a
license after dishonor of a check, cashier’s check, or money order used for
such purpose, by the bank or other entity or agency upon which it is drawn, in
the manner and within the time required by §
110.063.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.096 COMPLAINT.
   Any five residents of the county may file a written complaint with the
Commissioner stating that any license, subject to the jurisdiction of the
Commissioner, has committed any act or omission constituting grounds for
suspension or revocation. Such written complaint shall be in the form
prescribed by the Commissioner and shall be signed and sworn by the parties
complaining. Such complaint shall state the particular provision, rule, or
regulation believed to have been violated and the facts upon which such belief
is based.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.097 NOTICE.
   Notice as herein required shall be given by mailing the notice and complaint
to the licensed place of business by registered mail, postage prepaid, by
leaving a copy of said notice and complaint at the licensed place of business,
or by posting a copy of said notice and complaint upon the licensed premises,
provided that said notice be so given at least three days prior to the date set
for hearing.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.098 COMPLAINT BY COMMISSIONER.
   The Commissioner or any member of the Rock Island County Liquor Control
Commission may file a written complaint with the Commissioner in the same form
and manner and in conformity with the same procedure set forth in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.099 HEARING.
   (A)   If the Commissioner finds that the complaint substantially charges a
violation of the Illinois Liquor Control Act or this chapter and finds that,
from the facts alleged, there is a reasonable cause for such belief, he or she
shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve upon the licensee a copy of
the complaint and notice of the time and place of such hearing.
   (B)   Such hearing shall be public and a record shall be made by sound or
video. The licensee may be represented by legal counsel licensed to practice
law in the state. All witnesses shall testify under oath administered by the
Commissioner or other person authorized to administer such oath in the state.
Such hearing need not be conducted according to the strict rules of evidence
and procedure followed in a court of law, however such hearings shall be
conducted in a fair and impartial manner to all concerned. On motion of the
licensee, the three-day written notice of hearing may be waived in whole or in
part. Any licensee may, at his or her option, waive the right to a public
hearing on the suspension or revocation of his or her license. In such an
event, the Commissioner may order any suspension, revocation, or make any other
order which would be appropriate upon a finding of a violation at the
conclusion of a public hearing. The licensee shall indicate such waiver in
writing to the Commissioner at the time prior to the commencement of the public
hearing.
   (C)   The Commissioner shall, within five days after such hearing, if he or
she determines that the license should be revoked or suspended, state the
reason(s) for such determination in a written order of revocation or
suspension, and shall serve a copy of such order within the said five days upon
said licensee.
   (D)   The Commissioner shall report in writing to the Illinois Liquor
Control Commissioner within ten days after an order has been entered for a
violation by any retail alcoholic liquor licensee of any state law or county
ordinance. The report shall specify the date and place where the hearing was
held or whether the licensee waived the hearing; whether a suspension or
revocation was entered therein; or what other disposition was made or entered
in the Commissioner’s records.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.100 APPEAL.
   All decisions of the Commissioner to deny, revoke, or suspend a liquor
license may be appealed to the State Liquor Commissioner as provided by 235
ILCS 5/7-9.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.101 RECORD OF HEARINGS.
   An official record of proceedings of all public hearings before the
Commissioner or any person appointed to conduct liquor investigations and
disciplinary hearings shall be made by sound or sound and video recording. Any
party to the hearing desiring an official court reporter to take the records
shall bear the expense thereof. Any appeal of any order or action taken by the
Commissioner shall be limited to a review of such official record.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
§ 110.997 ACTS OF AGENT OR EMPLOYEE.
   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager, agent, or
employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to the act of such licensee.
Said licensee shall be subject to suspension or revocation of his or her
license or modification of hours of operation, and subject to criminal
prosecution and punishment in the same manner as if said act or omission had
been done or omitted by him or her personally.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.998 SEPARATE OFFENSES.
   Whenever provisions of this chapter are violated, a separate offense shall
be deemed committed during each day the violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, partnership, club, firm, association, or corporation who
is found by the Commission hearing to have violated any provision of this
chapter or any of the rules or regulations of the Commissioner shall be
penalized as follows:
      (1)   First offense, fined not less than $250 nor more than $500; and
      (2)   Subsequent offenses, fined not less than $350 nor more than $500
and/or the suspension or revocation of his or her liquor license for three to
ten days.
   (B)   Any person who violates the age requirements of this chapter shall be
fined $100 for the first offense and $200 for each subsequent offense.
   (C)   Any penalty imposed hereunder shall in no way affect the power of the
Commissioner to revoke or suspend the license of the licensee or to modify
hours of operation.
(Ord. 2024-03-A, passed 3-21-2024)
CHAPTER 111: PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTORS
Section
Plumbing
   
111.01   Contractor’s license required
   
111.02   Suspension, revocation of contractor’s license
Refuse Disposal
   
111.15   Refuse hauler’s license required
   
111.16   Suspension, revocation of refuse hauler’s license
PLUMBING
§ 111.01 CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, except as provided for in division (A)(1) below, shall
engage in the construction, installation, extension, or repair of private
sewage disposal systems in the county unless such person possesses a valid
county private sewage disposal system installation contractor’s license issued
by the Health Department.
      (1)   Exceptions. A county private sewage disposal system installation
contractor’s license shall not be required of a resident property owner or
intended resident property owner who may personally work on his or her own
single-family residence; this does not apply to builders of speculative homes.
However, such exception does not relieve the property owner from obtaining a
permit to install and from complying with the other requirements of this
section.
      (2)   Application. Application for a county private sewage disposal
system installation contractor’s license shall be in writing and in such form
as prescribed by the Health Department.
      (3)   Issuance of license.
         (a)   Upon submission of the application for license, the Health
Authority shall review:
            1.   Information provided on the application;
            2.   The applicant’s work record with respect to previous
compliance with provisions of this section (if applicable); and
            3.   Other pertinent information regarding qualifications,
experience, and equipment as deemed necessary by the Health Authority.
         (b)   The applicant shall also possess a valid state private sewage
disposal system installation contractor’s license. If the Health Authority
determines that the applicant has the proper qualifications and equipment, and
has previously operated in compliance with provisions of this section (if
applicable), and upon payment of the required fee, a licenses shall be issued
to the applicant. Licenses are issued annually and shall expire May 31 of each
year.
      (4)   License fee. The fee for a county private sewage disposal system
installation contractor’s license shall be $225 per year. However, if
application is made after December 1, the license fee shall be $125.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-13)
   (B)   No person shall pump, clean, or service septic tanks, seepage pits,
cesspools, or other sewage treatment or disposal units in the county unless
such person possesses a valid county private sewage disposal system pumping
contractor’s license issued by the Health Department.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-14) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.02 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE.
   (A)   For serious or repeated violation of any of the requirements of §
111.01 because of, but not limited to, incompetency, negligence, or
misrepresentation, or for interference with the Health Authority in the
performance of his or her duties, the county private sewage disposal system
installation contractor’s license and/or private sewage disposal system pumping
contractor’s license for this operator may be suspended or revoked after an
opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the Health Department
Administrator.
   (B)   Prior to such action, the Health Department Administrator shall notify
the operator in writing, stating the reasons for which the license or licenses
are subject to suspension or revocation, and advising that such license or
licenses shall be suspended or revoked at the end of five days following
service of notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with the Health
Department Administrator, by the license holder, within such five-day period.
   (C)   However, a county private sewage disposal system installation
contractor’s license may be suspended without warning, notice, or hearing by
the Health Authority if the licensee’s actions pose a substantial hazard to the
public health.
(Prior Code, § 4-4-15) (Ord. passed 6-16-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-1995; Ord.
passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
REFUSE DISPOSAL
§ 111.15 REFUSE HAULER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, except as provided in division (A) below, shall conduct a refuse
transporting, processing, or disposal business, nor conduct a refuse container
cleaning business in the county unless such person possesses a valid county
refuse hauler’s license issued by the Health Department.
   (A)   Exceptions. A county refuse hauler’s license shall not be required of
a property owner or tenant who may personally remove refuse generated on such
single-family property. However, such exception does not relieve the property
owner or tenant from complying with the other requirements of this subchapter.
Nor shall said license be required of a public or municipal refuse hauling
business operating in the county.
   (B)   Application. Application for a county refuse hauler’s license shall be
in writing and in such form as prescribed by the Health Department.
   (C)   License fee. The annual fee for a county refuse hauler’s license shall
be as follows, based upon the number and type of refuse hauling vehicles and
the number of container cleaning and/or refuse processing sites operating
within the county as set forth in the application for license:
 
Container cleaning or refuse                      $300 per site
Enclosed packer type vehicle:                     $225 per vehicle
(Operating one or more days per week)
Nonpacker vehicle with stationary or roll-off box $175 per vehicle
 
   (D)   Processing sites. Licenses shall begin on December 1 and shall expire
the following November 30. A license shall apply to any vehicle described in
the application and to any replacement of such vehicle upon approval of the
Health Authority, but a license may not be transferred from one person to
another person. A license applying to a site(s) shall not be valid for any
other site(s) other than those listed on the application.
   (E)   Performance standards. The following standards for applicable
vehicles, facilities, or equipment shall be met on an ongoing basis by holders
or applicants of a county refuse hauler’s license.
      (1)   Each refuse hauling vehicle shall be in good mechanical condition.
      (2)   Each refuse hauling vehicle shall be maintained in a safe, clean,
and sanitary condition, and shall be constructed, maintained, and operated to
prevent spillage of solid waste and/or liquid waste. Each refuse hauling
vehicle shall be constructed with a watertight body and cover which shall be an
integral part of the vehicle, or under conditions approved by the Health
Authority, there shall be a separate cover of suitable material with fasteners
designed to secure all sides of the cover to the vehicle. Such cover shall be
secured in place whenever the vehicle is transporting refuse. For refuse
haulers with a regular collection route, only an enclosed packer type vehicle
with exposed loading hopper shall be permitted. No refuse shall be transported
in the loading hopper.
      (3)   Overnight parking of a loaded refuse hauling vehicle on public or
private property is prohibited.
      (4)   A shovel and broom shall be kept on each refuse hauling vehicle for
the purpose of cleaning up spillage.
      (5)   Each refuse hauling vehicle container transported to any location
of use shall be properly identified with the operator’s business name and of
adequate letter size so as to be distinguishable at a reasonable distance.
Letters should not be in any case less than four inches high.
      (6)   Current lists of customers shall be supplied to the Health
Authority upon request.
      (7)   Licensed refuse haulers must comply with all applicable ordinances
and laws of the county and the state regarding the operation of their business.
      (8)   The license or a photostatic copy of the county refuse hauler’s
license must be kept on each vehicle.
      (9)   Proof of ownership or of lease of a vehicle or vehicles shall be
provided at the time of application.
      (10)   When a complaint is received regarding noise created by the
operation of refuse collection vehicles and/or crews, the Health Department
Administrator may, upon review of the complaint, set the hours of collection so
that the noise does not unduly disturb the neighborhood.
      (11)   Licensed refuse haulers shall be responsive to legitimate requests
from the Health Department for inquiry or action of such refuse haulers
regarding collection, payment by customers, and the like.
   (F)   Issuance of license.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the required application, the Health Authority
shall make an inspection of each vehicle or facility to ascertain whether the
applicable performance standards of this section are being met. Each vehicle of
the facility shall be inspected at a mutually-agreed upon time and location.
      (2)   If the Health Authority, after such inspection of equipment and
investigation, is satisfied that the applicant has the qualifications or
knowledge and equipment to perform the services in a manner not detrimental to
public health, and upon payment of the required fee, a license shall be issued
to the applicant. Such license shall expire November 30 of each year. The same
license number shall be reissued yearly, unless revoked by the Health
Department Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-7) (Ord. passed 4-16-1985; Ord. passed 4-21-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 111.16 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF REFUSE HAULER’S LICENSE.
   Whenever a license holder has failed to comply with any part of this
subchapter, the Health Authority may give a written notice to request
compliance within a specified time. Upon failure by the license holder to
comply with such notice in the time prescribed, the license may be suspended or
revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the Health
Department Administrator. Prior to such action, the Health Department
Administrator shall notify the operator in writing, stating the reasons for
which the county refuse hauler’s license is subject to suspension or
revocation, and advising that said license shall be suspended or revoked at the
end of five days following service of such notice, unless a request for a
hearing is filed with the Health Department Administrator, by the license
holder, within such five-day period. A county refuse hauler’s license may be
suspended for a cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto.
(Prior Code, § 4-5-9) (Ord. passed 4-16-1985; Ord. passed 4-21-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-22-1998; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENT AND LEISURE
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Pinball machines to be licensed
Video Gaming Terminals
   
112.15   Fee
   
112.16   Definitions
   
112.17   License required
   
112.18   Number of devices allowed
   
112.19   Application form required
   
112.20   Length of license
   
112.21   License not transferable
   
112.22   Regulation on disturbing the peace
   
112.23   Conditions; suspension or revocation of license
   
112.24   Information requirement
   
112.25   Time of application
Raffles, Poker Runs
   
112.40   Jurisdiction
   
112.41   Definitions
   
112.42   Commission
   
112.43   Application, licensing
   
112.44   Classification of license and fees
   
112.45   Conduct of raffles
   
112.46   Manager bond
   
112.47   Records
   
112.48   Issuance, suspension, revocation of license
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 PINBALL MACHINES TO BE LICENSED.
   (A)   Individual pinball machines shall be licensed in the unincorporated
areas of the county.
   (B)   The fee of $20 shall be charged per machine.
   (C)   The licensing of pinball machines to be effective May 1, 1977 and
shall be renewable on May 1 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 2-1-2) (Res. passed 4-19-1977)
VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS
§ 112.15 FEE.
   There is hereby imposed on the privilege of operating every video gaming
terminal in the county, as defined by the State Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/
1 et seq., an annual fee of $25 for each terminal.
(Ord. passed 10-16-2012)
§ 112.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   PERSON. As used herein shall include any person, firm, corporation or
association, or partnership, which, as permitted by state law and regulation,
owns or possesses or places for use by the public any video gaming terminal,
and shall also mean any such person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
association having control over any video gaming terminal.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. The same meaning as set forth in the State Gaming
Act, 230 ILCS 40/65.
(Ord. passed 10-16-2012)
§ 112.17 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall own, possess, keep, or display for use or patronage by the
public within the county any video gaming terminal without having first
obtained a license from the county, through the County Board office, and said
license shall be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises. The posted license may include more than one terminal on the
licensed premises. It shall be a prerequisite to any license from the county
that the person have a valid license from the state for each video gaming
terminal and the loss or suspension of any license issued by the state shall
automatically result in the loss and suspension of the licenses issued by the
county, without refund of any license fee. Pursuant to state regulation, the
county, through the County Board office, shall report to the state any
discipline or change in status of any video gaming license issued by the
county.
(Ord. passed 10-16-2012)
§ 112.18 NUMBER OF DEVICES ALLOWED.
   The number of video gaming terminal devices permitted upon a licensed
premises at any one time shall not exceed that number authorized in the
licenses issued for said premises by the state.
(Ord. passed 10-16-2012)
§ 112.19 APPLICATION FORM REQUIRED.
   An application for a video gaming license shall be made to the County Board
Chairperson on forms furnished by the County Clerk’s office. The application
shall set forth the number of video gaming terminals sought for the licensed
premises; shall include a copy of the license from the state for each video
gaming terminal for which an application to the county is being made; and shall
be accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee.
(Ord. passed 10-16-2012)
§ 112.20 LENGTH OF LICENSE.
   Every license granted hereunder shall expire on April 30. The fee shall not
be prorated.
(Ord. passed 10-16-2012)
§ 112.21 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No license issued to any person hereunder shall be transferable to any other
person or for any other premises other than as set forth on the license.
Application must be made annually.
(Ord. passed 10-16-2012)
§ 112.22 REGULATION ON DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   No license issued under this subchapter shall permit the operation of any
video gaming terminal at any place or in any manner which will disturb the
peace and quiet of persons outside, or beyond the premises on which the
terminal is being used. No lewd or obscene selection shall be presented in any
video gaming terminal.
(Ord. passed 10-16-2012)
§ 112.23 CONDITIONS; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   In addition to any other condition or regulation contained in this
subchapter or in the laws of the state, no video gaming terminal shall be
located in any establishment that does not qualify as a licensed establishment
as that term is defined in the State Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40 et seq.
   (B)   The County Board Chairperson may suspend or revoke any license issued
under this subchapter upon due notice to the licensee at the time and place of
a public hearing and after a public hearing, if the County Board Chairperson
determines that the licensee has failed or refused to comply with any provision
in this subchapter, has failed or refused to comply with other law applicable
to the business of keeping or providing video gaming terminals, or has been
convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of a violation of any provision
of this subchapter or the State Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40.
(Ord. passed 10-16-2012)
§ 112.24 INFORMATION REQUIREMENT.
   Applications for the license required above shall be filed in duplicate with
the County Board Chairperson’s office (with one of said copies being retained,
each, by the County Board Chairperson’s office and by the applicant), and shall
contain the following information:
   (A)   If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company:
      (1)   Corporate name and address;
      (2)   Names, dates of birth, and addresses of corporate officers and
directors;
      (3)   Statement of principal kind of business in which corporation
engages;
      (4)   Statement of whether corporate business will be conducted by a
manager, and the name, address, and authority of any such manager or agent;
      (5)   Names, dates of birth, and addresses of all persons, firms, and
organizations owning of record 5% or more of the corporation’s stock;
      (6)   Statement of whether any officer, manager, director, or shareholder
owning 5% or more of the stock of the corporation has ever been convicted of a
felony charge;
      (7)   The location of the place of business where the video gaming
terminal is to be kept or displayed;
      (8)   Statement or personal history of the manager or agent conducting
business for the corporation; and
      (9)   Any other information which the County Board Chairperson shall
require.
   (B)   If the applicant is an individual, partnership, or association:
      (1)   The name and address and date of birth of the applicant;
      (2)   Location of place of business;
      (3)   Principal kind of business engaged in;
      (4)   Statement of whether business will be conducted by a manager or
agent, and the name and address and date of birth of any such manager or agent;
      (5)   The location of the place of business where the video gaming
terminal is to be kept or displayed;
      (6)   Statement of personal history of the manager or agency conducting
business for the applicant; and
      (7)   Any other information which the County Board Chairperson shall
require.   
(Ord. passed 10-16-2012)
§ 112.25 TIME OF APPLICATION.
   Any such application submitted above shall be submitted at least 30 days
prior to the commencement of the period for which the license is sought.
(Ord. passed 10-16-2012)
RAFFLES, POKER RUNS
§ 112.40 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter shall be effective in all the areas of the county outside
the corporate limits of any city, town, or village and also within the
corporate limits of any city, town, or village in the county where there is, in
effect, a written contract between the governing body of said city, town, or
village and the County Board for joining in the licensing of organizations to
operate raffles and poker runs.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2014)
§ 112.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses
who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial, and
civic interests of a community.
   CHARITABLE.
      (1)   An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an
indefinite number of the public.
      (2)   The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also
confer some benefit on the public.
   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provided systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorable in the
scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported
schools.
   FRATERNAL. An organization or persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   HARDSHIP. A non-profit fundraising organization that has not been in
existence continuously for a period of five years immediately before making
application for a license that the county determines to be organized for the
sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or
group or individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an
illness, disability, accident, or disaster.
   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objectives of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such, pursuant to the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles and poker runs,
less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees, and other
reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle or
poker run.
   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
for-profit basis with no personal profit ensuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined by § 28-2(b) of the Criminal Code of
1961 conducted by an organization licensed under the subchapter, in which:
      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
presented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers, or by
some other medium, one or more of which chance is to be designated the winning
chance; and
      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the
party or persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the
winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly-exhibited
sporting contest.
   POKER RUN. An event organized by an organization licensed under this
subchapter in which participants travel to multiple predetermined locations,
including a key location, drawing a playing card or equivalent item at each
location, in order to assemble a facsimile of a poker hand or other numeric
score. POKER RUN includes dice runs, marble runs, or other events where the
objective is to build the best hand or highest score by obtaining an item at
each location.
   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for
the purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members of whom
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2014)
§ 112.42 COMMISSION.
   (A)   Commissioner. The Chairperson of the County Board shall be the Raffle
and Poker Run Licensing Commissioner and shall head the Raffle and Poker Run
Licensing Commission appointed in accordance with the terms of this subchapter.
   (B)   Members. The Raffle and Poker Run Licensing Commission shall consist
of the members of the Finance Committee of the County Board.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2014)
§ 112.43 APPLICATION, LICENSING.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, in the territory
of the county under the jurisdiction of this subchapter, any raffle chance
without first obtaining a license to operate a raffle or in violation of the
terms of said license.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business, corporation,
organization, or other entity to conduct or operate a poker run without having
first obtaining a license to operate a poker run or in violation of the terms
of said license.
   (B)   (1)   Application for said license shall be made in writing by the
applicant and filed with the County Board Office. Such application shall be
accompanied by the appropriate filing fee, if any, as required herein. Such fee
shall be cash, check, or money order.
      (2)   The County Board office shall refer the application as required
herein and shall remit the fee to the County Treasurer if the license is
issued.
   (C)   The Raffle and Poker Run Licensing Commissioner, or his or her
designee, shall review all applications for Class A and Class B licenses and
shall, if such application is in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter, issue said license. Class A and Class B applications shall be acted
upon within 30 days from the date of filing such application.
   (D)   (1)   The Raffle and Poker Run Licensing Commission shall review all
applications for Class C licenses, and, if such application is in compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter, shall issue said license. The
Commission shall act upon a license application within 30 days from the date of
application.
      (2)   The Raffle and Poker Run Licensing Commission shall review all
applications for Class D license and shall, if such application is in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, recommend to the County
Board that the license be issued. The Commission shall review applications for
Class D licenses within 30 days from the date of the application.
      (3)   The County Board shall review all applications for Class D license
after said applications have first been reviewed and recommended by the Raffle
and Poker Run Licensing Commission. If such application is in compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter, the Board shall issue said license within 60
days from the date of the application.
   (E)   Licenses shall be issued only to bonafide religious, charitable,
labor, fraternal, educational, business, or veterans organizations that operate
without profit to the members and which have been in existence continuously for
a period of five years immediately before making application for a license and
which have had during that entire five years a bonafide membership engaged in
carrying out their objects, or to a non-profit fundraising organization that
the county determines to be organized for the sole purpose of providing
financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals
suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability,
accident, or disaster.
   (F)   Licenses issued are subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   Licenses for raffles are subject to the following:
         (a)   No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances
without first obtaining a license therefor pursuant to this subchapter;
         (b)   The license and application for license must specify the
following:
            1.   The name and address of the applicant organization;
            2.   The type of organization that is conducting the raffle;
            3.   The length of existence of the organization and, if
incorporated, the date and state of incorporation;
            4.   The name, address, telephone number, and date of birth of the
organization’s presiding officer, secretary, raffles manager, and any other
members responsible for the conduct and operation of the raffle;
            5.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise
awarded by a licensee in a single raffle;
            6.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee
in a single raffle;
            7.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle change
issued or sold;
            8.   The maximum number of days during which changes may be issued
or sold;
            9.   The area in which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
            10.   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or
issued;
            11.   The date, time, and name and address of the location or
locations at which winning changes will be determined; and
            12.   A certificate signed by the presiding officer of the
applicant organization attesting to the fact that the information contained in
the application is true and correct.
         (c)   A license application must contain a sworn statement attesting
to the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization,
signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of the organization;
         (d)   Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for
one raffle, or a specific number of raffles to be conducted during a specified
period of time not to exceed one year;
         (e)   The maximum number of days during which raffle chances may be
issued or sold for any one raffle shall be one year; and
         (f)   A poker run license shall specify:
            1.   The area or areas within the county in which the poker run
will be conducted;
            2.   The time period during which a poker run will be conducted;
and
            3.   The time of determination of winning chances and the location
or locations at which the winning chances will be determined.
      (2)   Licenses for poker runs are subject to the following:
         (a)   No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct poker runs without
first obtaining a license pursuant to this subchapter;
         (b)   The application must specify the following:
            1.   The name and address of the applicant organization;
            2.   The type of organization that is conducting the raffle or
poker run, for example, religious charitable, labor, fraternal, educational,
veterans, or other;
            3.   The length of existence of the organization and, if
incorporated, the date and state of incorporation;
            4.   The name, address, telephone number, and date of birth of the
organization’s presiding officer, secretary, and any other members responsible
for the conduct and operation of the raffle or poker run;
            5.   The name, address, and telephone number of all locations at
which the poker run will be conducted;
            6.   The time period during which the poker run will be conducted;
            7.   The time of determination of winning chances and the location
or locations at which the winning chances will be determined;
            8.   A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of
the prospective licensee organization signed by the presiding officer and the
secretary of that organization; and
            9.   A certificate signed by the presiding officer of the applicant
organization attesting to the fact that the information contained in the
application is true and correct.
         (c)   A poker run license shall specify:
            1.   The area or areas within the county in which the poker run
will be conducted;
            2.   The time period during which a poker run will be conducted;
and
            3.   The time of determination of winning chances and the location
or locations at which the winning chances will be determined.
   (G)   The following are ineligible for any license under this subchapter:
      (1)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
      (2)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
      (3)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      (4)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in divisions (G)
(1), (G)(2), or (G)(3) above has a proprietary equitable or credit interest or
in which such a person is active or employed;
      (5)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (G)(1), (G)
(2), or (G)(3) above is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated
or not; or
      (6)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (G)(1), (G)
(2), or (G)(3) above is to participate in the management or operation of a
raffle as defined in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2014) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.44 CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSE AND FEES.
   (A)   Classification of licenses.
      (1)   A Class A raffle license shall authorize the operation of a raffle
where the aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle does not exceed $1,000, where the maximum retail
value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle does not exceed
$1,000 and where the maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued or
sold does not exceed $5.
      (2)   A Class B raffle license shall authorize the operation of a raffle
where either the prize values or the price per chance exceeds the maximums set
forth for a Class A license, and where the aggregate retail value of all prizes
or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle does not exceed
$20,000, where the maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in
a single raffle does not exceed $20,000, and where the maximum price which may
be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold does not exceed $100.
      (3)   A Class C raffle license shall authorize the operation of a raffle
where either the prize values or the price per chance exceeds the maximums set
forth for a Class B license, and where the aggregate retail value of all prizes
or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle does not exceed
$200,000, where the maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a license in
a single raffle does not exceed $200,000 and where the maximum price which may
be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold does not exceed $300.
      (4)   (a)   A Class D raffle license shall authorize the operation of a
raffle where:
            1.   The aggregate value of the prizes awarded does not exceed
$300,000;
            2.   A fee simple interest in real estate is offered as a first
prize or a cash prize in an amount equal to at least 50% of the value of the
fee simple interest in real estate is offered as an alternative first prize;
            3.   The maximum price charged for each chance issued or sold does
not exceed $300; and
            4.   The maximum number of chances issued or sold does not exceed
3,000.
         (b)   A Class D license may be issued only upon the submission of an
application as provided in §
112.43 and, in addition thereto, submission of the following:
            1.   A copy of a ruling or determination letter issued to, or for
the benefit of, the applicant by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service provided
that the applicant meets the requirements of § 101(6) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1939, or of § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as
amended;
            2.   A narrative statement describing the purpose of the proposed
raffle and, in figures and numbers, the estimated gross proceeds of the sale of
raffle chances, the administrative cost of the raffle, and the intended use of
the net proceeds derived from the proposed raffle;
            3.   A written agreement signed by an authorized officer of the
applicant holding the county, its Board Members, officers, employees, and
attorneys harmless from any claim or cause of action (whether state or federal)
for injury or damages arising out of or in any way related to, the subject
raffle or to any property (real and/or personal) conveyed by the applicant
pursuant to the subject raffle; and
            4.   An affidavit signed by the owner of said real estate which
verifies that on the date of application the fair market value of said real
estate to be raffled does not exceed $300,000 and that the applicant has full
authority to make said real estate the subject of their raffle. The affidavit
shall also be notarized.
   (B)   Filing fees.
      (1)   Filing fees for Class A raffle licenses shall be:
         (a)   Free if the aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise
to be awarded does not exceed $100; or
         (b)   Ten dollars if the aggregate retail value of all prizes or
merchandise to be awarded is $101 but does not exceed $1,000.
      (2)   Filing fees for Class B raffle licenses shall be $25 if the
aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise to be awarded is $1,001 but
does not exceed $20,000.
      (3)   Filing fees for Class C raffle licenses shall be:
         (a)   Fifty dollars if the aggregate retail value of all prizes or
merchandise to be awarded is $20,001 but does not exceed $50,000;
         (b)   One hundred dollars if the aggregate retail value of all prizes
or merchandise to be awarded is $50,001 but does not exceed $100,000;
         (c)   One hundred fifty dollars if the aggregate retail value of all
prizes or merchandise to be awarded is $l 00,001 but does not exceed $150,000;
and
         (d)   Two hundred dollars if the aggregate retail value of all prizes
or merchandise to be awarded is $150,001 but does not exceed $200,000.
      (4)   Filing fees for Class D raffle licenses shall be $500.
      (5)   Filing fees for poker run licenses shall be $25.
   (C)   No license. No raffle shall be conducted and no license for such
raffle shall be issued within the territory under the jurisdiction of this
subchapter where the prize values or the price per chance exceeds the maximums
set herein for a Class D license.
   (D)   Fees payable. All fees shall be payable at the time the application is
filed, and in the event that the application for a license is denied, the fee
shall be returned to the applicant by the County Board office.
   (E)   Prominent display of license.
      (1)   A raffle license shall be prominently displayed at the time and
location of the determination of the winning changes.
      (2)   A poker run license shall be prominently displayed at each location
at which the poker run is conducted or operated.
      (3)   Any poker run license issued shall cover the entire poker run,
including locations other than the key location. Each license issued shall
include the name and address of each location at which the poker run will be
conducted.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2014)
§ 112.45 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   The conducting of raffles and poker runs are subject to the following
restrictions:
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purpose of the organization permitted to conduct the game;
   (B)   No person except a bonafide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle or poker run;
   (C)   No person may receive any renumeration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle or poker run;
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this
subchapter. A premises where a poker run is held is not required to obtain a
license if the name and location of the premises is listed as a predetermined
location on the license issued for the poker run and the premises does not
charge for use of the premises;
   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license, and winning chance may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license. A playing card or equivalent item may be drawn only
within the area specified on the poker run license and winning hands or scores
may be determined only at those locations specified on said license; and
   (F)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting
of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 year may be within the area
where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by a parent or
guardian.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2014)
§ 112.46 MANAGER BOND.
   (A)   (1)   All operation of and the conduct of raffles and poker runs shall
be under the supervision of a single manager designated by the licensed
organization. The manager must be a bona fide member of the organization
holding the license for such a raffle or poker run and may not receive any
remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the
raffle or poker run.
      (2)   In the case of Class A and B raffles, the manager shall provide a
fidelity bond in a sum equal to the aggregate retail value of all prizes or
merchandise awarded in the raffle, with two sureties thereon who are residents
of the state, and who are acceptable to the issuing authority, or with a
solvent surety company licensed to do business in the state, in favor of the
sponsoring licensee conditioned upon his or her honesty and performance of his
or her duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the Commission not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation. The
issuing authority shall consider the bond and shall have the right to
disapprove the bond.
      (3)   In the case of Class C and D raffles and poker runs, the manager
shall give a fidelity bond in a sum equal to the aggregate retail value of all
prizes and merchandise to be awarded in the raffle with a solvent surety bond
company licensed to do business in the state, in favor of the sponsoring
licensee, conditioned upon his or her honesty and performance of his or her
duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice be given in writing to the
Commission not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation. The issuing
authority shall consider the bond and shall have the right to disapprove the
bond.
      (4)   Fidelity bonds shall be conditioned upon the faithful observance by
the licensee of this subchapter upon the provisions of all laws of the state
and the United States of America applying to raffles.
   (B)   The issuing authority may, in its discretion, waive the bond
requirement for Class A raffles only, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Upon the unanimous vote to the members of the licensed organization
that said requirements maybe waived;
      (2)   A written waiver is filed with the application for the license;
      (3)   The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to
the unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization signed by the
presiding officer and the secretary of said organization; and
      (4)   All licenses issued to the organization shall include a provision
that the fidelity bond has been waived.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2014)
§ 112.47 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances or poker
runs shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds for
each single gathering or occasion at which winning games are determined. All
deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, description of
the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount, and date of payment.
   (B)   (1)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle or poker run
programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including
bingo gross receipts if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit
organization, pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue
of the state, and placed in a separate account.
      (2)   Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The
person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from the
operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other
revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership and proceeds from raffles
and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
   (D)   Records required by this subchapter shall be preserved for three years
and the organization shall make available their records relating to operations
of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2014)
§ 112.48 ISSUANCE, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Raffle and Poker Run Licensing Commission, by a majority vote at a
convened meeting, may issue, revoke, or suspend any license in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter or on the basis or provisions of any state
law pertaining to raffles.
   (B)   In case of a tie vote of the members of the Commission at a convened
meeting, the Raffle and Poker Run Licensing Commissioner shall vote to break
the tie.
   (C)   Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter may be suspended or
revoked for any violation of this subchapter.
   (D)   When any licensee shall have his or her license revoked for any cause,
no license shall be granted to said licensee for a period of one year
thereafter.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2014)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or organization violating any provision of §§
112.40 through
112.48 shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed each day during or on which the violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2014)
CHAPTER 113: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Title, authority
   
113.02   Liberal construction
   
113.03   Definitions
   
113.04   Scope
Licenses
   
113.15   Application
   
113.16   Application forms
   
113.17   Leased property
   
113.18   Eligibility for license
   
113.19   Types of licenses
   
113.20   Duration of licenses
   
113.21   License fees
   
113.22   Partial fees
   
113.23   Refund of fees
   
113.24   Procedure
   
113.25   Number of licenses
   
113.26   Form of license
Restrictions
   
113.40   Business hours
   
113.41   Persons under age
   
113.42   Alcoholic liquor
   
113.43   Sanitation
   
113.44   Prohibited acts
Suspension and Revocation
   
113.55   Grounds
   
113.56   Complaints
   
113.57   Notice
   
113.58   Hearing
   
113.59   Decision
   
113.60   Transfer of license
   
113.61   Acts of agents and employees
   
113.62   Acts of Sheriff
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 TITLE, AUTHORITY.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “County of Rock
Island Sexually-Oriented Entertainment Licensing Resolution” or “this chapter,”
and is adopted pursuant to the enabling authority set forth in 55 ILCS 5/5-
1059.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-2) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.02 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to ensure the
protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the county.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-2) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. The definition set forth in the Liquor Control Act of the
state (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. and 235 ILCS 5/1-3.05) shall be used.
   BUILDING. Any enclosed structure attached to or set upon the ground,
including, but not limited to, tents, mobile homes, or truck trailers.
   COUNTY. The County of Rock Island, Illinois.
   NEAR-NUDE. The condition in which those portions of the human body not
required by the provisions of this chapter to be covered are nude.
   OUTDOOR LOCATION. An area not located within an enclosed structure, the
location of which is capable to precise definition.
   PERSON. An individual, a corporation, a partnership, or any unincorporated
association.
   SEATING AREA. The area of a building or outdoor location used by persons
viewing sexually-oriented entertainment not on a stage.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT. Any presentation of a dramatic production,
dance, or other performances in which live performers appear in a nude or near-
nude condition at any time during the performance, for the viewing of which a
fee, payable in money or anything of value, is charged, or which is performed
in conjunction with the service of food or beverages, for which service money
or anything of value must be paid.
   STAGE. A raised platform or portion of the floor of a building, upon which
performances may take place.
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-2) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.04 SCOPE.
   (A)   Acts prohibited. No person shall present sexually-oriented
entertainment in an unincorporated area of the county other than as authorized
by the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Regulated area. This chapter applies to the unincorporated areas of
the county.
   (C)   Power to license. Subject to the limitations and restrictions set
forth in this chapter, the Sheriff of the county has the power to issue, renew,
or revoke any license provided for by the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-3) (Res. passed 3-16-1993) Penalty, see §
10.99
LICENSES
§ 113.15 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to present sexually-oriented entertainment shall obtain
a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Applications therefor
shall be made in writing, under oath, on forms provided by the county. A
license shall be valid for the duration provided for in this chapter.
Application for renewal of an existing license must be made not less than 30
days prior to the expiration of a licensing period.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.16 APPLICATION FORMS.
   The forms used to apply for a license, or the renewal of a license, shall
require the identity of the prospective licensee, the precise location of the
building or outdoor location to be licensed, and such other information as is
necessary to establish the eligibility of the applicant for a license.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.17 LEASED PROPERTY.
   In all cases where the applicant for a license is the lessee of a building
or location sought to be licensed, a copy of the lease shall be submitted with
the application for license.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.18 ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE.
   No license shall be issued to:
   (A)   Any individual who is not at least 21 years of age;
   (B)   Any individual who has been convicted of an offense classified as a
felony, under the laws of the state or any other jurisdiction, within the five-
year period immediately proceeding the date of the application;
   (C)   Any individual who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (D)   Any individual who has been convicted of any offense set forth in
Article 11 of the Criminal Code of 1961, as amended and being 720 ILCS 5/11-0.1
et seq., within the five-year period immediately proceeding the date of
application;
   (E)   Any person whose license issued under the provisions of this chapter
has been previously revoked;
   (F)   Any person who, at the time of application for renewal, would not be
eligible for a license on a first application;
   (G)   Any partnership, unless all partners are eligible for a license;
   (H)   Any corporation, if any, officers, managers, or directors thereof, of
any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the
stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license;
   (I)   Any person whose business operations will be managed by someone other
than the licensee unless such an individual would be eligible for a license;
   (J)   Any person who does not own the building or outdoor location for which
a license is sought, or have a lease therein for the entire period for which
the license will be issued;
   (K)   Any person whose building or outdoor location is not properly zoned
for the activity sought to be licensed, or whose building has building code
violations, or is in violation of any public health regulations; and
   (L)   (1)   Any person whose proposed outdoor location is not immediately
adjacent to a building for which a license has been issued under the provisions
of this chapter.
      (2)   All outdoor locations must be properly zoned and must comply with
all applicable public health regulations.
      (3)   All outdoor locations must be at least 2,000 feet from any building
used as a residence, and at least 300 feet from any public highway.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.19 TYPES OF LICENSES.
   The types of licenses shall be as follows:
   (A)   A general license which applies to the building described in the
license; and
   (B)   An outdoor location license which shall apply to the outdoor location
described in the license.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.20 DURATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   All general licenses shall expire at midnight, June 30 of each year.
An outdoor location license shall expire 48 hours after its effective date.
   (B)   All applications for outdoor location licenses shall be made at least
15 days before the proposed effective date, which shall be set forth in the
application.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.21 LICENSE FEES.
   The fee for a general license shall be $200. The fee for each outdoor
location licenses shall be $100. Fees shall be paid in cash or by certified
check, and must be paid before a license is issued.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.22 PARTIAL FEES.
   If a general license is issued between July and December 31 of any year, the
entire fee therefor shall be collected. If the general licenses is issued on or
after January 1 of any year, the fee shall be $125. All renewals shall be for a
one-year period and the entire fee shall be collected.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.23 REFUND OF FEES.
   If a general license is rendered invalid because the licensed location
becomes incorporated, more than six months before the expiration of such
license, the licensee shall be refunded 50% of the fee paid for issuance or
renewal of the license. A similar refund shall be made if the person licensed
is an individual, and the individual dies during the first six months of a
licensing year. In the latter case, the refund may be made to the licensee’s
spouse, next of kin, or personal representative.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.24 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applications for a license of any type, or a renewal, shall be
made to the Sheriff of the county. The Sheriff shall make the necessary
investigation to ensure that the applicant is eligible for the requested
license, and is authorized to request assistance from other public officials or
agencies in making a decision. With respect to application for a first general
license, the Sheriff shall, within 45 days after reviewing the application,
notify the applicant of the decision to grant or deny the application. If the
application is denied, the Sheriff shall state the reason for such denial.
   (B)   With respect to renewals, the Sheriff must notify the applicant of his
or her decision to grant or deny the application at least 72 hours before the
expiration of a license, setting forth the reason for refusing to renew, if
that decision was made.
   (C)   When an application has been denied, the Sheriff shall refund the fee
paid. If an applicant can correct the deficiencies which caused the denial of
the application, the application may be re-submitted to the Sheriff, along with
the appropriate fee.
   (D)   The Sheriff must notify the applicant for an outdoor location license
of the decision to grant or deny the application at least 48 hours before the
date the license was to become effective. If the application is denied, the fee
shall be refunded.
   (E)   The pendency of an application for a license of any type, or renewal
of a license, does not permit the activity regulated by this chapter to occur
unless authorized by a license issued pursuant to the provisions of the
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.25 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   No person is eligible to receive more than three outdoor location licenses
within any 12-month period.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.26 FORM OF LICENSE.
   All licenses shall be in such form as approved by the county.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
RESTRICTIONS
§ 113.40 BUSINESS HOURS.
   No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall permit
the activity regulated by this chapter between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 3:00
p.m. each day.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-5) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.41 PERSONS UNDER AGE.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any building
or at any outdoor location licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No persons under 21 years of age shall be permitted to enter a
licensed building or to be present as a spectator at a licensed outdoor
location.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-5) (Res. passed 3-16-1993) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.42 ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
   Unless the building or outdoor location licensed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter is also licensed under the provisions of Chapter 110 of this
code of ordinances, possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor in such
building or at such outdoor location is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-5) (Res. passed 3-16-1993) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.43 SANITATION.
   All locations licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter must
comply with applicable state and county regulations pertaining to public health
and sanitation.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-5) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.44 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   The following acts are prohibited within any licensed building or at any
licensed outdoor location:
   (A)   No person participating in the presentation of sexually-oriented
entertainment shall appear while completely nude; the groin or pubic areas of
performers must be covered with non-transparent material which prevent view of
genitals or body cavities;
   (B)   Female performers must cover their nipples with non-transparent
materials at least three inches in diameter;
   (C)   No physical contact between or among performers on stage is permitted;
   (D)   No animals shall be used in any performance;
   (E)   Persons admitted to a licensed building or outdoor location for
purposes of viewing sexually-oriented entertainment shall not be permitted to
enter upon the stage;
   (F)   No physical contact between performers and those admitted to a
licensed building or outdoor location for purpose of viewing sexually-oriented
entertainment, either upon the stage or within a seating area, shall be
permitted, other than hand-to-hand contact; and
   (G)   No licensee, or agent or employee of a licensee, shall violate any
provision of Article 11 of the Criminal Code of 1961, as amended and being 720
ILCS 5/11-0.1 et seq., at or within a licensed location.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-5) (Res. passed 3-16-1993) Penalty, see §
10.99
SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION
§ 113.55 GROUNDS.
   Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
or suspended for a period not to exceed 60 days by the Sheriff for any of the
following reasons:
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter;
   (B)   Making a false statement as to material fact in an application for a
license hereunder;
   (C)   Any act or occurrence or prevent which would cause the licensee to be
ineligible for a license issued under the provisions of this chapter;
   (D)   Repeated violations of the criminal laws of the state by patrons of
the licensed building or outdoor location, while within or at such building or
location, or within 300 feet thereof; and
   (E)   Closing, abandoning, or cessation of the licensed business for more
than 60 days.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-6) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.56 COMPLAINTS.
   The Sheriff of the county shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions
hereof, and if, as the result of complaints made by citizens, or as the result
of complaints made by the Sheriff’s Department or other law enforcement
agencies, it appears as if any licensee is in violation of any provisions of
this chapter, the Sheriff shall prepare a complaint, setting forth the specific
nature of the violation, and serve a copy thereof upon the licensee, along with
a notice, setting forth the date, time, and place a hearing with respect to the
alleged violations will be held before the Sheriff.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-6) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.57 NOTICE.
   The notice may be served upon the licensee by mailing a copy thereof, along
with the complaint, to the licensed building at least three days before the
hearing, or by personally serving the licensee, a partner of the licensee, or
corporate agent authorized by law to receive service.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-6) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.58 HEARING.
   At a hearing, the licenses is entitled to be represented by counsel, present
witnesses on the licensee’s behalf, cross-examine the complaining witnesses,
and present other evidence.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-6) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.59 DECISION.
   After the hearing is closed, the Sheriff shall render a decision within five
days and notify the licensee, in writing. The decision shall be mailed to the
licensee at the licensed location.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-6) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.60 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license issued pursuant to the provisions hereof may be assigned or
transferred.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-6) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.61 ACTS OF AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Acts of agents or employees of a licensee which constitute violations of
this chapter shall be attributed to the licensee.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-7) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
§ 113.62 ACTS OF SHERIFF.
   Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided by law, and
shall not affect the ability of the Sheriff to revoke or suspend a license.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-7) (Res. passed 3-16-1993)
CHAPTER 114: TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS
Section
   
114.01   Authority
   
114.02   Surcharge
   
114.03   Terms
§ 114.01 AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to the enabling authority set forth in Ill. Rev. Statutes Ch. 34, §
419.4 and Ill. Rev. Statutes Ch. 134, §
45.3, as amended by Pub. Act 85-978, effective December 16, 1987, and the
result of a countywide referendum held on November 4, 1986, a surcharge be and
hereby is imposed upon all telecommunications carriers engaged in the business
of transmitting messages by means of electricity originating within the
corporate limits the county, and terminating within the state.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-2) (Ord. passed 4-1-1988; Ord. passed 4-16-1991; Ord. passed
2-16-1999)
§ 114.02 SURCHARGE.
   (A)   Such surcharge be and hereby is imposed at the rate of $0.65 per month
per network connection.
   (B)   The amount of the surcharge imposed by the provisions of this chapter
shall be paid to the Treasurer of the county in that official’s capacity as ex-
officio Treasurer of the County Emergency Telephone Systems Board not later
than 30 days after the surcharge liability accrues, net of any network or other
911 or sophisticated 911 system charges then due the particular
telecommunications carrier, as shown on an itemized bill, to be held and
distributed by the aforesaid County Treasurer according to law.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-3) (Ord. passed 4-1-1988; Ord. passed 4-16-1991; Ord. passed
2-16-1999)
§ 114.03 TERMS.
   (A)   For the purposes of computing the surcharge imposed by this chapter,
the network connections to which the surcharge shall apply shall be those in-
service network connections, other than those network connections assigned to
the county, in its capacity as a governmental unit, where the subscriber’s
service address for each such network connection or connections are located
within the corporate limits of the county. The term SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean
the location of the subscriber’s primary use of the network connection or
connections.
   (B)   Unless the provisions of this chapter specifically otherwise state,
all terms used in this chapter shall be defined in the manner set forth in the
Emergency Telephone System Act (Ill. Rev. Statutes Ch. 134, §§ 31 et seq.), or
other law to which reference is made by provisions of said Act.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-4) (Ord. passed 4-1-1988; Ord. passed 4-16-1991; Ord. passed
2-16-1999)
CHAPTER 115: PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY
Section
   
115.01   Definition
   
115.02   Sale, use, explosion of fireworks
   
115.03   Chairperson authorized to issue permits
   
115.04   Issuance of permits
   
115.05   Permit requirements
   
115.06   Bond
   
115.07   Display of fireworks
   
115.08   Protected areas
   
115.09   Possession
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   FIREWORKS. Any explosive composition or any substance, or combination of
substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion,
deflagration, or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in
which explosions are used, the types of balloons which require fire under need
to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs,
or other fireworks of like construction, and any FIREWORKS containing any
explosive compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance, or contain combustible substances visual effects. FIREWORKS,
however, shall not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; trick
noisemakers known as “party poppers,” “booby traps,” “snappers,” “trick
matches,” “cigarette loads,” and “auto burglar alarms;” sparklers; toy pistols,
toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing
25/100 grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so
constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for
the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than 20/
100 grains of explosive mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted
at all times (425 ILCS 35/1).
(Prior Code, § 5-2-2) (Ord. 99-1110, passed 11-16-1999)
§ 115.02 SALE, USE, EXPLOSION OF FIREWORKS.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
copartnership, or corporation to knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for
sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks; provided that the County
Board shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the
granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks (425 ILCS 35/
2).
(Prior Code, § 5-2-3) (Ord. 99-1110, passed 11-16-1999) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.03 CHAIRPERSON AUTHORIZED TO ISSUE PERMITS.
   The County Board Chairperson is authorized and empowered to grant and issue
permits for supervised public displays of fireworks in the county outside the
corporate limits of any city, village, or incorporated town upon a proper
application therefor by any group of three or more adult individuals, residents
in the territory, being filed with the County Board office pursuant to the
terms and provisions, of state law. This permit shall be issued only after
inspection of the display site by the County Sheriffs Department, or his or her
representative, to determine that the display shall not be hazardous to
property or endanger any person or persons (425 ILCS 35/2).
(Prior Code, § 5-2-4) (Ord. 99-1110, passed 11-16-1999)
§ 115.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   The application for the permit shall be filed in writing with the County
Board at least 15 days in advance of the date of the display, and shall name
and submit therein the name of a qualified and competent individual or company
experienced in the handling of fireworks displays and dismantling who will be
responsible for the proposed display. Action shall be taken on the application
within 48 hours after the application is made, provided the inspection has been
made as set forth in §
115.03. All applicants must comply with state statutes with respect to displays
of fireworks, including, but not limited to, the Fireworks Use Act, the
Fireworks Regulation Act, and the State Explosives Act (425 ILCS 35/2 and 425
ILCS 30 et seq., and 225 ILCS 210/1 et seq.).
(Prior Code, § 5-2-5) (Ord. 99-1110, passed 11-16-1999)
§ 115.05 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A permit shall be issued only after inspection of the display site by
the County Sheriff’s Department, to determine that such display shall not be
hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. Forms and a checklist
for the application and permit may be obtained from the County Board office.
One copy of the permit shall be on file with the issuing officer, and one copy
forwarded to the Sheriff’s Department.
   (B)   (1)   The permit when issued shall name the individual/company
selected and designated by the Chairperson of the County Board to handle the
display/explosives, and dismantling of the display, and no person other than
the individual/company so designated shall be permitted to handle the display.
The County Board Chairperson shall also appoint one of the three applicants to
supervise the display and carry the permit at the time of the display.
      (2)   The permit, when the application has been approved, shall be signed
by the Chairperson of the County Board and countersigned by the County Clerk.
The permit shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the state law.
After such privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use, and
distribution of fireworks for display shall be lawful for the purpose only. No
permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
   (C)   Possession by any party holding a certificate for registration under
the Fireworks Regulation Act (425 ILCS 30/1 et seq.) or by any employee or
agent of such party, or by any person transporting fireworks for such party,
shall not be a violation, provided that possession is within the scope of
business of the fireworks plant registered under that Act (425 ILCS 30/1 et
seq.).
(Prior Code, § 5-2-6) (Ord. 99-1110, passed 11-16-1999)
§ 115.06 BOND.
   (A)   At the time of filing an application for a fireworks permit and upon
the payment of all applicable permit fees, the applicant must produce one of
the following:
      (1)   A policy of liability insurance in a solvent and responsible
company authorized to do business in the state insuring said licensee against
liability for any injury, death, or property loss or damage which said licensee
may incur while operating under the provisions of this chapter; or
      (2)   A bond for a sum not less than $1,000,000 in a form deemed
acceptable by the Clerk and approved by same.
   (B)   Said policy if liability insurance must be in the amounts of $100,000
per person, $300,000 per occurrence for bodily injury liability and $100,000
for loss of means of support, and must be for a term of at least co-extensive
with the period of the license.
   (C)   No municipality shall be required to produce a policy of liability
insurance or to file a bond.
   (D)   Issuance of the permit is conditioned on compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, state law, and the regulations of the State
Department of Natural Resources with relating to explosives/fireworks.
   (E)   Issuance of the permit is conditioned upon payment of a $150
application fee and signature by the applicant(s) and those individuals/
companies who will be handling the display/explosives, and dismantling the
display on a hold harmless agreement (425 ILCS 35/2 and 225 ILCS 210).
(Prior Code, § 5-2-7) (Ord. 99-1110, passed 11-16-1999)
§ 115.07 DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS.
   Every public display of fireworks shall be handled by a competent individual
designated by the local authorities herein specified and shall be of such a
character and so located, discharged, or fired, as not to be hazardous to
property or endanger any person or persons (425 ILCS 35-2).
(Prior Code, § 5-2-8) (Ord. 99-1110, passed 11-16-1999)
§ 115.08 PROTECTED AREAS.
   No firework shall be discharged, ignited, or exploded at any point in the
state within 600 feet of any hospital, asylum, or infirmary (425 ILCS 35/3.1).
(Prior Code, § 5-2-9) (Ord. 99-1110, passed 11-16-1999)
§ 115.09 POSSESSION.
   In the case of a court finding that a person possessing fireworks or
combustibles seized by any officer or employee of the office of the State Fire
Marshal, the Department of State Police, Sheriff, or Deputy Sheriff was in
possession of these items in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
judgment shall be entered confiscating and forfeiting the property and ordering
its destruction.
(Prior Code, § 5-2-10) (Ord. 99-1110, passed 11-16-1999)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, co-partnership, or corporation violating the
provisions of this chapter, except as provided in division (B) below, shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   The possession, offering for sale, exposing for sale, or selling
at retail of fireworks in violation of this chapter is:
         (a)   A petty offense if involving an amount up to one pound of
fireworks, exclusive of external packaging;
         (b)   A Class B misdemeanor if involving an amount greater than one
pound but up to three pounds of fireworks, exclusive of external packaging; or
         (c)   A Class A misdemeanor if involving an amount greater than three
pounds of fireworks, exclusive of external packaging.
      (2)   For a violation to be charged as a Class A misdemeanor, it must be
filed as a state violation (425 ILCS 35/1).
(Prior Code, § 5-2-10) (Ord. 99-1110, passed 11-16-1999)
CHAPTER 116: BICYCLE SALES, REGISTRATION
Section
   
116.01   Bicycle dealer’s license
   
116.02   License procedure
   
116.03   Mandatory registration of bicycles
   
116.04   Registration procedures
 
   
116.99    Penalty
§ 116.01 BICYCLE DEALER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deal in sales of three or more bicycles within
any calendar year without a bicycle dealer’s license.
   (B)   BICYCLE for the purpose of this chapter is any bicycle 20 inches or
more in size.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-1) (Ord. passed 10-20-1998) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.02 LICENSE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   License application.
      (1)   The application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to
the County Clerk on a form provided by the office of the Sheriff’s Department
of the county.
      (2)   Licenses are non-transferrable.
   (B)   License fee. The license fee for a bicycle dealer’s license shall be
free and the license shall remain in effect from the date of issue until the
business is closed, sold, or ownership is transferred.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-1) (Ord. passed 10-20-1998)
§ 116.03 MANDATORY REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES.
   It shall be mandatory for all bicycle dealers dealing in the retail sales of
bicycles within the county to register all bicycles size 20 inches and over at
the time of sale. The registration forms and bicycles license plates shall be
made available to the businesses at no cost through the Sheriff’s Department.
The completed registration forms shall be picked up twice a month by a member
of the Sheriff’s Department. It shall be the responsibility of the business
owner and/or manager to notify the Sheriff’s Department if they are in need of
additional registration forms and/or license plates. Persons registering
bicycles at a bicycle dealer or at the Sheriff’s Department shall not be
charged a fee.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-1) (Ord. passed 10-20-1998)
§ 116.04 REGISTRATION PROCEDURES.
   In the event a bicycle has been purchased outside the unincorporated limits
of the county or was sold within the unincorporated limits of the county and
has not been processed for a license plate as set forth above, the bicycle
shall be licensed through the procedures set below:
   (A)   Registration agency. Applications for registrations should be issued
by the Sheriff;
   (B)   Application form. The application for a bicycle license shall be on a
form provided by the county;
   (C)   Proof of ownership. The Sheriff of the county shall refuse to issue a
license where he or she has reason to believe the applicant is not the owner
of, or entitled to possession of, the bicycle;
   (D)   Inspection. The Sheriff or an officer assigned such responsibility
shall inspect such bicycle before licensing the same, and shall refuse a
license for any bicycle which he or she determines is in unsafe mechanical
condition;
   (E)   Registration plate or tag. Upon issuing a bicycle license, the Sheriff
must also issue a plate or tag, which shall be firmly attached to the bicycle
in a manner as to be plainly visible from the rear;
   (F)   Records. The Sheriff shall keep a record of the number of each
license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued,
and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued; and
   (G)   Duration. Transfer of ownership or renewal of a bicycle license shall
remain valid as long as it remains the property of the initial owner. If sold,
traded, given away, and the like, the new owner shall re-register the bicycle
in his or her name.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-1) (Ord. passed 10-20-1998)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
116.03 relating to a bicycle dealer’s license and procedures shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
116.04 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100. In
the event a person accused with a violation of §
116.04 who does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time that
complaint is issued for said violation, said person may pay to the County
Sheriff’s Department a penalty in the sum of $15 for an in full satisfaction of
said violation. In the event a person is found guilty of violating the
provisions of §
116.04 a second or more time, he or she shall be fined in an amount equal the
minimum fine.
(Prior Code, § 5-5-1) (Ord. passed 10-20-1998)
CHAPTER 117: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   State laws adopted by reference
Licensing
   
117.15   Issuance of licenses
   
117.16   Renewal of license
   
117.17   Suspension of license
   
117.18   Reinstatement of suspended license
   
117.19   Revocation of license
Administration
   
117.30   Notices
   
117.31   Hearings before the Health Department Administrator
   
117.32   Inspections
   
117.33   Correction of violations
   
117.34   Examination, condemnation of food, equipment
   
117.35   Procedure when infection is suspected
   
117.36   Food handlers’ classes
   
117.37   Food service establishments outside of the county
   
117.38   Plan review of future construction
   
117.39   Injunctions
 
   
117.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      ADULTERATED. The condition of any food:
         (a)   If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance
in a quantity which may render it injurious to health;
         (b)   If it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious
substance for which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation or in
excess of such tolerances if one has been established;
         (c)   If it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or
decomposed substance or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption;
         (d)   If it has been processed, prepared, packed, or held under
unsanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or
whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health;
         (e)   If it is in whole or in part the product of a diseased animal or
animal which has died otherwise than by slaughter; and/or
         (f)   If its containers are composed in whole or in part of any
poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to
health.
      BOARD OF HEALTH. The County Board of Health or its authorized
representative(s).
      HEALTH AUTHORITY. The Administrator of the County Department of Public
Health, or his or her duly authorized representative(s).
      HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The County Department of Public Health, including its
duly authorized representative(s).
      HEALTH DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATOR. The individual selected by the County
Board of Health to administer and enforce the policies, ordinances,
resolutions, or law of said Board.
      ORDINANCE. The County Food Sanitation Ordinance.
   (B)   All other definitions shall be as contained in the State Food Service
Sanitation Rules and Regulations and the State Retail Food Store Sanitation
Rules and Regulations promulgated by the State Department of Public Health. The
term REGULATORY AUTHORITY contained in said rules and regulations shall mean
the County Department of Public Health.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-2) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.02 STATE LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   This chapter shall be interpreted and enforced in accordance with provisions
set forth in the unabridged form of the current State Food Service Sanitation
Rules and Regulations and the State Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules and
Regulations, and any subsequent amendments or revisions thereto, three copies
each which shall be on file in the office of the County Clerk, which
publications are incorporated herein and adopted by reference as part of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-3) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
LICENSING
§ 117.15 ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment or retail
food store, or to renew an expired license, shall make written application for
a license on forms provided by the Health Department. Such application shall
include the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of
proposed operation, and the signature of each applicant. If the application is
for a temporary food service establishment or temporary retail food store, it
shall also include the inclusive dates of the proposed operation.
   (B)   Licenses for food service establishments and retail food stores are
valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Licenses for
temporary food service establishments or temporary retail food stores shall not
exceed 14 days.
   (C)   (1)   Facilities shall be classified as either food service
establishments or retail food stores and licensed accordingly. Licenses for
food service establishments shall be classified by the Health Authority based
upon the specific type of food service, as follows:
         (a)   Regular food service establishment: Class A;
         (b)   Limited food service establishment: Class B (a tavern, bar, or
other operation that serves only beverages, prepackaged foods, or is equipped
for limited food preparation as approved by the Health Authority);
         (c)   Mobile food unit or mobile retail food store: Class C;
         (d)   Temporary food service: Class D; and
         (e)   Seasonal concession stand: Class E.
      (2)   Food service establishments shall operate within the limits of the
specified license classifications provided in this chapter.
   (D)   The annual license fee for a food service establishment or retail food
store shall be based upon the type of operation or on the square footage of the
building or facility or part thereof where such operation (including dining
areas, retail sales area, and storage areas) exists as follows:
Type of Establishment Fee
Type of Establishment                     Fee
Commissary operating at a professional    $400
golf tournament site
Mobile food unit or mobile retail food    $200
store
Mobile, temporary food service operating  $125
at a professional golf tournament site
Operations of 2,000 square feet or less   $300
in size
Operations of 2,001 to 3,000 square feet  $375
in size
Operations of over 3,000 square feet in   $450
size
Operations preparing small quantities of
non-potentially hazardous food (such as a $200
fudge shop)
Operations serving only foods prepared at $200
an approved commissary
School or church conducting routine food  $200
service
Seasonal concession stand (serving non-   $75
potentially hazardous food)
Seasonal concession stand (serving        $125
potentially hazardous food)
Soup kitchen, food pantry, or similar
facility operated by a not for profit     no fee
organization providing food at no charge
to the needy
Temporary food service establishment or   $50 (without pre-approved application
retail food store                         before event day, $75)
Temporary food service or temporary
retail food store serving only            $25
prepackaged, non-potentially hazardous
foods or beverages
Vendor selling a single food item or
beverage at a professional golf           $40 per location
tournament site
Notes to Table:
-ROUTINE FOOD SERVICE is defined as operation of at least once per week.
-   Seasonal concession stands shall operate for a period of four months or
less.
-   Seasonal concession stands not fully equipped as food service
establishments shall be limited to prepackaged food or non-potentially
hazardous food as appropriate for the facilities provided.
-   Temporary food stands shall operate for a period of 14 days or less.
 
   (E)   Prior to approval of an application for a license, the Health
Authority shall inspect the food service establishment or retail food store to
determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   The Health Department shall issue a license to the applicant if its
inspection reveals that the applicable requirements of this chapter have been
met and upon payment of the required fee.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-4) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003; Ord. passed 2-
16-2010)
§ 117.16 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Whenever the inspection for renewal of a license reveals serious or
repeated violations of this chapter, the license shall not be issued and the
Health Authority shall notify the applicant immediately thereof.
   (B)   Such notice shall state the reasons for not renewing the license. Such
notice shall also state that an opportunity for a hearing shall be provided for
the applicant at a time and place designated by the Health Authority. Such
hearing shall be scheduled not later than ten days from the date of the notice.
   (C)   A license which expired shall be removed from the establishment by the
Health Authority.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-4) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.17 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Licenses may be suspended temporarily by the Health Authority for
failure of the license holder to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
Whenever a license holder or operator has failed to comply with any notice
issued under the provisions of this chapter, the license holder or operator
shall be notified in writing that the license is, upon service of a notice,
immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if
a written request for a hearing is filed with the Health Department
Administrator by the license holder. Upon suspension of the license, all
operations as a food service establishment or retail food store are to be
discontinued at the direction of the Health Authority. The license shall be
removed from the establishment by the Health Authority and returned to the
Health Department.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, whenever the
Health Authority finds unsatisfactory or other conditions in the operations of
a food service establishment or retail food store which, in his or her
judgment, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, he or she may,
without warning, notice, or hearing, issue a written notice to the license
holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to
be taken and specifying the time period within such action shall be taken and,
if deemed necessary, such order shall state that the license is immediately
suspended, and all operations as a good service establishment or retail food
store are to be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is
issued shall comply immediately therewith, but upon written petition to the
Health Authority, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-4) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.18 REINSTATEMENT OF SUSPENDED LICENSE.
   Any person whose license has been suspended may at any time make application
for a re-inspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the license. Within ten
days following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by
the applicant, that in his or her opinion, the conditions causing suspension of
the license have been corrected, the Health Authority shall make a re-
inspection. If the applicant is found to be in compliance with the requirements
of this chapter, the license shall be reinstated.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-4) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.19 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this
chapter, or for interference with the Health Authority in the performance of
his or her duties, the license may be permanently revoked after an opportunity
for a hearing has been provided by the Health Department Administrator.
   (B)   Prior to such action, the Health Department Administrator shall notify
the license holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the license is
subject to revocation, and advising that the license shall be permanently
revoked at the end of five days following service of such notice, unless a
request for a hearing is filed with the Health Department Administrator by the
license holder, within such five-day period. A license may be suspended for
cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-4) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 117.30 NOTICES.
   A notice provided for in this chapter is properly serviced when it is
delivered to the holder of the license or the person in charge, or when it is
sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the holder of the license. A copy of the notice shall be filed
in the records of the Health Department. A completed inspection report form or
a letter are considered proper forms of notice.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-5) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.31 HEARINGS BEFORE THE HEALTH DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Any person affected by any order or notice issued by the Health
Department in connection with the enforcement of any section of this chapter
may file in the office of the Health Department a written request for a hearing
before the Health Department Administrator. The Health Department Administrator
shall hold a hearing at a time and place designated by him or her. The
petitioner for the hearing shall be notified of the time and place of the
hearing not less than five days prior to the date on which the hearing is to be
held. Proceedings of the hearing shall be recorded. Within ten days after the
date of the hearing, the Health Department Administrator shall make a final
finding based on the complete hearing record. The decision shall sustain,
modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written
report of the hearing shall be furnished to the petitioner by the Health
Department. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Heal Department
Administrator may seek relief therefrom through a hearing before the Board of
Health.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Health Department
Administrator, rendered as a result of a hearing held in accordance with
division (A) above, may file in the office of the Health Department a written
request for a hearing at a time and place designated by the Secretary of the
Board of Health. The petitioner for the hearing shall be notified of the time
and place of the hearing not less than five days prior to the date on which the
hearing is to be held. Proceedings of the hearing shall be recorded. Within ten
days after the date of the hearing, the Board of Health shall make a final
finding based upon the complete hearing record. The decision shall sustain,
modify, or rescind any notice or order considered at the hearing. A written
report of the hearing shall be furnished to the petitioner by the Health
Department.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-6) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.32 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Health Authority shall classify each food service establishment or
retail food store in one of the following three risk categories based upon the
relative risks of causing foodbome illness: high risk, medium risk, and low
risk. Classification criteria for each group are stated in division (D) below.
      (1)   (a)   High risk facilities shall receive three inspections per
year, or two inspections per year if one of the following conditions is met:
            1.   A certified food service manager is present at all times the
facility is in operation; or
            2.   Employees involved in food operations receive a HACCP training
exercise, in-service training on another food service sanitation area, or
attend an educational conference on food safety or sanitation.
         (b)   Medium risk facilities shall receive at least one inspection per
year.
         (c)   Low risk facilities shall receive at least one inspection per
year.
      (2)   Additional inspections of food service establishments or retail
food stores shall be performed as often as deemed necessary by the Health
Authority for the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   The Health Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted
to enter, at any reasonable time, any food service establishment or retail food
store within the county for the purpose of making inspections to determine
compliance with this chapter. The Health Authority shall be permitted to
examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to
food and supplies purchased, received, or used and persons employed.
   (C)   Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or retail food
store is made, the findings shall be recorded on an inspection report form. The
inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this chapter and
shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement. Inspectional
remarks shall be written to reference, by item number, the item violated, and
shall stated the correction to be made. The rating score of the establishment
shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted
from 100. A copy of the completed inspection report form shall be furnished to
the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection.
The completed inspection report is a pubic document that shall be made
available for public disclosure to any person who requests it, according to
law.
   (D)   For food service establishments or retail food stores shall be based
upon the following classifications and criteria:
      (1)   HIGH RISK means that a facility presents a high-relative risk of
causing foodborne illness based on the large number of food handling operations
typically implicated in foodborne outbreaks and/or the type of population
served by the facility. The following criteria shall be used to classify HIGH
RISK facilities:
         (a)   Whenever cooling of potentially hazardous foods occurs as part
of the food handling operations at the facility;
         (b)   When potentially hazardous foods are prepared hot or cold and
held hot or cold for more than 12 hours before serving;
         (c)   If potentially hazardous foods which have been previously cooked
and cooled must be reheated;
         (d)   When preparing potentially hazardous food for off-premises
service for which time-temperature requirements during transportation, holding,
and service are relevant;
         (e)   Whenever complex preparation of foods, or extensive handling of
raw ingredients with hand contact for ready-to-eat foods, occurs as part of the
food handling operations at the facility;
         (f)   If vacuum packaging and/or other forms of reduced oxygen
packaging are performed at the retail level; or
         (g)   Whenever serving immuno-comprised individuals where these
individuals comprise the majority of the consuming population.
      (2)   MEDIUM RISK means that a facility presents a medium-relative risk
of causing foodborne illness based upon few food handling operations typically
implicated in foodborne illness outbreaks. The following criteria shall be used
to classify MEDIUM RISK facilities:
         (a)   If hot or cold foods are not maintained at that temperature for
more than 12 hours and are restricted to same day service;
         (b)   If preparing foods for service from raw ingredients uses only
minimal assembly; and
         (c)   Foods served at an establishment that requires complex
preparation (whether canned, frozen, or fresh prepared) are obtained from
approved food processing plants, high risk food service establishments, or
retail food stores.
      (3)   LOW RISK means a facility presents a low-relative risk of causing
foodborne illness based upon few or no food handling operations typically
implicated in foodborne illness outbreaks.
         (a)   The following criteria shall be used to classify LOW RISK
facilities:
            1.   Only pre-packaged foods are available or served in the
facility, and any potentially hazardous foods available are commercially pre-
packaged in an approved food processing plant;
            2.   Only limited preparation of non-potentially hazardous foods
and beverages, such as snack foods and carbonated beverages, occurs at the
facility; or
            3.   Only beverages (alcoholic or non-alcoholic) are served at the
facility.
         (b)   The Health Authority may reclassify a facility based upon its
experience with such facility if, in his or her opinion, a health hazard will
not result from such reclassification or such reclassification will provide
better protection for the public. Factors to be used when considering
reclassification of a facility include inspection history, number and frequency
of violations and their severity, and corrective actions taken.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-7) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.33 CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of
time for the correction of the violations found; correction of the violations
shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance with the
following provisions.
   (A)   If an imminent health hazard exists, including, but not limited to,
complete lack of refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the
establishment shall immediately cease food service or sales operations.
      (1)   (a)   All violations of four- or five-point weighted items shall be
corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten days following
inspection.
         (b)   Within 15 days after the inspection, the holder of the license
shall notify the Health Authority stating that four- and five-point weighted
violations have been corrected. A follow-up inspection, as deemed necessary by
the Health Authority, shall be conducted to confirm correction.
      (2)   All one- or two-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection.
      (3)   When the rating scare of the establishment is less than 60, the
establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations
within 48 hours. One or more re-inspections will be conducted at reasonable
time intervals to assure correction.
      (4)   In the case of temporary food service establishments, all
violations shall be corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected
within 24 hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food service
operations until authorized to resume by the Health Authority.
   (B)   Failure of the license holder or operator to comply with any time
limits for corrections may result in cessation of food service operations. An
opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limitations, or
both, will be provided if a written request is filed with the Health
Administrator within ten days following cessation of operations. If a request
for hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within 20 days of receipt of
the request.
   (C)   Whenever a food service establishment or retail food store is required
under the provisions of division (A) above to cease operations, it shall not
resume operations until it is shown on re-inspection that conditions
responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist. An opportunity
for re-inspection shall be offered within a reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-8) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.34 EXAMINATION, CONDEMNATION OF FOOD, EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Authority as may be
necessary to determine freedom from adulteration or misbranding. The Health
Authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, place a
hold order on any food which he or she determines or has probable cause to
believe to be unwholesome or otherwise adulterated or misbranded. Under a hold
order, food shall be permitted to be suitably stored. It shall be unlawful for
any person to move or alter a hold order notice or tag placed on food by the
Health Authority. Neither such food nor the containers thereof shall be re-
labeled, repackaged, or reprocessed, altered, disposed of, or destroyed without
permission of the Health Authority, except on an order by a court of competent
jurisdiction. After the owner or person in charge has had a hearing as provided
in this chapter, and on the basis of evidence produced at such hearing, or on
the basis of examination in the event of written request for a hearing is not
received within ten days, the Health Authority may vacate the hold order or
may, by written notice, direct the owner or person in charge of food which was
placed under the hold order to denature or destroy such food, or bring it into
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall be stayed if
the order is appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within three days.
   (B)   Where equipment used in the preparation of food products is found to
be in a state of disrepair, unsafe, unsuitable for use, or unsanitary, such
equipment shall be taken out of use and a hold order placed on said items by
the Health Authority. Such equipment may not be put back into service until
written permission is obtained from the Health Authority. It shall be unlawful
for any person to move or alter a hold order notice or tag placed on equipment
by the Health Authority. Such equipment shall not be altered, disposed of, or
destroyed without permission of the Health Authority, except on an order in a
court of competent jurisdiction. After the owner or person in charge has had a
hearing as provided in this chapter, and on the basis of the evidence produced
at such hearing or on the basis of examination in the event of a written
request for a hearing is not received within ten days, the Health Authority may
vacate the hold order or may, by written notice, direct the owner or person in
charge of the equipment which was placed under the hold order to remove such
equipment or bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such
order shall be stayed if the order is appealed to a court of competent
jurisdiction within three days.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-9) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.35 PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED.
   (A)   When the Health Authority has reasonable cause to suspect possible
disease transmission by an employee of a food service establishment or retail
food store, it may secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee or make
any other investigation as may be indicated and take appropriate action.
   (B)   The Health Authority may require any or all of the following measures:
      (1)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in a food
service establishment or retail food store;
      (2)   The immediate closing of the food service establishment or retail
food store concerned until, in the opinion of the Health Authority, no further
danger or disease outbreak exists;
      (3)   Restrictions of the employee’s services to some areas of the
establishment where there will be no danger of transmitting disease; and/or
      (4)   Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee or
other employees and of his or her or their body discharges.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-10) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.36 FOOD HANDLERS’ CLASSES.
   The Health Authority may order any food handler to attend an immediate food
handler training course when, in the judgment of the Health Authority, the work
habits of said food handler constitute a hazard to public health. Fees may be
charged by the Health Authority to offset any costs incurred by the Health
Authority.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-11) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.37 FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS OUTSIDE OF THE COUNTY.
   Food from establishments outside the jurisdiction of the Health Authority
may be sold in the county if such food service establishments conform to the
provisions of this chapter or to substantially equivalent provisions. To
determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the Health Authority
may accept reports from responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where
such food service establishments are located.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-12) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.38 PLAN REVIEW OF FUTURE CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Whenever a food service establishment or retail food store is
constructed or extensively remodeled, and whenever an existing structure is
converted to use a as food service establishment or retail food store, properly
prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or
conversion shall be submitted to the Health Authority for review and approval
before construction, remodeling, or conversion is begun. The plans and
specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical
plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of
proposed fixed equipment and facilities. All applicable food service equipment
shall be of a quality as approved by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF)
or equivalent. New equipment which is approved for a certain use by NSF shall
be automatically approved by the Health Authority. Other applicable equipment
or used equipment shall be evaluated or otherwise approved by the Health
Authority. The Health Authority shall approve the plans and specifications if
they meet the requirements of this chapter. No food service establishment or
retail food store shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted
except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Health
Authority.
   (B)   Whenever plans and specifications are required by division (A) above
to be submitted to the Health Authority, the Health Authority shall inspect the
food service establishment or retail food store prior to the start of
operations to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications,
and with the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   A plan review fee of $300 shall be charged for proposed operations of
3,000 square feet or less in size. A plan review fee of $500 shall be charged
for proposed operations of 3,001 to 6,000 square feet in size. A plan review
fee of $750 shall be charged for proposed operations over 6,000 square feet in
size. A plan review fee of $150 shall be charged for existing operations of any
size where only moderate levels of remodeling are proposed. The Health
Authority shall determine whether a remodeling project is considered moderate
in scope. The required fee shall be submitted with the prepared plans and
specifications.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-13) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003; Ord. passed 2-
16-2010)
§ 117.39 INJUNCTIONS.
   The state’s Attorney of the county may bring action for an injunction to
restrain any violation of this chapter or to enjoin the operations of any such
establishment causing such violation.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-15) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $500. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-14) (Ord. passed 4-21-1987; Ord. passed 8-18-1992; Ord.
passed 3-21-1995; Ord. passed 12-16-1997; Ord. passed 8-19-2003)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
Persons Underage
   
130.01   Prohibiting the sale of tobacco to minors; possession of tobacco by
minors
   
130.02   Prohibiting the possession or consumption of alcohol
Prohibition Against Public Camping
   
130.10   Title
   
130.11   Jurisdiction and applicability
   
130.12   Purpose
   
130.13   Incorporation of recitals
   
130.14   Definitions
   
130.15   Public camping prohibited
   
130.16   Exceptions to prohibition
   
130.17   Removal of campsite on public property
   
130.18   Disposition and release of personal property
   
130.19   Assessment of fines
   
130.20   Fines
   
130.21   Mitigation
 
   
130.99   Penalty
PERSONS UNDERAGE
§ 130.01 PROHIBITING THE SALE OF TOBACCO TO MINORS; POSSESSION OF TOBACCO BY
MINORS.
   (A)   Possession by minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of 21 years of age to possess any tobacco product or to
misrepresent his or her age or identity for the purpose of obtaining tobacco
products.
   (B)   Sale to minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell, offer for sale, give away, or deliver any tobacco product to any person
under the age of 21 years old.
   (C)   Minimum age to sell tobacco products. It shall be unlawful for any
person to engage, employ, or permit any person under the age of 21 years of age
to sell tobacco products.
   (D)   Public signs. Signs informing the public of the age restriction for
the purchase of tobacco products shall be posted at or near every display or
tobacco products, and shall read as follows:
   “The sale of tobacco products to persons under the age of 21 is prohibited
by law.”
   (E)   Definition of tobacco products. For the purposes of this section, the
term TOBACCO PRODUCT shall mean any substance containing tobacco leaf,
including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, other smoking tobacco, snuff,
or chewing tobacco, or any other product made wholly or in part of tobacco
irrespective of whether or not such tobacco is flavored, adulterated, or mixed
with any other ingredient.
   (F)   Charging violations. Only duly appointed and authorized peace officers
shall have authority to sign complaints and charge violations of this section.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-1) (Ord. passed 8-17-1999; Ord. 2024-08-A, passed 8-20-2024)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 PROHIBITING THE POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL.
   (A)   Possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under 21. It shall be
unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to purchase, accept delivery, or
have possession of any alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   Consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under 21. It shall be
unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to consume alcoholic liquor.
   (C)   Exception. The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person
under 21 years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious
service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under 21 years of age under
the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent or those persons
standing in loco parentis of such person under 21 years of age in the privacy
of a home, is not prohibited under this section.
   (D)   Definition of alcoholic liquor. For the purpose of this section, the
term ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR (alcoholic, spiritous, and malt liquors) shall mean any
intoxicating liquors which can be used as a beverage, and which, when drunk to
excess, will produce intoxication.
   (E)   Charging violations. Only duly appointed and authorized peace officers
shall have the authority to sign complaints and charge violations of this
section.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-1) (Ord. passed 5-20-2003) Penalty, see §
130.99
PROHIBITION AGAINST PUBLIC CAMPING
§ 130.10 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Rock Island County prohibition against
public camping.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.11 JURISDICTION AND APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply within Rock Island County and
outside of the territory of each incorporated local governmental entity.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.12 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to define and abate the public nuisance of
public camping in Rock Island County, Illinois.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.13 INCORPORATION OF RECITALS.
   The recitals laid out in Ord. 2024-09 shall be and are hereby incorporated
as findings of fact as if said recitals were fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.14 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions apply to this subchapter:
   BEDDING. A sleeping bag, or any other material, used for bedding purposes.
   CAMPSITE. Any physical space that is not within an established structure,
where bedding or any stove or fire is placed, established or maintained for the
purpose of maintaining a temporary place to live, whether or not such place
incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack or any other structure, or any
vehicle or part thereof.
   COUNTY OF ROCK ISLAND PROPERTY. Any real or personal property belonging to
the County of Rock Island or any affiliated entity. COUNTY OF ROCK ISLAND
PROPERTY shall not include any parcel of property specifically designated by
the County of Rock Island in any subsequent ordinance as permitted or intended
to be used for public camping, as the term is defined herein.
   EXEMPT PERSONAL PROPERTY. Items which would otherwise constitute personal
property under the terms of this subchapter, but which:
      (1)   Has no apparent utility or monetary value;
      (2)   Personal property which is unsanitary to store or otherwise
maintain;
      (3)   Any weapon possessed illegally;
      (4)   Drug paraphernalia;
      (5)   Items appearing to be stolen or otherwise appearing to be evidence
of a crime;
      (6)   Items which the person cannot demonstrate the requisite lawful
authority to possess; and
      (7)   Any items of food which can reasonably be expected to spoil or
otherwise perish within the next 30 days.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Any item reasonably recognizable as belonging to a person
and having apparent utility or monetary value, except for exempt personal
property.
   PUBLIC CAMPING. To cause or participate in the establishment of, or the act
of remaining in or at, a campsite.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.15 PUBLIC CAMPING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, on a
public sidewalk, street, alley, lane, other public right-of-way, park, bench,
or any other County of Rock Island Property, nor on or under any bridge or
viaduct, at any time.
   (B)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, in any
pedestrian or vehicular entrance to public or private property abutting a
public right-of-way.
   (C)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, on any
County of Rock Island property or any real property otherwise maintained by
Rock Island County.
   (D)   No person may park a vehicle overnight within on County of Rock Island
property for the purpose of sleeping or otherwise engaging in public camping in
said vehicle.
   (E)   For the purposes of this section, the act of parking or leaving a
vehicle parked for two consecutive hours, and/or remaining within a public
vehicle on any property under the jurisdiction of Rock Island County for the
purpose of public camping, for two consecutive hours without permission from
the County Board Chairman and the County Board, between the hours of midnight
and 6:00 a.m., shall be considered a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.16 EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a violation to engage
in public camping when done:
      (1)   In a manner specifically authorized by this code;
      (2)   On property owned or operated by the Rock Island County Forest
Preserve district when done so as permitted by the rules and regulations by the
Rock Island County Forest Preserve district;
      (3)   After a formal declaration of the County of Rock Island in
emergency circumstances; or
      (4)   Upon resolution of the Chairman of the Board and the Rock Island
County Board the same may exempt a special event from the prohibitions of this
section, if the Chairman of the Board and the Rock Island County Board finds
such exemption to be in the public interest and consistent with the goals and
objectives of the Chairman of the Board and Rock Island County Board and with
such conditions imposed as the Rock Island County Board deems necessary.
   (B)   Any conditions imposed will include a condition requiring that the
applicant provide evidence of adequate insurance coverage and agree to
indemnify the county for any liability, damage or expense incurred by the
county as a result of the activities of the applicant. Any findings by the
Chairman of the Board and the Rock Island County Board shall specify the exact
dates and location covered by the exemption.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.17 REMOVAL OF CAMPSITE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Upon discovery of a campsite on public property, removal of the campsite by
the appropriate person(s) acting on behalf of Rock Island County may occur
under the following circumstances:
   (A)   Prior to removing a campsite, Rock Island County shall post a notice,
24-hours in advance of the removal, unless immediate removal of the campsite is
deemed to be necessary for one of the reasons in divisions (1) through (4)
below. If such immediate removal is undertaken, the basis for causing the
immediate removal of such campsite should be adequately documented by the
appropriate person(s).
      (1)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary to maintain access
to a property;
      
      (2)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary to maintain the
sanitary condition of a property;
      (3)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary because the campsite
is an obstruction to any public right-of-way; or
   
      (4)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary because the campsite
poses a risk to the health and safety of Rock Island County and its residents.
   (B)   At the time of posting the 24-hour notice, the county shall inform a
local agency (delivering social services to homeless individuals) of the
location of the campsite and the persons found to be in violation of this
subchapter, so said agency may determine whether or not it would be appropriate
to offer its services to those persons.
   (C)   After the 24-hour notice period has passed, the appropriate person(s)
acting on behalf of Rock Island County are authorized to remove the campsite
and all personal property related thereto.
   (D)   No portion of this section shall be construed to prohibit any person
found to be engaging in public camping from removing their personal property
from the campsite; however, such personal property that constitutes exempt
personal property and which a reasonably prudent law enforcement officer,
exercising the applicable constitutional standard, would conclude that said
exempt personal property constitutes items appearing to be stolen or otherwise
appearing to be evidence of a crime, and/or items which the person cannot
demonstrate the requisite lawful authority to possess, may be retained and
stored as evidence.
   (E)   In addition to any other remedy provided by law or this subchapter,
any person found in violation of this subchapter may be immediately removed
from the premises where the campsite is located.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.18 DISPOSITION AND RELEASE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   All personal property removed from any campsite which is not exempt
personal property shall be stored by the appropriate law enforcement agency of
Rock Island County, for a minimum of 30 days, during which time it shall be
reasonably available for and released to an individual confirming ownership.
   (B)   All exempt personal property may be disposed of or retained as
evidence by the Rock Island County Sheriff.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.19 ASSESSMENT OF FINES.
   As pertains to any fines authorized by this subchapter, the Rock Island
County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance, or by State of Illinois statute,
whoever suffers or permits any public nuisance or nuisance as specified in this
subchapter to exist or continue in violation of this subchapter shall be
subject to a separate fine for each offense. Fines may also be assessed by a
court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer pursuant to the Rock
Island County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance for failure to abate
violations of this subchapter in accordance with this subchapter, State of
Illinois statute or the Rock Island County Administrative Adjudication
Ordinance. Each day that a violation of this subchapter exists or continues
shall be considered a separate offense and any fine or fines for these separate
offenses shall be assessed in accordance with applicable State of Illinois
statutes.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.20 FINES.
   (A)   The penalty for any person's first violation of this subchapter within
a rolling 24-month period shall be $75.
   (B)   The penalty for any person's second violation of this subchapter
within a rolling 24-month period shall be $150.
   (C)   The penalty for any person's third violation of this subchapter within
a rolling 24-month period shall be $350.
   (D)   The penalty for any person's fourth violation of this subchapter
within a rolling 24-month period shall be $500.
   (E)   The penalty for any person's fifth violation of this subchapter within
a rolling 24-month period shall be $750.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.21 MITIGATION.
   Upon violation of this subchapter, in addition to any other factors deemed
appropriate by the Court or the hearing officer pursuant to the Rock Island
County Administrative Adjudication Ordinance, the Court or the hearing officer
pursuant to the Rock Island County Administrative Adjudication Ordinances shall
consider in mitigation whether or not the person immediately removed all
personal property and litter, including but not limited to bottles, can and
garbage from the campsite after being informed it was in violation of the law.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating §
130.01 shall be subject to a citation. The citation may be paid at the office
of the Circuit Clerk. A fine of $25 shall be assessed if the citation is paid
within 48 hours after issuance, excluding weekends and court holidays. A fine
of at least $50 shall be assessed thereafter. In lieu of a fine for a first
offense, a person who pleads or is found guilty of violating §
130.01 may elect to attend a tobacco use class presented by the American Lung
Association or any other organization approved by the court at his or her own
expense. Upon proof of successful completion of the class within a reasonable
amount of time to be determined by the court, the fine shall be waived.
(Prior Code, § 4-6-1)
   (C)   Any person violating §
130.02 shall be subject to a citation. The citation shall be paid at the office
of the Circuit Clerk. A fine of $50 shall be assessed for the first such
violation of §
130.02. A fine of at least $75 shall be assessed thereafter. In lieu of a fine
in the first offense, a person who pleads or is found guilty of violating §
130.02 may elect to attend an alcohol prevention class presented by an
acceptable organization approved by the court at his or her own expense.
(Prior Code, § 5-4-1)
(Ord. passed 8-17-1999; Ord. passed 5-20-2003)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME PARKS
      
152.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
153.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
154.   ZONING REGULATIONS
      
155.   RESERVED
      
156.   POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Contractor registration
Building Codes
   
150.15   Adoption of various codes
   
150.16   International Residential Code
   
150.17   International Building Code
   
150.18   International Fuel Gas Code
   
150.19   International Mechanical Code
   
150.20   International Existing Building Code
   
150.21   International Electric Code
   
150.22   International Property Maintenance Code
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Contractor registration.
      (1)   Permit required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a
building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove,
convert, or replace any electrical, mechanical, or plumbing system, the
installation of which is regulated by codes adopted by the county, or to cause
any such work to be done, shall first make an application to the Director of
Zoning and Building and obtain the required permit.
      (2)   Registration required. The owner or occupants of single-family
detached residential dwellings are permitted to obtain permits and perform work
to said residence and accessory structures. Work being performed on structures
by persons other than an owner/occupier of a primary single-family detached
residential dwelling and accessory structures including all persons, firms,
corporations, owners, authorized agents, or contractors shall be registered
with the county. See division (B) below for electrical contractor and division
(C) below for mechanical contractors for specific requirements.
      (3)   Permit and compliance bond required. Any person, firm, or
corporation desiring to engage in the business of any form of building
construction or reconstruction, including, but not limited to, concrete and
masonry contracting, demolition contracting, electrical contracting, fire
sprinkler contracting, fire suppression contracting, fire alarm contracting,
general contracting, heating, ventilation and air conditioning contracting,
lawn sprinkler contracting, swimming pool contractors and installers, private
sewage disposal contracting, roofing contracting, sign contracting, siding and
window contracting, and radon mitigation contracting, or any similar trade
required to obtain a permit per county ordinances shall register with the
office of Zoning and Building Safety effective March 1 of each year, and shall
file with the office of Zoning and Building Safety a compliance bond, with the
form thereof to be furnished by the Building Inspector, in the amount of
$10,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of all the provisions of
this chapter. This bond is a continuous bond and shall remain in full force and
effect until canceled by notice. The surety shall have the right to cancel this
bond for future liability upon 30 days’ written notice to the County Zoning and
Building Safety. Plumbing contractors shall provide a copy of current state
contractor registration and license of plumber of record.
      (4)   Proof of insurance required. General contractors, upon
registration, shall provide the following: Proof of liability insurance
acceptable to the office of Zoning and Building Safety in the type and amount
listed below.
         (a)   Each applicant shall obtain and maintain for the duration of
such registration, public liability and property damage insurance in the
minimum amount and for as hereby specified: $100,000 for each occurrence of
property damage, and $300,000 for each occurrence of personal injury or bodily
harm. Such policy shall provide that it cannot be canceled except upon written
notification to the office of Zoning and Building Safety at least 30 days prior
to the date of cancellation. Proof shall be a certificate of insurance.
         (b)   Proof that the applicant has obtained workers’ compensation
insurance or that the applicant is an approved self-insurer of workers’
compensation. Proof shall either be the certificate of insurance from the
insurance provider or the certificate of approval as a self-insurer issued by
the State Industrial Commission. If an applicant is a sole proprietorship or
partnership then the applicant shall not be required to provide proof of
workers’ compensation insurance. Such applicant’s application shall include a
sworn statement that the applicant has no employees.
      (5)   Fees. Effective March 1, 2014, the fee for registration of all
contractors shall be $50 and shall be valid for one year, and the filing fee
for plumbing contractors shall be $50 and shall be valid for one year.
   (B)   Electrical contractor registration.
      (1)   The term ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR shall mean and include any person
engaged in the business of installing, erecting, repairing, or contracting to
install, erect, or repair electrical equipment. An applicant for an ELECTRICAL
CONTRACTOR shall be of legal age to conduct business in the state.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) below, before any
person shall engage in the business of electrical contracting in the county,
and before any person now engaged in the business or any class thereof shall
continue in the business of electrical contracting, such person shall be
required to register and be licensed with the county.
         (b)   The license required by this section shall be issued only to an
individual, and not to a corporation or firm.
      (3)   The following persons shall not be required to register as an
electrical contractor pursuant to division (B)(2) above, nor shall they be
required to pay a registration fee:
         (a)   Electricians employed by an electrical contractor to perform or
to supervise electrical work; and
         (b)   Persons performing electrical work in their own domiciles, with
the assistance of any member of said owner-occupant’s family and household,
however, the Director of Zoning and Building Safety shall require a sufficient
display of electrical experience of a practical and elementary character so as
to test the person’s knowledge and qualifications of the electrical work to be
done in the interest of safeguarding life and property. The owner-occupant
shall obtain a permit for any such work and shall call for inspection by the
county.
      (4)   An electrical contractor who is licensed in any county, city, or
village in the state or Iowa shall be required by the county to register and
pay a registration fee; however, the Director of Zoning and Building Safety
shall require a sufficient display of electrical experience of a practical and
elementary character so as to test the knowledge and qualifications of an
electrical contractor subject to this division (B) for the electrical work to
be done in the interest of safeguarding life and property.
      (5)   No registration required by this section shall be issued until the
applicant therefor has established proper qualifications and has successfully
completed an examination conducted by a nationally recognized testing agency,
as approved by the Director of Zoning and Building Safety.
      (6)   Before any registration required by this chapter is issued, the
applicant therefor shall furnish a compliance bond in the penal sum of $10,000.
The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the applicant’s
work in accordance with the provisions of the adopted codes. This shall be a
continuing bond until canceled by notice. The surety shall have the right to
cancel this bond for future liability upon 30 days’ written notice to the
Director of Zoning and Building Safety, which notice must be received by the
office of Zoning and Building Safety to be effective.
      (7)   No person permitted to register under the provisions of this
section shall install or repair electrical equipment for electric light, heat,
or power purposes after the expiration of the registration or after the
registration shall have been revoked pursuant to this section, unless the
registration or renewal thereof shall have been received.
      (8)   Registrant must have taken 12 hours of update courses within one
year of adoption of any new or revised code for each code change and must
submit a certificate of completion prior to renewal of the license.
      (9)   Registration required by this section is prohibited from being
loaned, rented, assigned, or transferred.
   (C)   Mechanical contractor registration.
      (1)   The term MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR shall mean and include any person
engaged in the business of installing, maintaining, altering, or repairing
mechanical systems that are permanently installed and/or utilized to provide
control of environmental conditions and related processes within buildings.
This also includes those mechanical systems, system components, equipment and
appliances, the installation of fuel gas distribution piping and equipment, and
fuel gas-fired appliances and fuel gas-fired appliance venting systems. An
applicant for a MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR shall be of legal age to conduct business
in the state.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) below, before any person
shall engage in the business of electrical contracting in the county, and
before any person now engaged in the business or any class thereof shall
continue in the business of electrical contracting, such person shall be
required to register with the county. The registration required by this section
shall be issued only to an individual, and not to a corporation or firm.
      (3)   The following persons shall not be required to register as a
mechanical contractor pursuant to division (C)(2) above, nor shall they be
required to pay a registration fee:
         (a)   Persons employed by a mechanical contractor to perform or to
supervise mechanical work; and
         (b)   Persons performing mechanical work in their own domiciles, with
the assistance of any member of said owner-occupant’s family and household,
however, the Director of Zoning and Building Safety shall require a sufficient
display of mechanical experience of a practical and elementary character so as
to test the person’s knowledge and qualifications of the mechanical work to be
done in the interest of safeguarding life and property. The owner-occupant
shall obtain a permit for any such work and shall call for inspection by the
county.
      (4)   A mechanical contractor who is licensed in any county, city, or
village in the state or Iowa shall be required by the county to register, and
pay a registration fee; however, the Director of Zoning and Building Safety
shall require a sufficient display of mechanical experience of a practical and
elementary character so as to test the knowledge and qualifications of an
mechanical contractor subject to this division (C) for the mechanical work to
be done in the interest of safeguarding life and property.
      (5)   No registration required by this section shall be issued until the
applicant therefor has established proper qualifications and has successfully
completed an examination conducted by a nationally recognized testing agency,
as approved by the Director of Zoning and Building Safety.
      (6)   Before any registration required by this chapter is issued, the
applicant therefor shall furnish a compliance bond in the penal sum of $10,000.
The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the applicant’s
work in accordance with the provisions of the adopted codes. This shall be a
continuing bond until canceled by notice. The surety shall have the right to
cancel this bond for future liability upon 30 days’ written notice to the
Director of Zoning and Building Safety, which notice must be received by the
office of Zoning and Building Safety to be effective.
      (7)   No person permitted to register under the provisions of this
section shall install or repair electrical equipment for electric light, heat,
or power purposes after the expiration of the registration or after the
registration shall have been revoked pursuant to this section, unless the
registration or renewal thereof shall have been received.
      (8)   A registration required by this section is prohibited from being
loaned, rented, assigned, or transferred.
(Res. passed 2-18-2014)
BUILDING CODES
§ 150.15 ADOPTION OF VARIOUS CODES.
   (A)   The provisions of the International Building Code, the International
Residential Code, the Fuel Gas Code, the International Mechanical Code, the
International Existing Building Code, the International Property Maintenance
Code, 2012 editions, as prepared and published in book form by the
International Code Council, and, the NFPA 70: National Electrical Code prepared
and published by the National Fire Protection Association are hereby adopted by
reference, pursuant to the provisions of 55 ILCS 5/5-1063, 5/5-1065, 5/5-6002,
and 5/5-6004, subject to the amendments set forth in §§
150.16 through
150.22.
   (B)   Where the provisions of the International Building Code, the
International Residential Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, the
International Mechanical Code, the International Existing Building Code, and
the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 editions, as prepared and
published in book form by the International Code Council, and, the NFPA 70:
National Electrical Code prepared and published by the National Fire Protection
Association as prepared and published in book form and adopted by this section,
make references to other codes, they shall be the governing code. Where a
conflict between any referenced code appears, the more restrictive, as
determined by the Building Official, shall apply.
(Res. passed 2-18-2014)
§ 150.16 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   The International Residential Code, 2012 edition, shall be amended as
follows.
   (A)   R101.1 Title. “Rock Island County, Illinois” shall be inserted in “
[NAME OF JURISDICTION]” and shall be known as “The Jurisdiction.”
   (B)   R101.2 Scope. Add exception: “3. The most recent edition of the
Illinois Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair,
relocation, addition, replacement, and maintenance of plumbing systems as
stipulated by the Illinois Plumbing Code. The provisions of the International
Residential Code shall apply to all plumbing and piping systems not covered by
the Illinois Plumbing Code. In addition, any structure in which a building
drain is installed shall have at least one (1) vent stack carried through the
roof and increased to a minimum size of Four Inches (4”) at a point one foot
(1’) below the roof line.”
   (C)   R104.1 General. Add: “The Building Official, the Code Official, the
Administrative Officer, and the Director of the Department of Zoning & Building
Safety shall be inferred to be one and the same.”
   (D)   R104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of Construction and
Equipment. Add: “Structures, including accessory buildings or buildings for
personal storage, built under this section using Engineered trusses, said
trusses shall meet a 30/10/20/10 loading requirement unless designed as part of
a complete building system with plans/prints bearing an Illinois Licensed
Design Professional’s stamp and indicating the design requirements of Table
R301.2(1) are met.”
   (E)   R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Change “(1) 120 square feet;” Delete “
(10).”
   (F)   R108.2 Fees. The county building fee schedule shall apply.
   (G)   R108.6 Work commencing prior to permit issuance. Change:
      “Any persons, firms, corporations, owners, authorized agents or
contractors who commences work requiring a permit on a building, structure,
electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary
permits shall be subject to a penalty fee equal to the permit fee for the
entire project, and not limited to the portion of the project done prior to
permit issuance.
      Persons or contractors commencing work requiring a permit prior to
obtaining the necessary permits more than once in a 5 year rolling period
ending on the date of the second violation, (including a 2nd occurrence on the
same job site) Shall be subject to violation penalties as described in R113.4.”
   (H)   R113.4 Violation Penalties. Add first word: “For.” Delete the period
at the end of the section and add: “The Building Official is authorized, but
not limited to, cause the following actions:
      1.   post a Stop Work order on the subject project, and
      2.   post a Stop Work order on any or all other projects being permitted
by said person or contractor within the Jurisdiction, and
      3.   post a stop work order on any other contractor who re-validates the
permit and uses the original person or contractor who violated the permit
requirement to perform the work authorized, and
      4.   seek fines of not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00 per
violation with each day a violation is allowed to continue constituting a
separate violation and other penalties as allowed by law through the Municipal
Code Enforcement System or the Rock Island County State's Attorney’s Office,
and
      5.   reject permit applications for persons or contractors who change
their business name to thwart the intent of this section, and
      6.   notify any other jurisdiction of said action.”
   (I)   Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Criteria.
 
Ground Snow  Wind Design           Seismic    Subject to Damage From
Load         Speed d   Topographic Design     Weathering Front line Termite c
             (mph)     Effects k   Category f a          depth b
ps = 30 psf,
except that
calculations
for
additional   90        YES         A          SEVERE     42”      Moderate to
drift loads                                                         Heavy
shall use a
ground snow
load pg = 25
psf
 
 
Winter Design Ice Barrier                   Air Freezing Mean Annual Temp.
Temp e        Underlayment Flood Hazards g  Index I      j
              Required h
                           Initial NFIP 04/
-4F           YES          14/1978 FIRM     2000         50.5F
                           #170582 04/05/
                           2010
 
   (J)   R202 Definitions. Accessory Structure: Remove definition and replace
with “A structure not more than two stories in height, the use of which is
customarily accessory to and incidental to that of dwelling(s) and which is
located on the same tax parcel.”
   (K)   R305 Ceiling height. Add: “Exception 3. Ceilings may have projections
to within 6 feet 6 inches of the finished floor for a width of no more than 48
inches.”
   (L)   R313.2 One- and Two-Family Dwelling Automatic Fire Systems. Add:
“Exception 2. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be
required when the requirements of Section R501.3 are met and the under-stair
surface and any soffits are protected with 1/2 gypsum board.”
   (M)   R315.1 Carbon Monoxide Alarms. Change: “For new construction, an
approved carbon monoxide alarm may be installed inside each separate sleeping
area, or, if installed outside of each separate sleeping area must be within 15
feet of the door to the sleeping area in dwelling units within which fuel-fired
appliances are installed and in dwelling units that have an attached garage.”
   (N)   Table R403.1 Minimum Width of concrete, precast or masonry footings
(inches) a b. Add: “Footnote b. Minimum rebar required #4 @ 8 inches on
center.”
   (O)   R403.1.1 (footings) General. In the third sentence, change: “6 inches
(152mm)” to “8 inches (200mm).”
   (P)   R403.1.1.1 Decks footings. Add: “Deck footings NOT supporting a roof
or over head structure shall be a minimum 12 inches in diameter and 42 inches
below finished grade.”
   (Q)   R403.1.1.2 Covered deck and room addition footings. Add: “All covered
decks, screened porches; three season rooms, four season rooms, room additions,
etc., shall have one of the following:
      1.   Pier footings designed by a design professional.
      2.   12 inch wide reinforced trench footing 42 inches in depth.
      3.   Spread footings 42 inches in depth with a minimum 8 inch masonry
wall or concrete foundation wall.”
   (R)   R507.2.3. Add after paragraph: “Where the lateral load connections are
provided in accordance with Figure R507.2.3(2), the hold-down tension devices
can be installed in not less than 4 locations per deck, and each device shall
have an allowable stress design capacity of not less than 750 pounds (3336N).”
   (S)   Figure 507.2.3(2). Add:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d53095237a00b1625eb993db652189a9fc2b0aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1743.png]
   (T)   R2603.5.1. Add: “Building sewers than connect to private sewage
disposal systems shall be a minimum of 6 inches below finished grade at the
point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 42
inches below grade.”
   (U)   Part VIII Electrical, Chapters 34-43 Chapter 34 General Requirements.
Add: “Where the 2011 National Electric Code NFPA 70 as referenced is amended by
this Resolution, such amendments are to be interpreted as a minimum requirement
for this Part. Requirements for registration with the jurisdiction, permits,
fees and violations/penalties of this 2012 International Residential Code
hereby apply to the 2011 National Electric Code NFPA 70.”
   (V)   E3406.3 Minimum Size of Conductors.
      (1)   Change: “14 AWG Copper” to “12 AWG Copper.”
      (2)   Change: “12 AWG Aluminum” to “10 AWG Aluminum.”
      (3)   Add: “In all instances, where this code or the NFPA70 references
‘14 AWG Copper,’ ‘12 AWG Copper’ shall apply. In all instances, where this code
or the NFPA70 references ‘12 AWG Aluminum’ to ‘10 AWG Aluminum shall apply.’”
   (W)   Appendices. Adopt as noted:
      (1)   A - Sizing and capacities of gas piping;
      (2)   B - Sizing of venting systems serving appliances equipped with
draft hoods, Category 1 appliances, and appliances listed for type B vents;
      (3)   C - Exit terminals of mechanical draft and direct-vent venting
systems;
      (4)   D - Recommended procedure for inspection of an existing appliance
installation;
      (5)   E - Manufactured housing used as a dwelling; and
      (6)   F - Radon control methods with the following amendments:
         (a)   AF103.4.4: The second sentence must be entirely deleted.
(Delete: “sumps used as the suction point in a sub slab depressurization system
shall have a lid designed to accommodate the vent pipe.”)
         (b)   AFI 03.5.3: In the second sentence delete “the roof” and insert
“above the highest eave of the house.”
         (c)   AFI 03.6.1:
            1.   First paragraph:
               a.   Delete “ABS” (not allowed);
               b.   Add “schedule 40” prior to “PVC;” and
               c.   The last sentence must be amended to read: “Alternatively,
the 3-inch (76 mm) pipe shall be inserted directly above the interior drain
tile loop and not tied into it.”
            2.   Second paragraph: In the first sentence delete “surface of the
roof” and insert “highest eave of the house.”
         (d)   AFI 03.6.2: The last sentence should read: “Vent pipes shall
connect to a single vent that terminates at least 12” above the highest eave of
the house or each individual vent pipe shall terminate separately at least 12”
above the highest eave of the house.”
         (e)   AF103.10: The second sentence must read as follows: “Each radon
vent pipe shall terminate at least 12” above the highest eave of the house or
shall be connected to a single vent that terminates at least 12” above the
highest eave of the house.”
         (f)   1.   G - Swimming Pools, Spas, Hot tubs;
            2.   H - Patio Covers;
            3.   J - Existing Buildings and Structures;
            4.   K - Sound Transmission;
            5.   M - Home Daycare R-3 Occupancy;
            6.   O - Automatic Vehicular Gates; and
            7.   Q - ICC- IRC Electrical provisions/NEC cross-reference.
(Res. passed 2-18-2014)
§ 150.17 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   The International Building Code, 2012 edition, shall be amended as follows.
   (A)   Section 101.1 Title. “Rock Island County, Illinois” shall be inserted
in “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]” and shall be known as “The Jurisdiction.”
   (B)   Section 101.2 Scope. Add “1.” to exception, and add exception: “2.
Existing buildings undergoing repair, alternations, additions, or change of
occupancy shall be permitted to comply with the International Existing Building
Code.”
   (C)   Section 104.1 General. Add “the Building official, the Code Official,
the Administrative Officer and the Director of the Department of Zoning and
Building Safety shall be inferred to be one and the same.”
   (D)   Section 101.4.3 Plumbing. Remove the paragraph and replace with: “The
most recent edition of the Illinois Plumbing Code shall apply to the
installation, alteration, repair, relocation, addition, replacement, and
maintenance of plumbing systems as stipulated by the Illinois Plumbing Code.
The provisions of the International Residential Code shall apply to all
plumbing and piping systems not covered by the Illinois Plumbing Code. In
addition, any structure in which a building drain is installed shall have at
least one vent stack carried through the roof and increased to a minimum size
of four inches at a point one foot below the roof line.”
   (E)   Section 109.4 Work Commencing Prior to Permit Issuance. Change to:
“Any person, firm, Corporation or Contractor who commences work requiring a
permit on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing
system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty fee
equal and in addition to the permit fee for the entire project, and not limited
to the portion of the project done prior to discovery of the violation. Persons
or contractors commencing work requiring a permit prior to obtaining the
necessary permits more than once in a 5 year rolling period ending on the date
of the second violation (including a 2nd occurrence on the same job site) shall
be subject to violation penalties as described in 114.4.”
   (F)   Section 114.4 Violation Penalties. Add first word “For.” Delete the
period at the end of the section and add “The Building Official is authorized,
but not limited to, cause the following actions:
      1.   post a Stop Work order on the subject project, and
      2.   post a Stop Work order on any or all other projects being permitted
by said person or contractor within the Jurisdiction, and
      3.   post a stop work order on any other contractor who re-validates the
permit and uses the original person or contractor who violated the permit
requirement to perform the work authorized, and
      4.   seek fines of not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00 per
violation with each day a violation is allowed to continue constituting a
separate violation and other penalties as allowed by law through the Municipal
Code Enforcement System or the Rock Island County State’s Attorney’s Office,
and
      5.   reject permit applications for persons or contractors who change
their business name to thwart the intent of this section, and
      6.   notify any other jurisdiction of said action.”
   (G)   Section 1612 Flood loads. Replace the section with “1612 FLOOD LOADS,
The Rock Island County Code of Ordinances Section 3-2-38, Development in a
Special Flood Hazard Area shall apply.”
   (H)   Section 2701.1 Scope. Add “Where the 2011 National Electric Code NFPA
70 as referenced is amended by this Resolution, such amendments are to be
interpreted as a minimum requirement. Requirements for registration with the
jurisdiction, permits, fees and violations/penalties of this 2012 International
Building Code hereby apply to the 2011 National Electric Code NFPA 70.”
   (I)   Section 3412.2 Applicability.
      (1)   Structures existing prior to add “September 13th, 1966...”
      (2)   [Reserved] Adopt the following Appendices:
         (a)   A - Employee Qualifications;
         (b)   B - Board of Appeals;
         (c)   C - Group U Agricultural Buildings;
         (d)   D - Fire Districts;
         (e)   E - Supplementary Accessibility Requirements;
         (f)   F - Rodent Proofing;
         (h)   H - Signs;
         (i)   I - Patio Covers;
         (j)   J - Grading; and
         (k)   K - Administrative Provisions.
(Res. passed 2-18-2014)
§ 150.18 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.
   The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, shall be amended as follows.
   (A)   Section 101.1 Title. “Rock Island County, Illinois” shall be inserted
in [NAME OF JURISDICTION] and shall be known as “The Jurisdiction.”
   (B)   Section 103.1 General. Add: “the Building Official, the Code Official,
the Administrative Officer, and the Director of the Department of Zoning &
Building Safety shall be inferred to be one and the same.”
   (C)   Section 106.6.2 Fees. The county building fee schedule shall apply.
   (D)   Section 106.6.3 Refunds. (2) Change “[specify percentage]” to “80%;”
(3) Change “[specify percentage]” to “80%.”
   (E)   Section 108.4 Violation Penalties. After “shall be guilty of a” change
to “petty offense, and shall be subject to remedies as allowed by law. The
Building Official is authorized, but not limited to, the following actions:
      1.   post a Stop Work order on the subject project, and
      2.   post a Stop Work order on any or all other projects being permitted
by said person or contractor within the Jurisdiction, and
      3.   post a stop work order on any other contractor who re-validates the
permit and uses the original person or contractor who violated the permit
requirement to perform the work authorized, and
      4.   seek fines of not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00 per
violation with each day a violation is allowed to continue constituting a
separate violation and other penalties as allowed by law through the Municipal
Code Enforcement System or the Rock Island County State’s Attorney’s Office,
and
      5.   reject permit applications for persons or contractors who change
their business name to thwart the intent of this section, and
      6.   notify any other jurisdiction of said action.”
   (F)   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders. Last sentence after “remove a
violation or unsafe condition” change to “shall be subject to the remedies
allowed under 108.4 and other penalties as prescribed by law.”
   (G)   Section 608 Vented Wall Furnaces. Delete section, not allowed.
   (H)   Section 609 Floor Furnaces. Delete section, not allowed.
   (I)   Appendix A. Adopted by reference.
(Res. passed 2-18-2014)
§ 150.19 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
   The International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, shall be amended as
follows.
   (A)   Section 101.1 Title. “Rock Island County, Illinois” shall be inserted
in “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]” and shall be known as “The Jurisdiction.”
   (B)   Section 103.1 General. Add: “the Building official, the Code Official,
the Administrative Officer, and the Director of the Department of Zoning &
Building Safety shall be inferred to be one and the same.”
   (C)   Section 106.5.1 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Change to:
“Any person, firm, Corporation or Contractor who commences work requiring a
permit on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing
system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty fee
equal and in addition to the permit fee for the entire project, and not limited
to the portion of the project done prior to discovery of the violation.
   Persons or contractors commencing work requiring a permit prior to obtaining
the necessary permits more than once in a 5 year rolling period ending on the
date of the second violation (including a 2nd occurrence on the same job site)
shall be subject to violation penalties as described in R108.4.”
   (D)   Section 106.5.2 Fees. The county building fee schedule shall apply.
   (E)   Section 106.5.3 Refunds. (2) Change “[specify percentage]” to “80%;”
(3) Change “[specify percentage]” to “80%.”
   (F)   Section 108.4 Violation Penalties. After “shall be guilty of a” change
to “petty offense, and shall be subject to remedies as allowed by law. The
Building Official is authorized, but not limited to, the following actions:
      1.   post a Stop Work order on the subject project, and
      2.   post a Stop Work order on any or all other projects being permitted
by said person or contractor within the Jurisdiction, and
      3.   post a stop work order on any other contractor who re-validates the
permit and uses the original person or contractor who violated the permit
requirement to perform the work authorized, and
      4.   seek fines of not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00 per
violation with each day a violation is allowed to continue constituting a
separate violation and other penalties as allowed by law through the Municipal
Code Enforcement System or the Rock Island County State’s Attorney’s Office,
and
      5.   reject permit applications for persons or contractors who change
their business name to thwart the intent of this section, and
      6.   notify any other jurisdiction of said action.”
   (G)   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders. Last sentence after “remove a
violation or unsafe condition,” change to “shall be subject to the remedies
allowed under 108.4 and other penalties as prescribed by law.”
   (H)   Appendices. All appendices are hereby adopted.
(Res. passed 2-18-2014)
§ 150.20 INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
   The International Existing Building Code, 2012 edition, shall be amended as
follows.
   (A)   Section 101.1 Title. “Rock Island County, Illinois” shall be inserted
in “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]” and shall be known as “The Jurisdiction.”
   (B)   Section 104.1 General. Add: “The Building official, the Code Official,
the Administrative Officer, and the Director of the Department of Zoning &
Building Safety shall be inferred to be one and the same.”
   (C)   Section 113.4 Violation Penalties. Add first word “For.” Add “The
Building Official is authorized, but not limited, to cause the following
actions:
      1.   post a Stop Work order on the subject project, and
      2.   post a Stop Work order on any or all other projects being permitted
by said person or contractor within the Jurisdiction, and
      3.   post a stop work order on any other contractor who re-validates the
permit and uses the original person or contractor who violated the permit
requirement to perform the work authorized, and
      4.   seek fines of not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00 per
violation with each day a violation is allowed to continue constituting a
separate violation and other penalties as allowed by law through the Municipal
Code Enforcement System or the Rock Island County State’s Attorney’s Office,
and
      5.   reject permit applications for persons or contractors who change
their business name to thwart the intent of this section, and
      6.   notify any other jurisdiction of said action.”
   (D)   Section 114.3 Unlawful Continuance. Last sentence after “remove a
violation or unsafe condition,” change to “shall be subject to the remedies
allowed under 113.4 and other penalties as prescribed by law.”
   (E)   Section 1301.2. “[date to be inserted by Jurisdiction]” is “September
13th, 1966.”
(Res. passed 2-18-2014)
§ 150.21 INTERNATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE.
   As referenced by the adopted International Code Series, the National
Electric Code NFPA 70, 2011 edition, shall be amended as follows.
   (A)   Section 220.14 Other Loads - All Occupancies. Add:
      “(M) Maximum number of outlets per circuit. Except as otherwise provided,
the maximum number of outlets per circuit shall be:
      (1)   Lighting outlets in dwelling occupancies 12
      (2)   General use receptacles - all dwelling occupancies 10
      (3)   General use receptacles - all dwelling kitchen countertops 2.”
   (B)   Section 230.43 Wiring Methods for 600 Volts Nominal Or Less. Delete in
its entirety and replace with the following: “Service-entrance conductors shall
be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this Code
covering the type of wiring method used and limited to the following methods:
(1) open wiring on insulators; (2) Type IGS cable; (3) rigid metal conduit; (4)
intermediate metal conduit; (5) electrical metallic tubing; (6) wire ways; (7)
busways; (8) auxiliary gutters; (9) rigid nonmetallic conduit; (10) cablebus;
(11) mineral-insulated, metal sheathed cable; (12) High Density Polyethylene
Conduit (HDPE); (13) Nonmetallic Underground Conduit with Conductors NUCC);
(14) Reinforced Thermosetting Resin Conduit (RTRC). (Ord. 2011-546 § 1
(part)).”
   (C)   Section 230.91 Service-Entrance Conductors Inside Structures. Change:
“Location of Overcurrent Protection. The service overcurrent device shall be
connected by no more than 10 feet of raceway from the meter device, in
structures.”
   (D)   Section 314.17 Conductors entering boxes, conduit bodies, or fittings.
Add:
      “(E) Insulated Throats. All fittings for use with EMT conduit, flexible
metallic tubing and flexible metallic conduit shall utilize insulated throats.”
   (E)   Section 334.10 Uses Permitted. Delete in its entirety and replace with
the following: “Section 334.10 Uses Permitted. Type NM and Type NMC cable,
minimum size #12 copper or equivalent shall be permitted to be used in one-
family and two-family dwellings, and in multi-family dwellings. All service and
sub-feeds shall be installed in raceway. Exception: One-family and two-family
dwellings not exceeding three stories in height may utilize #12 NM or NMC cable
or larger without raceways for sub-feeds.”
   (F)   Section 334.12 Uses Not Permitted. Add:
      “(11) Structures other than one-family and two-family dwellings, and in
multi-family dwellings three (3) stories or less.”
   (G)   Section 334.15 Exposed Work. Delete in its entirety and replace with
the following:
      “334.15 Exposed Work - General.
      In exposed work, except as provided in sections 300.11 (A), the cable
shall be installed as specified in (a), (b), and (c) below.
         (a)   To Follow Surface. Cable shall closely follow the surface of the
building surface or of running boards.
         (b)   Protection From Physical Damage. Cable shall be protected from
physical damage to a height of 8 feet (2.44 meters) from the floor by rigid
metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing, Schedule 80 PVC rigid nonmetallic
conduit, Type RTRC marked with suffix-XW, or other approved means.
         (c)   In Unfinished Basements. Where the cable is run at right angles
with the joist in unfinished basements, the cable shall be installed through
bored holes in the joist. Nonmetallic-sheathed cable installed on a wall of an
unfinished basement shall be permitted to be installed in a listed conduit or
tubing or shall be protected in accordance with 300.4. Conduit or tubing shall
be provided with a suitable insulating bushing or adapter at the point the
cable enters the raceway. The sheath of a nonmetallic-sheathed cable shall
extend through the conduit or tubing and into the outlet or device box not less
than 6 mm (1/4 in.) The cable shall be secured within 300 mm (12 in.) of the
point where the cable enters the conduit or tubing. Metal conduit and tubing
and metal outlet boxes shall be connected to an equipment grounding conductor
complying with the provisions of 250.86 and 250.148.”
   (H)   Section 334.40(B) Devices of Insulating Material. Delete In its
entirety and replace with the following:
      “334.40(B) Devices of Insulating Material. All switches, outlets, and tap
devices must terminate in an outlet box complying with the requirements of
Article 314 of the National Electrical Code.”
   (I)   Section 404.4 Wet Locations. Add: “In no case shall any outlet, switch
or unapproved fixture be installed within the restricted tub or shower zone.
The zone is all encompassing and includes the space directly over the tub or
shower and extends Three (3) feet from the side and Eight (8) feet above the
top of the tub rim shall be considered minimum distance from said tub or
shower.”
(Res. passed 2-18-2014)
§ 150.22 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The International Property maintenance Code, 2009 edition, shall be amended
as follows.
   (A)   Section 101.1 Title. “Rock Island County, Illinois” shall be inserted
in “[NAME OF JURISDICTION]” and shall be known as “The Jurisdiction.”
   (B)   Section 103.1 General. Add: “The Building official, the Code Official,
the Administrative Officer, and the Director of the Department of Zoning &
Building Safety shall be inferred to be one and the same.”
   (C)   Section 103.5 Fees. Change “following schedule” to “fee structure set
forth by the Building Official.”
   (D)   Section 112.4 Failure to Comply. After “not less than” insert
“$25.00.” After “more than” insert “$1,000.00.”
   (E)   Section 302.4 Weeds. Delete in its entirety and replace with the
following: “All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of ‘10.’ All noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants, woody vegetation in fence
lines and from the wall to the drip line of any structure; however this term
shall not include cultivated flowers, gardens and trimmed shrubs. For lots over
one acre, the minimum setbacks or required yards shall be maintained as
described above.”
   (F)   Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Insert “April 1st to November 1st.”
   (G)   Section 503.4 Floor surface. Delete “In other than dwelling units.”
   (H)   Section 602.3 Heat supply. Insert “October 1st to May 15th.”
   (I)   Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Insert “October 1st to May
15th.”
   (J)   New text. Add new text as follows:
      “603.1.1 Property owners are required to have annual carbon monoxide
tests of furnaces performed for all fuel-burning furnaces that are 10 years old
or older and for all fuel-burning furnaces that have been inoperative for one
year or longer. Tests must be performed by a properly certified and registered
mechanical contractor. Owners shall immediately notify Inspection Division of
failed tests. Owners shall provide a legible certified copy of successful test
results to Code official not later than 30 days after the test.
      Exception: A carbon monoxide detector installed within 10’ of furnace
will meet the intent of the annual carbon monoxide test requirement.”
      “603.1.2: Every dwelling until shall be equipped with at least one
approved carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within 15 feet of
every room used for sleeping purposes. Carbon monoxide detector/smoke detector
alarms may be installed only if the combined unit provides different alarm
tones for the carbon monoxide detection and the smoke detection.
      Every structure that contains more than one dwelling unit shall contain
at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating condition within 15
feet of every room used for sleeping purposes.
      The required carbon monoxide detector/alarm is permitted to be solely
battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings
that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of
buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal
of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
      Exceptions: Carbon Monoxide Detectors are not required if:
         1.   A residential unit in a building that does not rely on combustion
of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation, or hot water.
         2.   A residential unit in a building that is not connected in any way
to a garage and not close to a source of carbon monoxide.”
      [Reserved] “603.7 Existing HVAC systems. Refrigerant circuit access ports
shall be provided with locking-type tamper-resistant caps or comparable
device.”
   (K)   605.2 Receptacles. Replace with:
      “605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at
least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall
contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground
fault circuit interrupter.
      605.2.1 Bathrooms in Residential units. Each bathroom in residential
units shall have at least one receptacle. Every bathroom receptacle in
residential units shall be protected against ground faults by means of a ground
fault circuit interrupter or other approved means.
      605.2.2 Kitchens in Residential units. Every kitchen countertop
receptacle that is within 6 feet of a sink or exposed pipe shall be protected
against ground faults by means of a ground fault circuit interrupter or other
approved means.”
   (L)   606.1 General. Replace with “Elevators, dumbwaiters, and escalators
shall be maintained and certified in accordance with State statutes and
regulations.”
(Res. passed 2-18-2014)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation, agent, employee, or contractor
of such who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or
who resists enforcement of any provisions of §
150.01 and §§
150.15 through
150.22 shall, upon conviction, forfeit not less than $25 nor more than $1,000
for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution, and in default of
payment of such forfeiture and costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the
County Jail until said forfeiture and costs are paid, for a period not exceed
30 days for each violation. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation, agent, employee, or contractor
who commences work requiring a permit on a building, structure, electrical,
gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits
shall be subject to a penalty fee equal to the permit fee for the entire
project, and not limited to the portion of the project done prior to permit
issuance.
(Res. passed 2-18-2014)
CHAPTER 151: MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Authority
   
151.02   Intent and purpose
   
151.03   Definitions
Requirements
   
151.15   General requirements
   
151.16   Design variance; compliance
   
151.17   Design, construction requirements
   
151.18   Mobile home park maintenance; operation
   
151.19   Mobile homes to be tied down
   
151.20   Permit requirements
   
151.21   Tables of regulations
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 AUTHORITY.
   These regulations are adopted pursuant to the enabling authority set forth
in Ill. Rev. Statutes Ch. 34, § 422, and Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 111.5, § 728, and
shall be cited and known as “The Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park Code ” of the
county or “this chapter.”
(Prior Code, § 3-4-1) (Res. passed 5-20-1986)
§ 151.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The intent and purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county by providing safe, sanitary
facilities for residential living in mobile home parks. Through the application
and understanding of this chapter, the people of the county residing in mobile
home parks will be provided with quality housing in an enjoyable environment.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-1) (Res. passed 5-20-1986)
§ 151.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural and the plural the singular. The word SHALL is
mandatory and MAY is permissive.
   ACCESSORY USE or BUILDING. A use or building on the same lot with and of a
nature of customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a
building.
   ACT. The Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, Chapter
111.5 Pars. 711 et seq.).
   AFFIDAVIT. An oath in writing, sworn before and attested to an individual
who has the authority to administer an oath.
   APPLICANT. Any person making application for a license to operate or permit
to construct or alter a mobile home park.
   BUILDING. Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure,
shelter, or protection of people, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Zoning and Building Department for
the construction of an accessory building or structure, repairs to an existing
mobile home, placement of a mobile home on a space in a licensed mobile home
park, including, but not limited to, sewer, water and heating fuel connections,
electrical service and connecting wiring and/or supply cords.
   CONSTRUCTION IN A FLOODPLAIN. The placement or erection of structures or
earthworks; land filling, excavation, or other non-agricultural alternation of
the ground surface; installation of public utilities channel modification; or
storage of materials or any other activity undertaken to modify the existing
physical features of a floodplain with respect to the storage and conveyance of
floodwaters.
   COUNTY. The County of Rock Island, Illinois.
   DEPARTMENT. Either the State Department of Public Health, County Public
Health Department, or the County Zoning and Building Department, as specified.
   DIRECTOR. Either the Director of the Department of Public Health, the County
Public Health Department Director, or the Code Enforcement Administrator of the
county.
   DIVISION OF WATER RESOURCES. The State Department of Transportation,
Division of Water Resources, Department of Transportation Administration
Building, Room 300, Springfield, Illinois 62764.
   FLOOD MAPS. The Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, Community Panel Numbers 170582
0001-0200, effective August 2, 1982, including revisions.
   FLOODWAY. The portion of the special flood hazard area required to store and
convey the base flood.
   IMMOBILIZED MOBILE HOME. Any structure served by individual utilities and
resting on a permanent foundation with wheels, tongue and hitch permanently
removed, and properly secured in compliance with the State Manufactured Housing
and Mobile Home Safety Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, Ch 67.5, Pars. 501 et seq.)
and/or the State Mobile Home Tie Down Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, Ch 111.5,
Pars. 4401 et seq.) and the Department’s regulations for the Mobile Home Tie
Down Act (77 Ill. Adm. Code 870) in accordance with the following criteria:
      (1)   The foundation shall extend into the ground below the frost line
(minimum depth is 42 inches) so as to attach and become part of the real
estate. Materials such as concrete, mortared concrete block, or mortared brick
shall be used; and
      (2)   Where the mobile home is secured to the foundation in accordance
with the current County Building Code, it shall be deemed to satisfy the
requirements for a permanent foundation.
   LICENSE. A certificate issued by the Zoning and Building Department allowing
a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of the
Act and this chapter.
   LICENSEE. Any person having a license or permit to construct a mobile home
park under the Act and this chapter.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
eight body feet or more in width and is 32 body feet or more in length, and
which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems
contained therein. A travel trailer is not to be considered a MOBILE HOME.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A lot upon which two or more occupied mobile home
dwellings are harbored either free of charge or for revenue purposes.
   OWNER or OPERATOR. The licensee.
   PERMIT. A certificate issued by the Zoning and Building Department
permitting the construction, alternation, reduction in number of spaces, or the
change in ownership of a mobile home park under the provisions of the Act and
this chapter.
   PERSON. Any individual, group of individuals, association, trust,
partnership, corporation, persons doing business under an assumed name, county,
municipality, the state, or any political subdivision or department thereof, or
any other entity.
   PUBLIC BATHING BEACH.
      (1)   Any body of water, or that portion thereof used for the purpose of
public swimming or recreational bathing, and includes beaches at apartments,
condominiums, and other groups or associations having five or more living
units, clubs, churches, camps, schools, institutions, parks, recreational
areas, motels, hotels, and other commercial establishments.
      (2)   It includes shores, equipments, buildings, and appurtenances
pertaining to such areas. It does not include bathing beaches at private
residences intended only for the use of the owner and guests.
   REVOCATION. To declare invalid a permit or license issued to the applicant
or licensee by the Zoning and Building Department for an indefinite period of
time.
   SPACE. A site for a mobile home.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. An area having special flood hazards and shown as
such on a regulatory floodplain map (published and available from the Division
of Water Resources or Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Hazard Boundary Map
published by the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency).
   STATE FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS. The rules set forth for the regulation of
construction within the floodplains (92 Ill. Adm. Code 706) issued by the
Division of Water Resources.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among
other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, bulk
storage tanks, billboards, and poster panels.
   SUSPENSION. To declare invalid a permit or license issued to the applicant
or license by the Zoning and Building Department for a temporary period of time
with an expectation of resumption.
   SWIMMING POOLS/PONDS, PRIVATE. A tank or pond of water wither above or below
grade level in which the depth of water exceeds 18 inches. Swimming pools, hot
tubs, whirlpool baths and tubs, and jacuzzi-type tubs or baths shall be
considered SWIMMING POOLS if they are located outside.
   SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC. Any artificial basin of water which is modified,
improved, constructed, or installed for the purpose of public swimming, and
includes pools for community use, pools at apartments, condominiums, and other
groups or associations having five or more living units, clubs, churches,
camps, schools, institutions, YMCAs, YWCAs, parks, recreational areas, motels,
hotels, and other commercial establishments. It does not include pools at
private residences intended only for the use of the owner and guests.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis, designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having
a body width not exceeding eight feet.
   UNSAFE BUILDING or STRUCTURE. Buildings or structures which have structural
defects or are not provided with adequate egress, light, and ventilation, or
have extensive fire damage or are otherwise constituting a hazard to safety,
health, or public welfare.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-1) (Res. passed 5-20-1986)
REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.15 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Planning. Any person, firm, or corporation seeking to establish,
maintain, conduct, operate, or alter a mobile home park shall obtain a permit
to construct or a permit to alter and an original license or a supplemental
license to operate a mobile home park.
   (B)   (1)   Application.
         (a)   1.   All applications for license shall be filed with the Zoning
and Building Department on forms prescribed, prepared, and furnished by the
Department.
            2.   The application shall contain such information as will be
required by the Department for the proper administration and enforcement of the
Act and this chapter.
         (b)   Every applicant shall file with the Zoning and Building
Department a written application, in triplicate, and plan documents for the
proposed construction or alteration of a mobile home park.
         (c)   Applications shall be completed by the applicant or an engineer
or architect who is registered and licensed to practice in the state, pursuant
to § 4 of the Act.
         (d)   Application for permit or license shall be made according to the
requirements set forth in § 4 of the Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park Act (Ill.
Rev. Stat., 1983, Chapter 111.5 Pars. 714).
         (e)   Each applicant shall include an application fee of $100 for a
permit to construct; or an application fee of $50 for a permit to alter or
increase the size of the park. No application fee shall be required where the
alteration involves a reduction in the number of mobile home spaces or any
change not increasing the spaces in the park. The application fee, once paid to
the Zoning and Building Department, shall not be refunded.
         (f)   In addition to the permits and fees covered in divisions (B)(1)
(a) through (B)(1)(e) above, building permits will be required for any new
buildings or structures erected in the mobile home park. (Refer to the County
Building Codes.)
      (2)   Permits. The Zoning and Building Department shall review such
application and plan documents pursuant to §§
151.04 and
151.05, and shall issue permits as specified in § 5 of the Mobile Home and
Mobile Home Park Act.
   (C)   License.
      (1)   Upon completion of the proposed construction of a mobile home park
or the proposed alteration of a mobile home park, the applicant shall notify
the Zoning and Building Department and the Department of Public Health for the
state in order that an inspection of the completed facilities can be made. A
license shall be issued by the Zoning and Building Department upon verification
that the construction is in accordance with plans previously submitted,
reviewed and approved pursuant to §§
151.04 and
151.05 by the Zoning and Building Department, and providing all zoning
approvals are obtained and the mobile home park is otherwise in compliance with
the Act and this chapter.
      (2)   An existing mobile home park, not previously licensed by the Zoning
and Building Department, must comply with the Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park
Act and this chapter. A license shall be issued up on verification by the
Zoning and Building Department that the mobile home park is in compliance with
the Act and this chapter.
      (3)   No license shall be issued unless the requisite fee established
pursuant to § 6 of the Act has been paid to the Zoning and Building Department.
      (4)   In addition to the application fee provided for herein, the
licensees shall pay the Administrative Officer of the Zoning and Building
Department on or before June 30 of each year an annual fee which shall be $50,
provided, however, that subsequent to the above date, any applicant for an
original license to operate a new mobile home park constructed under a permit
issued by the Zoning and Building Department shall only be required to pay one-
half the annual fee.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-2) (Res. passed 5-20-1986)
§ 151.16 DESIGN VARIANCE; COMPLIANCE.
   All existing mobile home parks shall be required to comply with this chapter
with the following exceptions.
   (A)   Changes shall not be required on items of construction that were
completed in accordance with an approved permit to construct or permit to
alter, or were previously accepted under an original license to operate issued
by the Zoning and Building Department unless such items create a significant
health or safety problem, including, but not limited to, sewage systems or
water supplies, as determined by an inspection by the Zoning and Building
Department or County Health Department utilizing the standards set forth in the
Private Sewage Disposal Code (77 Ill. Adm, Code 905), the Department’s rule for
Drinking Water Systems (77 Ill. Adm. Code 900), and the Water Well Construction
Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 920), and the Water Well Pump Installation Code (77
Ill. Adm. Code 925).
   (B)   (1)   The Zoning and Building Department shall issue waivers allowing
construction at less than the requirements set forth in this chapter, provided
such waivers are necessary to enable the new construction to be compatible with
the existing portion of the mobile home park, and that such waivers will not
create significant health or safety problems as determined by data,
calculations, plans, or specifications which support the waiver request.
      (2)   Said waiver must first be approved by the Department of Public
Health of the state prior to requesting approval from the Zoning and Building
Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-3) (Res. passed 5-20-1986)
§ 151.17 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Plan document.
      (1)   In order to obtain a permit to construct or alter, or an original
license to operate a mobile home park not previously licensed by the Zoning and
Building Department, the applicant shall submit to the Zoning and Building
Department a written application with two copies of the plan documents.
      (2)   The plans shall include the following design and construction
criteria.
         (a)   Plans and specifications for all buildings, such as service
buildings containing community kitchens, dining rooms, laundries, and lavatory
and toilet facilities shall be included.
         (b)   All plumbing within a service building shall comply with the
State Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 980). All electrical and heating
installations shall be made in accordance with existing municipal and county
building codes, and other various codes specified in this chapter.
         (c)   All mobile home park construction activities in floodplains
under the jurisdiction of the county shall be built in accordance with the
flood damage prevention standards of the County Floodplain Regulations and the
State Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources.
         (d)   When mobile home park construction activities are proposed in a
floodplain, the applicant shall contact the Zoning and Building Department to
discern if the site is a special flood hazard area. Determination of the
special flood hazard area locations shall be made by utilizing the county Flood
maps. If the site is located in such an area, plans for the project to be
located in a special flood hazard area will not be approved within a statement
from the Division of Water Resources’ Chief Floodplain Management Engineer that
it complies with the requirements of Executive Order No. 79-4.
   (B)   Location. Sites selected for mobile home development shall be well
drained and free from topographical or geographical hindrances. When natural
drainage is not available, a storm drainage system shall be provided so that
stormwater will not endanger any water supply or surface watercourse. No mobile
home park may be located within an identified floodway. (Refer to Section
135.075 of the Rock Island County Zoning Resolution.)
   (C)   Roadways and parking.
      (1)   All streets in every park shall be constructed and maintained in a
passable and dust-proof condition at all times. All streets shall have a
minimum width of 24 feet.
      (2)   All streets in mobile home parks shall provide vehicular traffic
flow in accordance with the specifications in §
151.08(A).
      (3)   No portion of a mobile home shall block, in any way, the pedestrian
traffic on walkways.
   (D)   Mobile home sites and spacing.
      (1)   Each mobile home site or space constructed after August 21, 1967
shall by provided with a minimum of 2,100 square feet.
      (2)   (a)   No mobile home shall be parked closer than five feet to the
side lot lines of a park, or closer than ten feet to a public street, alley, or
building.
         (b)   Each individual site shall abut or face on a private or public
driveway or roadway. There shall be an open space of at least ten feet adjacent
to the sides of every mobile home and at least ten feet adjacent to the ends of
every mobile home.
      (3)   All mobile home sites, irrespective of shape, shall have a minimum
frontage of 25 linear feet.
      (4)   Pads, runners, or piers of suitable construction material such as,
but not limited to, concrete or cement blocks shall be provided for each lot.
      (5)   All sites shall be constructed to allow the mobile home to be tied
down in accordance with the State Mobile Home Tie Down Act (Ill. Rev. Stat.
1983, Ch. 111 Pars. 4401 et seq.) and the rules promulgated thereunder (77 Ill.
Adm. Code 870).
      (6)   The exterior construction material of other than the mobile home
itself, including, but not limited to, storage facilities, mobile home
skirting, and underpinning shall be of a fire resistant material meeting ASTM
E84 (American Society of Testing and Materials: Standard Method of Test for
Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials, 1981) surface flame
spread rating of 200 or less as stated in the Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. part 3280 (June 15, 1976). ADTM E84 (1981) is
available from the American Society of Testing and Materials, 1916 Race Street,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19101, and does not include any later amendments or
editions.
   (E)   Potable water supply. Requirements in these divisions (E) through (I)
below are regulated by the State Department of Public Health.
      (1)   All mobile home parks licensed for 13 spaces or more and served by
their own water supply source shall be considered to have a community public
water system under the jurisdiction of the State Environmental Protection
Agency. Permits shall be obtained from that agency prior to constructing any
portion of the water supply and/or distribution system.
      (2)   All water supplies for a mobile home park must be capable of
providing at least 250 gallons per space per day and shall come from sources
that comply with the State Department’s Rules for Drinking Water Systems (77
Ill. Adm. Code 900).
   (F)   Distribution system.
      (1)   Potable water distribution systems shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the State Department’s Rules for Drinking Water
Systems. All plumbing shall be installed in accordance with the State Plumbing
Code.
      (2)   The inside diameter for the pipe required shall be proportional to
the length of the main in accordance with §
151.08(B).
      (3)   (a)   The distribution system shall supply water at a minimum
pressure of 20 pounds per square inch (psi) during periods of peak demand and
usage.
         (b)   When water pressure in the system exceeds 80 psi, a water
pressure reducing valve shall be installed. The distribution system shall be
looped whenever possible and dead end mains shall be equipped with flush
hydrants or an equivalent.
      (4)   A water service connection shall not have less than a three-fourths
inch inside diameter and shall not serve more than one mobile home at any time.
      (5)   All water risers shall be at least three-fourths inch in diameter
and terminate at least four inches above finished ground level or two inches
above encasement. (See Illustration A.)
      (6)   On new installations, water supply outlets at each mobile home site
shall be separated not less than ten feet horizontally from the sewer outlet.
      (7)   All corporation stops and valve cocks shall be approved and
installed pursuant to the State Plumbing Code. Combination stop and waste
valves shall not be installed in an underground service pipe.
   (G)   Sewage disposal system (State Department of Public Health and County
Health).
      (1)   All raw or partially treated sewage within a mobile home park shall
discharge into a municipal sewerage system or sewage disposal system approved
by the State Environmental Protection Agency or into a private sewage disposal
system constructed in accordance with the State Private Sewage Disposal
Licensing Act (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1983 Ch. 111.5 Pars. 116.301 et seq.) and
Sewage Disposal Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 910).
      (2)   (a)   A permit must be obtained from the State Department of Public
Health to construct a mobile home park sewage disposal system designed to
discharge to a subsurface seepage field or designed for approved surface
discharge, or less than 1,500 gallons per day.
         (b)   Permits will be granted in accordance with the standards set
forth in the Private Sewage Disposal Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 905.30, 905.50,
and 905.60).
      (3)   If a mobile home park sewage disposal system is designed for
surface discharge of 1,500 or more gallons per day, a permit for construction
must be obtained from the State Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to §
12 of the State Environmental Protection Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, Ch. 111
Par. 1012).
      (4)   If existing sewage disposal systems discharge partially treated
sewage in mobile home parks, it shall be reconstructed in compliance with the
State Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and the Department’s Private Sewage
Disposal Code, or meet the requirements of the State Environmental Protection
Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983 Ch. 111 Pars. 1001 et seq.).
      (5)   When treatment facilities are designed for a mobile home park, they
shall be based on the maximum number of mobile home spaces and designed and
constructed on the basis of 250 gallons per space per day.
      (6)   At all sewer connections, the sewer riser shall have a four-inch
diameter and extend at least four inches above the ground. The connection
between the riser and mobile home sewer shall be water- and odor-tight. (See
Illustration B.)
      (7)   Waste drain lines from the mobile home outlet to the receiving
sewer shall be of a material in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and
shall be installed with a minimum slope of one-eighth inch per foot toward the
receiving sewer, and shall be adequately supported to ensure proper drainage.
   (H)   Sewage collection system (State Department of Public Health and County
Health).
      (1)   New or altered sewage collection systems shall be designed so as
not to conflict with division (E) above. Distances between sewage collection
systems and potable water systems shall be maintained in accordance with the
Department’s Rules for Drinking Water Systems (77 Ill. Adm. Code 900).
      (2)   The minimum design and slope of new sewer installations shall be
determined in accordance with §
151.08(C).
      (3)   On new installations, manholes shall be provided at every change in
direction or grade, at the upper end of every main sewer line, at every
junction of two or more branch sewers, and at intervals of nor more than 400
feet. Cleanouts extending to grade may be used instead of manholes on sewer
lines no grater than eight inches in diameter, and shall be at intervals of not
more than 100 feet.
   (I)   Solid waste disposal (State Department of Public Health and County
Health).
      (1)   All garbage and refuse shall be stored in fly-proof and watertight
containers, except when an incinerator device is used in accordance with the
State Environmental Protection Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, Ch. 111.5, Pars. 1001
et seq.).
         (a)   Garbage containers shall be emptied at least once a week, not
filled to overflowing, or allowed to become odorous or breeding area for
insects.
         (b)   Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of without creating a
nuisance or menace to health.
         (c)   Individual refuse containers shall be located at each space, or
bulk containers shall be located within 150 feet from any mobile home.
         (d)   All containers shall be stored at least eight inches off the
ground surface or on an impervious slab.
         (e)   All refuse, which includes garbage, rubbish, and all tin cans
shall be stored in a durable, rust resistant, non-absorbent, watertight and
rodent-proof container having a tight-fitting lid. The container shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition and in good repair at all times.
         (f)   The minimum capacity for refuse containers shall be equivalent
to 40 gallons per mobile home per week when a centralized collections system is
utilized.
         (g)   Additional containers shall be required by the Department when
refuse continuously exceeds the specified capacity of 40 gallons per mobile
home per week.
      (2)   Paper and plastic bags designed and meant specifically for solid
waste and that can be sealed to prevent odor and insect breeding may be used on
occasion as a supplement to basic storage containers, provided they are kept
properly closed and sealed to prevent entry of insects and rodents when not in
use, attached to a holder, properly stored at least eight inches above ground
to prevent scattering by animals or humans, and provided no evidence of rodent
activity is observed.
      (3)   The collection of all solid waste shall be performed by a public or
private disposal contractor, if the service is not performed by park personnel.
   (J)   Fire protection.
      (1)   Each mobile home in a mobile home park shall be equipped with fire
extinguishers in working order, one in each end of the mobile home in
accordance with §
9.9 of the Act.
      (2)   Bales of straw or other flammable material shall not be used for
skirting or insulation of the mobile home.
   (K)   Exterior lighting.
      (1)   Electrical distribution for electrical lighting systems shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with the safety provisions of the
National Fire Protection Association, National Electric Code, NFPA 70 (1984).
The NFPA 70 (1984) is available from the County Zoning and Building Department.
      (2)   (a)   There shall be an average illumination level at least 0.6
footcandle and a minimum illumination level of 0.3 footcandle maintained in all
areas of the mobile home park.
         (b)   To achieve this level of illumination, the Zoning and Building
Department recommends the use of a 175 watt mercury/vapor lamp or a 600 watt
tungsten lamp, at an elevation of 25 feet, every 250 feet. Individual yard
lights having an average equivalent illumination of a 40 watt electric light
bulb per space will be acceptable in lieu of a central lighting system.
   (L)   Vector control.
      (1)   Insect and rodent control measures shall be employed by the mobile
home park owner. All buildings shall be insect- and rodent-proof, and rodent
harborages shall not be permitted to exist in the park or pathways.
      (2)   The mobile home park owner or manager shall maintain and supervise
the park to minimize the potential for transmission of disease by vectors as a
result of inspect breeding and rodent harborage. Drainage to prevent ponding of
water shall be maintained. Tires, open containers, or vessels subject to
collecting and holding water shall not be permitted. Measures shall be taken to
control weed and grass growth. Firewood shall be stored in stacks at least six
inches above the ground or directly on am impervious surface. Bales of straw or
similar material shall not be used as insulation or sheathing material.
      (3)   Animal retention areas must be cleaned daily of excrement, food,
and debris.
   (M)   Electrical distribution.
      (1)   All electrical distribution systems in mobile home parks shall be
designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the safety provisions
of the National Fire Protection Association, National Electrical Code (NFPA 70,
1984). Wherever the requirements of local codes and ordinances differ with
these regulations, the more stringent requirements shall apply.
      (2)   Mobile home park electrical wiring systems shall be calculated on
basis of not less than 16,000 watts (at 115/230 volts) per each mobile home
service. The demand factors which are set forth in §
151.08(D) shall be considered the minimum allowable demand factors which shall
be permitted in calculating the load on feeder or service entrance conductor.
No demand factor shall be allowed for any other load.
      (3)   Mobile home lot feeder circuit conductors shall have capacity for
the loads supplied and shall be rated at not less than 100 amperes at 115/230
volts. The mobile home lot feeder assembly shall be connected to the mobile
home service equipment by a permanent wiring method.
      (4)   Power outlets used as mobile home service equipment shall also be
permitted to contain receptacles rated up to 50 amperes with appropriate
overcurrent protection. Fifty ampere receptacles shall conform to the
configuration as approved by the National Electrical Code (1984).
      (5)   Additional receptacles shall be permitted for connection of
electrical equipment, located outside the mobile home and all such 120-volt,
single-phase 15- and 20-ampere receptacles shall be protected by approved
ground-fault circuit protection for personnel.
      (6)   The mobile home service equipment shall be located adjacent to the
mobile home. In cases of electrical service of 50 amperes or less, the power
supply to the mobile home shall be by a mobile home power supply cord as
approved by Article 339 of the NFPA National Electrical Code. Where the
calculated load exceeds 50 amperes, the supply shall be by means of four
continuous, insulated, color-coded feeder conductors, one of which shall be an
equipment grounding conductor.
      (7)   Underground electrical conductors of the direct burial type shall
be an approved type UF (underground feeder) cable of the moisture resistant
type which is suitable for branch circuit wiring, or one which is approved for
the purpose according to Article 400 of the NFPA National Electrical Code. The
ampacity of the type UF cable shall be that of 60°C (140°F) conductors. In
addition to the insulated conductor, the cable shall be permitted to have an
insulated or bare conductor for equipment grounding purposes only, in a size
approved according to Article 400 of the NFPA National Electrical Code. The
overall covering shall be flame retardant, moisture resistant, fungus
resistant, corrosion resistant, and suitable for direct burial in the earth.
      (8)   Where single conductor cables are installed, all cables of the
feeder circuit, sub-feeder circuit, or branch circuit, including the neutral
conductor, if any, shall be run together in the same trench or raceway.
      (9)   Direct or burial UF cable used for main and branch feeders shall be
buried in a minimum of 24 inches below ground surface. Conductors servicing the
mobile home service equipment and the mobile home shall be buried a minimum of
12 inches below ground surface. Conductors emerging from the ground shall be
protected from damage by enclosed raceways. Raceways shall be of rigid,
corrosion-resistant metal conduit, PVC Schedule 80, or equivalent.
      (10)   (a)   A box or fitting shall be used at all conductor splice
connections, junction points, service equipment, and receptacles.
         (b)   Boxes, installed outdoors, shall be or corrosion-resistant
materials and approved as “rain-tight” or “outdoor type.”
         (c)   Boxes shall be secured and supported. Metal boxes shall be
grounded according to the National Electric Code (NFPA 70, 1984). Conductors
entering boxes and fittings shall be effectively closed to afford protection.
      (11)   Mobile home electrical service equipment installations and
appurtenances shall be so designed to service the mobile homes in accordance
with Article 550, National Electrical Code (1984) requirements for grounding
and bonding.
   (N)   Fuel supply and storage.
      (1)   All handling and storage of natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas
(LPG), fuel oil, or other flammable liquids or gases shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable state and local government codes and
regulations.
      (2)   The State Fire Marshal is the regulatory agency for safe fuel
storage and handling systems, and the applicable regulations are the current
National Fire Protection Association Standards; NFPA 31 (1983) “Installation of
Oil Burning Equipment”, NFPA 54 (1980) “National Fuel Gas Code,” and NFPA 58
(1983) “Liquefied Petroleum Gases: Storage and Handling.” The placement of LPG
or fuel oil containers inside or beneath any mobile home, storage cabinet,
carport, or any other structure shall be governed by local or municipal
ordinance. Containers of fuel shall be at least five feet from any mobile home
door or exits, and placed on stands constructed of a noncombustible material.
   (O)   Swimming pools and beaches. If approved, shall be constructed and
operated in accordance with the State Department of Public Health’s Minimum
Sanitary Requirements for the Design and Operation of Swimming Pools and
Bathing Beaches (77 Ill. Adm. Code 820), as prescribed under the Swimming Pool
and Bathing Beach Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, Ch. 111.5 Pars. 1201 et seq.).
Separate plans and specifications are to be submitted to the State Department
of Public Health for approval, based upon the Swimming Pool and Bathing Beach
Act and regulations promulgated thereunder, prior to construction.
   (P)   Swimming pool fences.
      (1)   No public or private swimming pool shall be erected unless the same
be entirely enclosed by buildings, fences, or walls not less than five nor more
than seven feet in height and of such construction that a child may not reach
the pool from the street or from any adjacent property without opening a door
or gate, or scaling a wall or fence.
      (2)   Holes or openings in the fence shall be four inches or less. Such
fences or walls shall be equipped with self latching gates or doors. The
latching device shall be located not less than four feet above the ground and
shall be of a type that can be locked. All exterior doors or gates shall be
kept locked at all times when not properly supervised by an adult having direct
control over the activities herein. Swimming pool fences are in addition to
individual site fences covered elsewhere in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-4) (Res. passed 5-20-1986)
§ 151.18 MOBILE HOME PARK MAINTENANCE; OPERATION.
   (A)   Resident rights and duties. Upon initial admittance to the mobile home
park, the mobile home park owner or manager shall notify the mobile home
residents of all applicable provisions of the Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park
Act and this chapter, and inform them of their duties and responsibilities
required therein.
   (B)   Local mobile home park rules and regulations.
      (1)   The mobile home park owner shall draft and adopt a separate set of
rules and regulations governing the maintenance of the mobile home park to keep
its facilities and equipment in good repair and in clean and sanitary condition
as required by this chapter. Under these rules and regulations, the mobile home
park owner or manager shall identify the responsibilities of the management to
the mobile home owner and shall further identify the responsibilities of the
resident in the mobile home park as required by the Mobile Home Park Landlord
and Tenant Act (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1983, Ch. 80, Pars. 201 et seq.) and the State
Mobile Home Tie Down Act (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1983, Ch. 111.5, Pars. 4401 et
seq.).
      (2)   The local rules and regulations established by the mobile home park
owner or manager shall contain, but not be limited to, the control of pets, the
storage of refuse and garbage, the design and construction of auxiliary
structures, acceptable material for skirting and awnings, the control of
inoperable, unlicensed, or abandoned automobiles, the policy of performing
vehicle repairs, the control of the growth of weeds and grass, control of
insects, rats, and mice, and all other rules and regulations necessary to
maintain the mobile home park, its facilities, and equipment in good repair and
in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (3)   A copy of the State Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park Act and this
chapter must be on file at the manager’s office for the use of the residents of
the park.
      (4)   The local rules and regulations, established by the mobile home
park owner or manager, shall not relieve the owner or manager of compliance
with the State Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park Act and this chapter.
   (C)   Adequate supervision and inspection.
      (1)   The person to whom a license for a mobile home is issued or
caretaker shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the mobile home park
in compliance with the State Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park Act and Mobile
Home Tie Down Act (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1983, Ch. 111.5, Pars. 4401 et seq.) and
applicable provisions of the Mobile Home Landlord and Tenant Act (Ill. Rev.
Stat., 1983, Ch. 80, Pars. 201 et seq.).
      (2)   The mobile home park owner or caretaker shall conduct inspections
to ensure facilities, equipment, services, and maintenance are being performed
in a satisfactory manner and in compliance with the aforementioned Acts and
their pursuant regulations.
      (3)   The facilities and equipment of all service buildings shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition and kept in good repair.
      (4)   The correction of all deficiencies noted by the mobile home park
owner or caretaker must be accomplished within five working days, unless
specified by the owner or caretaker.
   (D)   Site numbers. The mobile home park owner or caretaker shall maintain a
plot plan of the park at the custodian’s office, with all sites numbered or
marked distinctly. All sites shall also be specifically numbered for
identification purposes.
   (E)   Inspection doors. When mobile home skirting is installed, a sliding or
hinge type of inspection door must be provided for use by the Zoning and
Building Department. The inspection door must be a minimum of 24 inches in
width and be located near the sewer riser.
   (F)   Fencing. Fencing of individual sites, where permitted by the park
owner, shall not exceed three and one-half feet in height and shall provide
open space available for fire protection.
   (G)   Abandoned automobiles or equipment.
      (1)   Any abandoned automobile or piece of equipment having the
appearance of being abandoned shall be removed from the park.
      (2)   (a)   The storage of unused or not currently licensed vehicles and
the performance of major automotive repairs shall not be permitted within the
mobile home park.
         (b)   Abandoned automobile removal shall comply with the application
provisions of the State Vehicle Code (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1983, Chapter 95.5,
Pars. 4-201 et seq.).
   (H)   Storage. Park residents shall not store household appliances,
refrigerators, furniture, or similar items outside the mobile home.
   (I)   Unsafe buildings or structures. Unsafe buildings or structures shall
be removed from the mobile home park within ten days after notification by the
Zoning and Building Department that said unsafe building or structure is
declared unsafe. A mobile home or accessory structure damaged by fire beyond
50% of it’s retail value prior to the fire is, for the purpose of this section,
considered an unsafe building.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-5) (Res. passed 5-20-1986)
§ 151.19 MOBILE HOMES TO BE TIED DOWN.
   (A)   (1)   Every mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park in the
county on or after January 1, 1980, or which is moved from lot to another late
after that date, shall be secured by the use of tie-down equipment.
      (2)   The rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of
Public Health, pursuant to the State Mobile Home Tie-Down Act, shall be the
minimum requirements for tie-down equipment and installation.
      (3)   The rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of
Public Health, pursuant to the State Mobile Home Tie-Down Act, are set forth in
their entirety in division (B) below and are specifically made a part of this
chapter.
   (B)   The following documents are from the original printing of the
ordinance codified in this chapter in January, 1986. The statutory authority
and rules and regulations remain in place.
      (1)   The statutes reprinted in this pamphlet are from the 1979 Illinois
State Bar Edition, Illinois Revised Statutes, as published by West Publishing
Company, St. Paul, Minnesota. The Department’s appreciation is expressed to the
West Publishing Company in granting permission to reprint such statutes for the
convenience of the Department and the public. Certification of rules and
publication of same.
      (2)   Minimum number of ties required per side are as follows.
 
Single                                Double Wides
Length of MH (ft.) Number of Vertical Number of Diagonal Number of Diagonal
                   Ties               Ties               Ties
32-50              2                  2                  2
51-75              2                  3                  3
76-                2                  4                  4
Notes to Table:
Caution - See Rule 5.02 Frost Heave
 
(Prior Code, § 3-4-6) (Res. passed 5-20-1986)
§ 151.20 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   No person, firm, or corporation shall locate a mobile home in
any licensed mobile home park in the unincorporated areas of the county before
acquiring a building permit to locate said mobile home and make service
connections thereto.
      (2)   A fee of $15 shall be submitted with each application for a
building permit.
   (B)   No mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park in the
unincorporated areas of the county shall be occupied until it is determined by
the Zoning and Building Department that the mobile home is located in
compliance with all applicable codes and regulations of the county.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-7) (Res. passed 5-20-1986)
§ 151.21 TABLES OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Road width for parking.
 
Table A
Road Width for Parking
Road Width Parking
24 feet    No parking on streets; two-way traffic
30 feet    Parking one side of street
36 feet    Parking two sides of street
 
   (B)   Distribution system piping.
 
Table B
Distribution System Piping
Side of Main (inside Number of MH that May Be Max Length of Main Installed
diameter)            Serviced                 (feet)
2 inches             20                       600
3 inches             60                       1,800
4 inches             120                      3,600
6 inches             400                      12,000
Notes to Table:
If local requirements exceed the above sizes, the local standards will
apply.
 
   (C)   Minimum size and slope of sewer mains.
 
Table C
Minimum Size and Slope of Sewer Mains*
Number of Spaces Sewer Inside Diameter (inches) Minimum Slope (per foot)
1-125            6                              1/8 inches
More than 125    8                              1/8 inches
Notes to Table:
* = Exclusive of laterals serving individual mobile homes
 
   (D)   Demand factors for feeder and service entrance conductors.
Table D
Demand Factors for Feeder and Service Entrance Conductors
Number of Mobile Homes Demand Factor (percent)
Table D
Demand Factors for Feeder and Service Entrance Conductors
Number of Mobile Homes Demand Factor (percent)
7-9                    28
10-12                  27
13-15                  26
16-21                  25
22-40                  24
41-60                  23
61 and over            22
Notes to Table:
The demand factor for a given number of lots shall apply to all lots
indicated.
Example: Twenty lots calculated at 25% of 16,000 watts results in a
permissible demand of 4,000 watts per lot or a total of 80,000 watts for 20
lots.
 
(Prior Code, § 3-4-10) (Res. passed 5-20-1986)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   All violations of this code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500
as authorized by Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 34, § 437.
(Prior Code, § 3-4-8) (Res. passed 5-20-1986)
CHAPTER 152: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Authority
   
152.002   Purpose
   
152.003   Abbreviations
   
152.004   Definitions
   
152.005   Fees
Prohibited Actions
   
152.020   Surface water
   
152.021   Easements
   
152.022   Obstruction of watercourse
   
152.023   Discharge
   
152.024   Exempted discharges
   
152.025   Pollutant discharge
   
152.026   Line connect
   
152.027   Interference
Requirements for Certain Discharges
   
152.040   Private drainage system maintenance
   
152.041   Minimization of irrigation runoff
   
152.042   Cleaning of paved surfaces required
   
152.043   Mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning operations
   
152.044   Maintenance of equipment
   
152.045   Materials storage
   
152.046   Pet waste
   
152.047   Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers
   
152.048   Prohibition of pesticides and fungicides banned from manufacture
   
152.049   Open drainage channel maintenance
   
152.050   Release reporting and cleanup
   
152.051   Authorization to adopt and impose best management practices
Inspections and Plan Modifications
   
152.065   Inspections
   
152.066   Special precautions
   
152.067   Amendment of plans
Responsibility
   
152.080   Applicant
   
152.081   Jurisdiction
Maintenance of Drainage Facilities
   
152.095   Responsibility
Enforcement
   
152.110   Right of entry and sampling
   
152.111   Notice of violation
   
152.112   Action without prior notice
   
152.113   Enforcement actions
   
152.114   Other legal action
Implementation
   
152.125   Subdivision improvements
   
152.126   Non-subdivision improvements requiring a building permit
   
152.127   Improvements that previously did not required a permit
Variances and Appeals
   
152.140   General procedures
   
152.141   Variances
   
152.142   Appeals
Construction Sites; Runoff Control
   
152.155   Responsible entity
   
152.156   Waste disposal
   
152.157   Ready mixed concrete
   
152.158   Erosion and sediment control
   
152.159   Continued compliance
   
152.160   Use of BMPs
   
152.161   Preserving regulatory floodplains; floodprone and wetland areas
   
152.162   Minimizing impervious surfaces on the property
   
152.163   Stormwater wetlands, grassed swales, vegetated filter strips
   
152.164   Infiltrating runoff on site
   
152.165   Providing stormwater retention structures
   
152.166   Providing wet or wetland detention structures
   
152.167   Providing dry detention structures
   
152.168   Constructing storm sewers
   
152.169   Water quality and multiple uses
Grading and Drainage Permit Requirements
   
152.180   Permit exceptions
   
152.181   Class 1 grading and drainage permit
   
152.182   Class 2 grading and drainage permit
   
152.183   Class 3 grading and drainage permit
   
152.184   Grading and drainage permit application forms
   
152.185   Submittal, review, approval
   
152.186   Other agency permits
   
152.187   Permit limitations
   
152.188   Revocation of permits
   
152.189   Retention of plans
Hydrologic Design Criteria for Class 3 Projects
   
152.200   Referenced standards
   
152.201   Release rates
   
152.202   Drainage system design and evaluation
   
152.203   Design methodologies
   
152.204   Positive drainage
   
152.205   Culvert, road, driveway crossings
   
152.206   Vegetated filter strips and swales
   
152.207   Maintenance considerations
   
152.208   Provisions for agricultural drainage
   
152.209   Channel modifications
Detention System Design Criteria
   
152.220   Referenced standards
   
152.221   Detention storage requirements
   
152.222   Waiver of requirements
   
152.223   Ownership
   
152.224   Maintenance and repair responsibilities
   
152.225   General basin design requirements
   
152.226   Wet detention basin design
   
152.227   Dry detention basin design
   
152.228   Detention on prime farmland
   
152.229   Detention in floodplains
   
152.230   Drainage into wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and areas
   
152.231   Street detention
   
152.232   Parking lot detention
   
152.233   Rooftop detention
   
152.234   Fee in lieu of detention
   
152.235   Cooperative detention
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3)
   
152.250   General
   
152.251   Requirements for utility construction
   
152.252   Required documentation
   
152.253   Applicability and guidelines
   
152.254   Referenced standards
   
152.255   General erosion and sediment control design features
   
152.256   Materials and construction notes
   
152.257   Testing and inspection
   
152.258   Soil grading and drainage plan requirements
   
152.259   Site development requirements
Forms
   
152.270   Letter of credit
   
152.271   Performance bond
   
152.272   Covenant for stormwater detention basin
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   (1)   These regulations provide for the regulation of matters relative
to the management of stormwater within the county and its unincorporated
jurisdiction. Its provisions include, but are not limited to, regulating
drainage installations and improvements, requiring the preservation and
enhancement of certain natural environmental features, requiring the
installation of drainage improvements in developments, regulating uses,
maintenance, and activities in floodplains and flood hazard areas, requiring
permits, payment of fees, and assurances of completion, and providing for
inspections and control of work.
      (2)   The requirements, standards, and specifications herein provided are
in addition to any other applicable legal requirements.
   (B)   Where any portion of a proposed development activity is within one and
one-half miles of a municipality with a stormwater ordinance, the permittee may
be required, at the discretion of the Zoning and Building Director, to adhere
to the requirements of that municipality. Where more than one municipality with
a stormwater ordinance is within one and one-half miles of any portion of a
proposed development activity, the Zoning and Building Director shall review
the area for a pre-annexation agreement. The permittee may be required, at the
discretion of the Zoning and Building Director, to adhere to the requirements
of that municipality having claimed the area for future annexation. In the
event the municipality claiming the area for annexation declines to provide the
stormwater reviews and inspections, the Zoning and Building Director may
require the permittee to adhere to the requirements of other municipalities
having boundaries within one and one-half miles of any portion of a proposed
development activity. Lacking any other stormwater ordinance, this chapter
shall be binding.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is:
   (A)   To maintain and improve the quality of water impacted by the storm
drainage system within the county;
   (B)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (C)   To preserve property values by protecting new and existing buildings
and improvements to buildings from damage due to stormwater flow;
   (D)   To assure that new developments and redevelopments do not increase
flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible
to erosion;
   (E)   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order
to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, and to protect water quality;
   (F)   To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff and illicit
discharges from industrial, commercial, residential, and construction sites
into the storm drainage system within the county;
   (G)   To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil,
petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste,
sediment, and other pollutants into the storm drainage system;
   (H)   To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other
hazardous consumer products;
   (I)   To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits
by owners of construction sites within the county; and
   (J)   To enable the county to comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations applicable to the national pollutant discharge elimination system
(NPDES) permitting requirements for stormwater discharges.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.003 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings.
BMP    Best management practices
C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations
FEMA   Federal Emergency Management Agency
HHW    Household hazardous waste
IDPH   Illinois Department of Public Health
IEPA   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
MS4    Municipal separate storm sewer system
NPDES  National pollutant discharge elimination system
NRCS   Natural Resources Conservation Service
RISWCD Rock Island Soil and Water Conservation District
SWP3   Stormwater pollution prevention plan
USDA   U.S. Department of Agriculture
USEPA  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   100-YEAR EVENT. A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a 1% probability
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A 24-hour storm duration is
assumed unless otherwise noted.
   ADVERSE IMPACTS. Any negative impact on plant, soil, air, or water resources
affecting their beneficial uses, including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic
habitat, quality, and quantity.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the
necessary forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to
carry out construction of a new development or redevelopment from the county.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation at all locations delineating the level
of flooding resulting from the 100-year frequency flood event, which has a 1%
probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood
elevation at any location is defined in the “County of Rock Island Floodplain
Ordinance” as codified in this chapter.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Refers to management practices and methods
to control pollutants in stormwater. BMPs are of two types: SOURCE CONTROLS
(nonstructural) and TREATMENT CONTROLS (structural). SOURCE CONTROLS are
practices that prevent pollution by reducing potential pollutants at their
source before they come into contact with stormwater. TREATMENT CONTROLS remove
pollutants from stormwater. The selection, application, and maintenance of BMPs
must be sufficient to prevent or reduce the likelihood of pollutants entering
the storm drainage system. Specific BMPs may be imposed by the county and are
discussed further in §§
152.160 through
154.169.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the International Building Code as
adopted for the county.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the county for the construction,
erection, or alteration of a structure or building, and the related ground and
surface preparation prior to and after completion of construction, erection, or
alteration of a structure or building.
   BYPASS FLOWS. Stormwater runoff from upstream properties’ tributary to a
property’s drainage system, but not under its control.
   CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION. Formally attesting that the specific inspections
and tests were performed, and that such inspections and tests comply with the
applicable requirements of this chapter.
   CHANNEL. Any defined river, stream, creek, brook, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, on stream lake or impoundment, abandoned mine,
flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or
human-made drainage way, which has a definite bed and bank or shoreline, in or
into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. The alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), filling, widening, deepening,
straightening, relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody
rooted vegetation. CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include the human-made
clearing of debris or removal of trash.
   CLEARING. Any activity which removes the natural vegetative ground cover.
   COMMERCIAL. Pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity
engaged in for profit business.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the floodplain used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain.
   CONDUIT. Any channel, pipe, sewer, or culvert used for the conveyance or
movement of water, whether open or closed.
   CONSTRUCTION SITE. Any location where clearing, grading, filling, and the
like activity occurs.
   CONTAMINATED. Containing harmful quantities of pollutants.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person or firm performing or managing construction work at a
construction site, including any construction manager, general contractor, or
subcontractor. Also includes, but is not limited to, earthwork, paving,
building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, or landscaping contractors, and
material suppliers delivering materials to the site.
   COUNTY. The County of Rock Island, Illinois.
   DAM. As defined by the State Department of Natural Resources Office of Water
Resources.
   DESIGNEE(S). A person, firm, corporation, governmental agency, or any other
entity that the Director of Zoning and Building may appoint to review any
application, and from whom may require the permittee to obtain written
approval, fees, and assistance with enforcement of all requirements of this
chapter. Examples may include, but are not limited to, municipalities within
one and one-half miles of the proposed project, the Soil and Water Conservation
District, the County Public Works Department, professional engineers licensed
in a relevant field, and the like.
   DETENTION BASIN. A facility constructed or modified to provide for the
temporary storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release by gravity of
this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm.
   DETENTION TIME. The amount of time stormwater is held within a detention
basin.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to real estate or property, including:
      (1)   The division or subdivision of any duly recorded parcel of
property;
      (2)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a building or any
addition to a building valued at more than $1,000;
      (3)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days per year;
      (4)   Construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects;
      (5)   Redevelopment of a site;
      (6)   Filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving, drilling,
mining, or other nonagricultural alterations of a ground surface;
      (7)   Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste; and
      (8)   Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency,
direction, or velocity of stormwater flows from a property.
   DEVELOPMENT AREA. In order to preclude inappropriate phasing of developments
to circumvent the intent of this chapter, when a proposed development activity
will occur on a lot or parcel of land that has contiguous lots or parcels of
lands owned by the same property owner, then the criteria as defined in this
section will be applied to the total land area compiled from aggregate
ownership parcels, and shall be known as the DEVELOPMENT AREA.
   DISCHARGE. Any addition or release of any pollutant, stormwater, or any
other substance whatsoever into storm drainage system.
   DISCHARGER. Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise
responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any owner of a
construction site or industrial facility.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Sewage originating primarily from kitchen, bathroom, and
laundry sources, including waste from food preparation, dishwashing, garbage
grinding, toilets, baths, showers, and sinks.
   DRAINAGE PLAN. A plan, including engineering drawings and supporting
calculations, which describes the existing stormwater drainage system and
environmental features, including grading, as well as proposed alterations or
changes to the drainage system and environment of a property.
   DRY BASIN. A detention basin designed to drain after temporary storage of
stormwater flows and to normally be dry over much of its bottom area.
   EARTHWORK. The disturbance of soils on a site associated with clearing,
grading, or excavation activities.
   EROSION. The general process whereby soil or earth is moved by rainfall,
flowing water, wind, or wave action.
   EXCAVATION. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or
any other similar material, is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated, or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting
from such actions.
   EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF. The volume and rate of flow of stormwater
discharged from a new development or redevelopment which is or will be in
excess of that volume and rate which existed before development or
redevelopment.
   EXISTING GRADE. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior
to excavation or filling.
   FACILITY. Any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from
which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant.
   FERTILIZER. A substance or compound that contains an essential plant
nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its
essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of
a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more
fertilizers.
   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved by
humans to a new location, and shall include the conditions resulting there
from.
   FILL MATERIAL, APPROVED. Uncontaminated, non-water-soluable, non-
decomposable inert solid material. Clean fill includes soil, rock, stone,
dredged material, used asphalt and brick, block or concrete masonry units
(CMUs) that have been broken so as not to become “critter condos,” used
concrete that has been broken into pieces smaller than 12 inches by 12 inches
by 12 inches with no protruding bar from construction, and demolition
activities that is separate from other waste and recognizable as such. Unused
asphalt would not meet the definition of clean fill.
   FINAL GRADE. The vertical location of the ground surface after grading work
is completed in accordance with the plans.
   FIRE PROTECTION WATER. Any water, and any substances or materials contained
therein, used by any person to control or extinguish a fire, or to inspect or
test fire equipment.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from
markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other
food products.
   GRADING. The excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, and shall
include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
   GROUNDWATER. Any water residing below the surface of the ground or
percolating into or out of the ground.
   HARMFUL QUANTITY. The amount of any substance that the Zoning and Building
Director determines will cause an adverse impact to storm drainage system or
will contribute towards the failure of the county to meet the water quality
based requirements of the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance listed in table 302.4 of 40 C.F.R. part
302.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by
the EPA pursuant to 40 C.F.R. part 261.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE (HHW). Any material generated in a household
(including single and multiple residences) that would be classified as
hazardous pursuant to the IEPA.
   HYDROGRAPH. A graph showing for a given location on a stream or conduit the
flow rate with respect to time.
   HYDROGRAPH METHOD. This method estimates runoff volume and runoff
hydrographs for the point of interest by generating hydrographs for individual
subareas, combining them, and routing them through stream lengths and reservoir
structures. Factors such as rainfall amount and distribution, runoff curve
number, time of concentration, and travel time are included.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. See definition of ILLICIT DISCHARGE.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage
system.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is
prohibited under this chapter.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. The area of property that is covered by materials other
than soil and vegetation and that has no intended capacity to absorb
stormwater, such as parking lots, roadways, driveways, sidewalks, patios,
tennis courts, roofs, and other structures.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE or COMMERCIAL WASTE. Any wastes produced as a byproduct of
any industrial, institutional, or commercial process or operation, other than
domestic sewage.
   INFILTRATION. The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
   JURISDICTION. The County of Rock Island, Illinois, and designees.
   LOESSAL SOIL. A sediment, commonly non-stratified and unconsolidated,
composed predominately of silt sized particles with accessory clay and sand.
   LOT. An individual platted parcel in an approved subdivision.
   MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM. The portion of a drainage system needed to store and
convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system.
   MAY. Discretionary.
   MECHANICAL FLUID. Any fluid used in the operation and maintenance of
machinery, vehicles, and any other equipment, including lubricants, antifreeze,
petroleum products, oil, and fuel.
   MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM. The portion of a drainage system designed for the
convenience of the public. It consists of street gutters, storm sewers, small
open channels, and swales and, where human-made, is to be designed to handle
the ten-year runoff event.
   MITIGATION. When the prescribed controls are not sufficient and additional
measures are required to offset the development, including those measures
necessary to minimize the negative effects which stormwater drainage and
development activities might have on the public health, safety, and welfare.
Examples of MITIGATION include, but are not limited to, compensatory storage,
soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
   MOBILE COMMERCIAL COSMETIC CLEANING or MOBILE WASHING. Power washing, steam
cleaning, and any other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning of vehicles and/or
exterior surfaces, engaged in for commercial purposes or related to a
commercial activity.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances,
including roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch
basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins, and ponds owned
and operated by the county and designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater, and not used for collecting or conveying sanitary sewage.
   NPDES. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued by the IEPA that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general area wide basis.
   NATURAL. Conditions resulting from physical, chemical, and biological
processes without intervention by humans.
   NATURAL DRAINAGE. Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A written notice detailing any violations of this
chapter and any action expected of the violators.
   OIL. Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum,
fuel oil, crude oil, synthetic oil, motor oil, cooking oil, grease, sludge, oil
refuse, and oil mixed with waste.
   ONE-YEAR EVENT. A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a 100% probability
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A 24-hour storm duration is
assumed unless otherwise noted.
   OWNER. The person who owns a facility, part of a facility, or land including
the contract seller and contract purchaser.
   PARCEL. A contiguous lot or tract of land under common ownership. A lot or
tract of land is land intended as a unit for the purpose of development or
transfer of ownership.
   PEAK FLOW. The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel
or conduit.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a building permit or a grading and drainage
permit is issued.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns, including all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
   PESTICIDE. A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent,
destroy, repel, or migrate any pest.
   PET WASTE or ANIMAL WASTE. Excrement and other waste from domestic animals.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCT. A product that is obtained from distilling and processing
crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel or lubricant in a motor
vehicle or aircraft, including motor oil, motor gasoline, gasohol, other
alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1
and #2 diesel.
   POLLUTANT. Any substance attributable to water pollution, including, but not
limited to, rubbish, garbage, solid waste, litter, debris, yard waste,
pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, pet waste, animal waste, domestic sewage,
industrial waste, sanitary sewage, wastewater, septic tank waste, mechanical
fluid, oil, motor oil, used oil, grease, petroleum products, antifreeze,
surfactants, solvents, detergents, cleaning agents, paint, heavy metals,
toxins, household hazardous waste, small quantity generator waste, hazardous
substances, hazardous waste, soil, and sediment.
   POLLUTION. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological
quality of, or the contamination of, any water that renders the water harmful,
detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, plant life, property, or
public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public
enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
   POSITIVE DRAINAGE. Provision for overland paths for all areas of a property
including depressional areas that may also be drained by storm sewer.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that has been treated to drinking water standards and
is safe for human consumption.
   PRIVATE DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All privately or publicly owned ground, surfaces,
structures, or systems, excluding the MS4, that contribute to or convey
stormwater, including, but not limited to, roofs, gutters, downspouts, lawns,
driveways, pavement, roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains,
catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins, ponds,
draws, swales, streams, and any ground surface.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PLANS. Engineering drawings subject to approval by the
county engineer for the construction of public improvements.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works for the county, or his
or her designee.
   QUALIFIED PERSON. A person who possesses the required certification,
license, or appropriate competence, skills, and ability as demonstrated by
sufficient education, training, and/or experience to perform a specific
activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the regulatory
requirements and generally accepted industry standards for such activity.
   RELEASE. To dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, inject, leach,
dispose or otherwise introduce into the storm drainage system.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of:
      (1)   Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood,
excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar
materials; and
      (2)   Non-combustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin
cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at
ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600F to 1,800F).
   SANITARY SEWAGE. The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is
discharged into any sanitary or combined sewer system and passes through the
sanitary or combined sewer system to a sewage treatment plant for treatment.
   SANITARY SEWER. The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which
carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, to a sewage treatment plant (and to
which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted).
   SEDIMENT. Soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and transported
naturally by water, wind, gravity, or equipment tracking (tires, vehicles).
   SEDIMENTATION. The process that deposits soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or stormwater drainage
systems.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and aerated tanks.
   SHALL. Mandatory.
   SITE. The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically
located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the
facility or activity.
   SLOPE DISTURBANCE LINE. The line which delineates relatively level building
areas from areas where slopes exceed 7% and where special precautions must be
taken.
   SMALL QUANTITY GENERATOR WASTE. Any hazardous waste generated by a small
quantity generator as defined by IEPA.
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, and other discarded material,
including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material, resulting
from industrial, municipal, commercial, construction, mining, or agricultural
operations, and residential, community, and institutional activities.
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All surfaces, structures, and systems that contribute
to or convey stormwater, including private drainage systems, the MS4, surface
water, groundwater, waters of the state, and waters of the United States.
   STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater.
   STORMWATER. Runoff resulting from precipitation.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWP3). A document that describes the
best management practices to be implemented at a site, to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants.
   STREAM. Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural or
human-made drainageway which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or
into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.
   STRIPPING. Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover,
including tree removal, by spraying or clearing, and storage or removal of
topsoil.
   SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT. Includes activities associated with the platting of
any parcel of land into two or more lots and includes all construction activity
taking place thereon.
   SURFACE WATER. Water bodies and any water temporarily residing on the
surface of the ground, including oceans, lakes, reservoirs, rivers, ponds,
streams, puddles, channelized flow, and runoff.
   TEN-YEAR EVENT. A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having a 10% probability
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A 24-hour storm duration is
assumed unless otherwise noted.
   TIME OF CONCENTRATION. The elapsed time for stormwater to flow from the most
hydraulically remote point in a drainage basin to a particular point of
interest in the watershed.
   TRIBUTARY WATERSHED. All of the land surface area that contributes runoff to
a given point.
   TWO-YEAR EVENT. A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having 2% probability of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A 24-hour storm duration is
assumed unless otherwise noted.
   UNCONTAMINATED. Not containing harmful quantities of pollutants.
   USED OIL or USED MOTOR OIL. Any oil that, as a result of use, storage, or
handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities
or the loss of original properties.
   UTILITY AGENCY. Private utility companies, the county, or contractors
working for private utility companies or the county, engaged in the
construction or maintenance of utility distribution lines and services,
including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas, telephone,
television, and communication services.
   VACANT. Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
   WATER OF THE STATE or WATER. Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise,
lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, inside the territorial limits of the state,
and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or non-
navigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of
surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or
inside the jurisdiction of the state.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARD. The designation of a body or segment of surface
water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria
deemed by state or federal regulatory standards to be necessary to protect
those uses.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. All waters which are currently used, were used
in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce,
including all waters which are subject to the ebb and the flow of the tide; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or
foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the
United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in
this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition;
and any waters within the federal definition of WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES at
40 C.F.R. § 122.2, but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment
ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water
Act.
   WATERSHED. All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same
channel, lake, marsh, stormwater facility, groundwater, or depressional area.
   WET BASIN. A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water
after the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
   WETLANDS.
      (1)   Defined by regulation as “those areas that are inundated or
saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.”
      (2)   WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar
areas. For general, but not inclusive, locations of designated WETLANDS, refer
to mapping prepared jointly by the U.S. Department of Interior, Fish, and
Wildlife Service and the State Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Resource Conservation, National Wetlands Inventory Mapping, 1987.
      (3)   More specific WETLAND information is published in the Rock River
Wetlands Special Area Management Plan, by the Bi-State Regional Commission in
cooperation with the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
      (4)   The applicant may be required to provide a field investigation by a
qualified wetland delineator.
   YARD WASTE. Leaves, grass clippings, tree limbs, brush, soil, rocks, or
debris that result from landscaping, gardening, yard maintenance, or land
clearing operations.
   ZONING AND BUILDING DIRECTOR. The Director of Zoning and Building for the
county, or his or her designee.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 1-21-2014)
§ 152.005 FEES.
   (A)   Grading and drainage permit and application review fees as adopted by
the county, or its designee.
   (B)   Appeals to the Zoning of Appeals as adopted by the county, or its
designee.
(Ord. passed - -)
PROHIBITED ACTIONS
§ 152.020 SURFACE WATER.
   (A)   Surface water shall be allowed to travel its natural or pre-regulated
course unless changes are allowed by means of a grading and drainage permit or
grading and drainage plans approved by the Zoning and Building Director, or his
or her designee.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to force surface water off that
person’s property and onto a neighboring property or to prevent surface water
which would have entered that person’s property from doing so without approval
granted by a grading and drainage permit.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.021 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   No buildings or permanent structures, including impervious surfaces,
may be placed wholly or in part within an easement that has been granted for
access to drainage facilities of any type, including agricultural drainage
conduit, without the written approval of the Public Works Director.
   (B)   Provided, however, streets, sidewalks, and driveways may be allowed to
cross easements by the shortest possible route, provided that other
requirements are met.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.022 OBSTRUCTION OF WATERCOURSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain any obstruction
within a watercourse or drainage facility of any type, except as may be
specifically authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.023 DISCHARGE.
   No person shall release or cause to be released into the storm drainage
system any discharge that is not composed entirely of uncontaminated
stormwater, except as allowed in listed exemptions of this chapter. Common
stormwater contaminants include trash, yard waste, stones, earth, concrete,
wood, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum products, cleaning
products, paint products, hazardous waste, and sediment.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.024 EXEMPTED DISCHARGES.
   The following discharges are exempt from the regulations in this chapter:
   (A)   Water line and fire hydrant flushing;
   (B)   Landscape irrigation;
   (C)   Rising groundwaters;
   (D)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration;
   (E)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
   (F)   Discharges from potable water sources;
   (G)   Foundation drains;
   (H)   Air conditioning condensate;
   (I)   Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation);
   (J)   Springs;
   (K)   Water from crawl space pumps;
   (L)   Footing drains;
   (M)   Storm sewer cleaning;
   (N)   Water from individual car washing on properties zoned residential;
   (O)   Routine external building wash-down which does not use detergents;
   (P)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
   (Q)   De-chlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges;
   (R)   Residual street wash water;
   (S)   Discharges or flows from firefighting activities;
   (T)   De-chlorinated water reservoir discharges; and
   (U)   Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed).
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.025 POLLUTANT DISCHARGE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the listed exemptions of §
152.024, any discharge shall be prohibited by this chapter if the discharge in
question has been determined by the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her
designee, to be a source of pollutants to the storm drainage system.
   (B)   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existences of illicit
connections to the storm drainage system are prohibited. This prohibition
expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.026 LINE CONNECT.
   No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic sewage,
or industrial waste, to the storm drainage system, or allow such a connection
to continue.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.027 INTERFERENCE.
   No person shall interfere with best management practices (BMPs) implemented
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.999
REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN DISCHARGES
§ 152.040 PRIVATE DRAINAGE SYSTEM MAINTENANCE.
   The owner of any private drainage system shall maintain the system to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants. This maintenance shall include,
but is not limited to, sediment removal, bank erosion repairs, maintenance of
vegetative cover, and removal of debris from pipes and structures.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.041 MINIMIZATION OF IRRIGATION RUNOFF.
   Irrigation systems shall be managed to reduce the discharge of water from a
site.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.042 CLEANING OF PAVED SURFACES REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of any paved parking lot, street, or drive shall clean the
pavement as required to prevent the buildup and discharge of pollutants. The
visible buildup of mechanical fluid, waste materials, sediment, or debris is a
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Paved surfaces shall be cleaned by dry sweeping, wet vacuum sweeping,
collection, and treatment of wash water or other methods in compliance with
this chapter.
   (C)   This section does not apply to pollutants discharged from construction
activities, which are otherwise specified.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.043 MOBILE COMMERCIAL COSMETIC CLEANING OPERATIONS.
   Mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning operations shall not discharge to the
storm drainage system in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.044 MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Any leak or spill related to equipment maintenance in an outdoor,
uncovered area shall be contained to prevent the potential release of
pollutants.
   (B)   Vehicles, machinery, and equipment must be maintained to reduce
leaking fluids.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.045 MATERIALS STORAGE.
   In addition to other requirements of this chapter, materials shall be stored
to prevent the potential release of pollutants. The uncovered, outdoor storage
of unsealed containers of hazardous substances is prohibited.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.046 PET WASTE.
   Pet waste shall be disposed of as solid waste or sanitary sewage in a timely
manner to prevent discharge to the storm drainage system.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.047 PESTICIDES, HERBICIDES, AND FERTILIZERS.
   Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with
manufacturer recommendations and applicable laws. Excessive application shall
be avoided.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.048 PROHIBITION OF PESTICIDES AND FUNGICIDES BANNED FROM MANUFACTURE.
   Use of any pesticide, herbicide, or fungicide, the manufacture of which has
been either voluntarily discontinued or prohibited by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or any federal, state, or local jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.049 OPEN DRAINAGE CHANNEL MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Every person owning or occupying property through which an open
drainage channel passes shall keep and maintain that part of the drainage
channel within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and
other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or retard the flow of water
through the drainage channel.
   (B)   In addition, the owner or occupant shall maintain existing privately-
owned structures adjacent to a drainage channel so that such structures will
not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the drainage
channel.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.050 RELEASE REPORTING AND CLEANUP.
   (A)   Any person responsible for a known or suspected release of materials
which are resulting in or may result in illegal discharges to the storm
drainage system shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, abatement, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a
release of a hazardous material, said person shall comply with all state,
federal, and local laws requiring reporting, cleanup, containment, and any
other appropriate remedial action in response to the release.
   (B)   In the event of such a release of nonhazardous materials, said person
shall notify the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, no later
than the close of the next business day.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.051 AUTHORIZATION TO ADOPT AND IMPOSE BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   (A)   The county may adopt and impose requirements identifying best
management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation, or facility, which may
cause a discharge of pollutants to the storm drainage system.
   (B)   Where specific BMPs are required, every person undertaking such
activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall implement and
maintain these BMPs at their own expense.
(Ord. passed - -)
INSPECTIONS AND PLAN MODIFICATIONS
§ 152.065 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, shall make
inspections as required and shall notify the grading and drainage permit holder
in the event that the work fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter. The notification of any deficiencies in the work or violations of this
chapter shall be posted at the site and mailed to the owner of the site by
ordinary mail.
   (B)   The owner of the site shall notify the Zoning and Building Director,
or his or her designee:
      (1)   Two working days prior to the start of any land disturbing
activities;
      (2)   Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control
measures (including perimeter controls and diversions); and
      (3)   After final stabilization and landscaping, and prior to removal of
temporary sediment controls. Final stabilization has occurred when:
         (a)   All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed;
         (b)   A uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% of
the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all
unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures; or
         (c)   Equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 1-21-2014)
§ 152.066 SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS.
   (A)   If at any stage of the grading of any development site the county, or
designee, determines by inspection that the nature of the site is such that
further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any
property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or drainage structure, the county,
or designee, shall require, as a condition of allowing the work to be done,
that such reasonable special precautions to be taken as is considered advisable
to avoid the likelihood of such peril. Special precautions may include, but
shall not be limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction of additional
drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, cribbing, installation of
plant materials for erosion control, and recommendations of a certified
professional in erosion and sediment control or a professional engineer, which
may be made requirements for further work.
   (B)   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on
any development site is not complete, work shall be stopped and the grading and
drainage permit holder required to install temporary structures or take such
other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public
safety.
   (C)   On large developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the
Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, shall specify the time of
starting grading and time of completion, or may require that the operations be
conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures
or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.067 AMENDMENT OF PLANS.
   (A)   Major amendments to stormwater drainage and detention or grading and
drainage plans shall be submitted to the Zoning and Building Director, or his
or her designee, and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same
manner as the original plans.
   (B)   Field modification of a minor nature may be authorized and documented
by the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee.
(Ord. passed - -)
RESPONSIBILITY
§ 152.080 APPLICANT.
   The applicant for a grading and drainage permit shall not be relieved of
responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.081 JURISDICTION.
   The county, or its officers or agents, will not be made liable for such
damage, by:
   (A)   The issuance of a grading and drainage permit under this chapter;
   (B)   Compliance with the provisions of the grading and drainage permit, or
conditions attached to it by the public ordinance;
   (C)   Failure of the county, or designees, to observe or recognize hazardous
or unsightly conditions;
   (D)   Failure of the county officials, or designees, to recommend denial or
to deny a grading and drainage permit; or
   (E)   Exemptions from grading and drainage permit requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
MAINTENANCE OF DRAINAGE FACILITIES
§ 152.095 RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The county will maintain those drainage facilities that are on public
land and have been dedicated and accepted for maintenance or stipulated by
agreement for maintenance by the county. All other drainage facilities shall be
the responsibility of the owner of the property on which they exist or the
owner of the drainage facility, regardless of whether or not dedicated
easements or rights-of-way exist over said facilities.
   (B)   (1)   The responsible party shall at all times properly operate and
maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related
appurtenances) which are installed to achieve compliance with conditions of
this permit. Proper operation and maintenance includes effective performance,
adequate funding, adequate operator staffing and training, and appropriate
quality assurance procedures.
      (2)   Abandonment and alteration, either structural or operational, of
all facilities and systems shall occur only following application and issuance
of a permit.
(Ord. passed - -)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.110 RIGHT OF ENTRY AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever the appropriate official has cause to believe that
there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition
which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the appropriate official shall
have the right to enter the premises at any reasonable time to determine if the
discharger is complying with all requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   In the event that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a
request to enter has been made, the state’s Attorney of the county is hereby
empowered to seek assistance from a court of competent jurisdiction in
obtaining such entry.
   (B)   The appropriate official shall have the right to set up on the
property of any discharger to the storm drainage system such devices that are
necessary to conduct sampling of discharges.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.111 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever an authorized enforcement person determines that a person has
violated or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the enforcement
person will order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Posting the written notice on the property will constitute written
notice.
   (B)   Whenever possible, a copy of the notice of violation will be mailed by
ordinary mail or e-mail when an address has been provided through appropriate
permitting procedures.
   (C)   The notice of violation shall include:
      (1)   The name of the responsible person or property owner;
      (2)   The date and location of the violation;
      (3)   A description of the violation;
      (4)   Actions that must be taken by the responsible person to remedy the
violation;
      (5)   The deadline within which the required actions must be completed;
      (6)   Enforcement actions that may be taken by the state’s Attorney of
the county or any other legal procedures system adopted for the purpose of
prosecuting ordinance violations;
      (7)   Notice date; and
      (8)   (a)   Any person receiving a notice of violation may file a written
appeal to the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, within 15
days of the notice date.
         (b)   The Zoning and Building Director will affirm, modify or rescind
the notice in writing, within 15 days of the date of the appeal. If the
recipient of a notice of violation is dissatisfied with the outcome of the
appeal to the Zoning and Building Director, the appeal process outlined in §§
152.140 through
152.142 will be followed.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.112 ACTION WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE.
   Any person who violates or fails to meet a requirement of this chapter will
be subject, without prior notice, to one or more of the enforcement actions
identified in this chapter when attempts to contact the person have failed and
the enforcement actions are necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent danger to the environment or to the
health or welfare of persons, or to the storm drainage system.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.113 ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
   Any person who fails to comply with or appeal a notice of violation, or
fails to comply with an appeal decision of the Zoning and Building Director, or
his or her designee, will be subject to one or more of the following
enforcement actions:
   (A)   Stop work order. The Zoning and Building Director, or his or her
designee, may issue a stop work order to the owner and contractors on a
construction site by posting the order at the construction site and
distributing the order to all county departments whose decisions may affect any
activity at the site. Unless express written exception is made, the stop work
order shall prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall
bar any further inspection or approval necessary to commence or continue
construction or to assume occupancy at the site. A notice of violation shall
accompany the stop work order, and shall define the compliance requirements.
   (B)   Abatement of an illicit connection. The Zoning and Building Director,
or his or her designee, may terminate an illicit connection. Any expense
related to such abatement shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner.
   (C)   Abatement of a violation on private property. When a property owner is
not available, not able, or not willing to correct a violation, the Zoning and
Building Director, or his or her designee, may enter private property to take
any and all measures necessary to abate the violation. It shall be unlawful for
any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of any premises to refuse to
allow the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, to enter upon
the premises for these purposes. Any expense related to such abatement shall be
fully reimbursed by the property owner.
   (D)   Recovery of costs. Within 30 days after abatement by the Zoning and
Building Director, the Zoning and Building Director shall notify the property
owner of the costs of abatement, including administrative costs, and the
deadline for payment. The property owner may appeal the recovery costs as
outlined in §§
152.140 through
152.142.
   (E)   Termination of utility services. After lawful notice to the customer
and property owner concerning the proposed disconnection, the Zoning and
Building Director, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to order
the disconnection of utilities, well water, sanitary sewer, and/or sanitation
services, upon a finding by the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her
designee, that the disconnection of utility services will remove a violation of
this chapter that poses a public health hazard or environmental hazard.
   (F)   Criminal prosecution. Any person who violates or continues to violate
a prohibition or requirement of this chapter shall be liable to criminal
prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to criminal
penalties.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.114 OTHER LEGAL ACTION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other remedies or procedures available to the
county, including an administrative hearing officer as allowed by Illinois
Compiled Statutes, if any person violates this chapter, the state’s Attorney of
the county may commence an action for appropriate legal and equitable relief
including damages and court costs.
   (B)   The state’s Attorney of the county may seek a preliminary or permanent
injunction or both which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the
discharger.
(Ord. passed - -)
IMPLEMENTATION
§ 152.125 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The requirements for obtaining a grading and drainage permit are
waived for subdivisions under construction on the passage date of this chapter,
provided the preliminary plat of said subdivision was approved in writing prior
to the passage date of this chapter.
   (B)   All other requirements of this chapter shall be in effect.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.126 NON-SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRING A BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   The requirements for obtaining a grading and drainage permit for non-
subdivision related improvements requiring a building permit are waived for the
duration of the building permit if the building permit was issued prior to the
passage date of this chapter.
   (B)   All other requirements of this chapter shall remain in effect.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.127 IMPROVEMENTS THAT PREVIOUSLY DID NOT REQUIRED A PERMIT.
   (A)   The requirements for obtaining a grading and drainage permit for
construction that did not require a permit prior to the passage date hereof are
waived for a period of six months if the construction commenced prior to the
passage date hereof.
   (B)   All other requirements of this chapter shall remain in effect.
(Ord. passed - -)
VARIANCES AND APPEALS
§ 152.140 GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals, after a public hearing, may:
      (1)   Determine and vary the requirements and regulations of this chapter
in harmony with their general purpose and intent, where the Zoning Board of
Appeals make written findings of fact in accordance with the standards herein
after prescribed and further, find that there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of
requirements and regulations of this chapter; and
      (2)   Uphold, modify, or overrule the decision of the Zoning and Building
Director, or his or her designee.
   (B)   (1)   A written application for a variance from the requirements of
this chapter or an appeal of a decision by the Zoning and Building Director, or
his or her designee, shall be filed within 60 days of the time that the
applicant became aware of the need for the variance or the decision. The
application shall fully state the grounds of the request and the facts relied
upon by the applicant.
      (2)   Each application shall be filed with the Zoning and Building
Director, or his or her designee. The application shall be accompanied by a fee
as adopted by the county for a variance hearing before the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
      (3)   Should the application be withdrawn prior to publication of legal
notice thereon, such fee will be returned upon the written request of the
applicant.
   (C)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall give at least 15 days’ notice of the
time and place of such hearing by insertion in a daily newspaper generally
distributed within the jurisdiction of the county and shall also give notice
delivered personally or by mail at least 15 days before the time fixed for such
hearing to:
      (1)   The applicant or appellant;
      (2)   To the public works director;
      (3)   To the respective owners of record of property adjoining or
adjacent to the premises in question; and
      (4)   To the Stormwater Manager of all municipalities within one and one-
half miles of the nearest property line of the total project effected. Any
party may appear at such hearing in person or by agent, or by attorney.
   (D)   The re-filing of denied requests for variance or appeals denied by the
Zoning Board of Appeals that are not substantially or materially different from
the previously filed request or appeal shall not be accepted from the same or
different person for the following periods of time:
      (1)   For a six-month period from the date of the first decision by the
Zoning Board of Appeals; or
      (2)   For a one-year period from the date of subsequent decisions by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (E)   The Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, shall
determine whether a request is substantially or materially different and
submittable, although the Zoning Board of Appeals may, by majority vote,
reverse a decision of the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee,
to not accept a request following a denied request or appeal.
   (F)   The Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, will review
and transmit recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall review
such recommendations prior to granting or denying the variance. In the event a
notice of objection is received from a Stormwater Manager of any municipality
within one and one-half miles of the nearest property line of the total project
effected, deference shall be given to the objecting municipality by the Zoning
Board of Appeals in considering a decision.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.141 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not vary the requirements and
regulations of this chapter unless evidence is presented that proves that all
of the following three situations exist.
      (1)   The land in question is of such shape or size, or is affected by
such physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations or record,
that it is impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of
the requirements of this chapter; financial concerns shall not be a
consideration for this standard.
      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the applicant.
      (3)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare, environment, or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the
subject’s property.
   (B)   (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on each
application for variance on the next regularly scheduled Zoning Board of
Appeals meeting , but not more than 60 days after the application for a
variance is received by the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her
designee.
      (2)   Within 60 days after the public hearing, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall approve the variance with the conditions it deems necessary,
disapprove the variance, or take other such action as appropriate.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.142 APPEALS.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider each application for
modification to the decision of the Zoning and Building Director at a public
meeting within 60 days after the appeal application is received by the Zoning
and Building Director.
   (B)   Within 60 days after the public meeting, the appropriate entity shall
uphold, modify, or overrule the decision of the Zoning and Building Director.
(Ord. passed - -)
CONSTRUCTION SITES; RUNOFF CONTROL
§ 152.155 RESPONSIBLE ENTITY.
   The owner of a site of construction activity and the contractors working on
the construction site shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.156 WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste, and any other pollutants or
waste on any construction site shall be controlled through the use of BMPs.
Waste or recycling containers shall be provided and maintained by the owner or
contractor on construction sites where there is the potential for release of
waste.
   (B)   Uncontained waste that may blow, wash, or otherwise be released from
the site is prohibited.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.157 READY MIXED CONCRETE.
   Ready mixed concrete, or any materials resulting from the cleaning of
vehicles or equipment containing or used in transporting or applying ready
mixed concrete, shall be contained on construction sites for proper disposal.
Release of these materials is prohibited.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.158 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
   BMPs shall be implemented to prevent the release of sediment from
construction sites. Disturbed areas shall be minimized, disturbed soil shall be
managed, and construction site entrances shall be managed to prevent sediment
tracking. Excessive sediment tracked onto public streets shall be removed
immediately.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.159 CONTINUED COMPLIANCE.
   Upon completion of permitted construction activity on any site, the property
owner and subsequent property owners will be responsible for continued
compliance with the requirements of this chapter in the course of maintenance,
reconstruction, or any other construction activity on the site.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.160 USE OF BMPS.
   Use of BMPs identified by this chapter, or the use of any other BMPs
submitted for approval by the permittee as a substitute, will be a requirement
of this chapter in obtaining approval for subdivisions, building permits, and
grading and drainage permits. Their use will also present an opportunity (in
some cases, when allowed by ordinance) for the permittee to receive credits
against their stormwater utility fees. This list of definitions is not
exclusive and developers are encouraged to submit alternative BMPs for approval
by the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.161 PRESERVING REGULATORY FLOODPLAINS; FLOODPRONE AND WETLAND AREAS.
   (A)   Buffer zones. An area along a shoreline, wetland, or stream where
development is restricted or prohibited. The primary function of aquatic
buffers is to physically protect and separate a stream, lake, or wetland from
future disturbance or encroachment. The three types of buffers are water
pollution hazard setbacks, vegetated buffers, and engineered buffers.
   (B)   Conservation easements. Voluntary agreements that allow an individual
or group to set aside private property to limit the type or amount of
development on their property. The conservation easement can cover all or a
portion of a property and can either be permanent or last for a specified time.
The easement is typically described in terms of the resource it is designed to
protect (for example, agricultural, forest, historic, or open space easements)
and explains and mandates the restrictions on the uses of the particular
property.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.162 MINIMIZING IMPERVIOUS SURFACES ON THE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Open space design, conservation development, planned urban development
(PUD).
      (1)   A better site design technique that concentrates dwelling units in
a compact area in one portion of the development site in exchange for providing
open space and natural areas in place of buildable area elsewhere on the site.
      (2)   The minimum lot sizes, setbacks, and frontage distances for the
residential zone are relaxed in order to create the open space.
   (B)   Narrower streets.
      (1)   In many residential settings, streets can be as narrow as 22 to 26
feet wide without sacrificing emergency access, on street parking, or vehicular
and pedestrian safety.
      (2)   Even narrower access streets or shared driveways can be used when
only a handful of homes need to be served. Use of narrower streets will only be
allowed on public streets by requesting a variance from Chapter 153 of this
code of ordinances or in conjunction with the development of a PUD.
   (C)   Eliminating curbs and gutters. Elimination of curbs and gutters
involves the use of grass swales and ditches as an alternative to curbs and
gutters along residential streets. Eliminating curbs and gutters from public
streets will only be allowed by requesting a variance from Chapter 153 of this
code of ordinances or in conjunction with the development of a PUD.
   (D)   Alternative turnarounds. Alternative turnarounds are designs for end
of street vehicle turnaround that replace cul-de-sacs and reduce the amount of
impervious cover created in residential neighborhoods. Numerous alternatives
create less impervious cover than the traditional 40-foot cul-de-sac. These
alternatives include reducing cul-de-sacs to a 30-foot radius and creating
hammerheads, loop roads, and pervious islands in the cul-de-sac center by
requesting a variance from Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances or in
conjunction with the development of a PUD.
   (E)   Alternative pavers. Alternative pavers are permeable surfaces that can
replace asphalt and concrete and can be used for driveways, parking lots, and
walkways. Commercially available pavers are used which contain void spaces for
grass or clean, washed stone or gravel. Gravel, cobble, or mulch parking lots
are prohibited except for development of one un-attached single-family dwelling
private driveway.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.163 STORMWATER WETLANDS, GRASSED SWALES, VEGETATED FILTER STRIPS.
   (A)   Stormwater wetlands.
      (1)   Stormwater wetlands (also known as constructed wetlands) are
structural practices similar to wet ponds that incorporate wetland plants into
the design. Stormwater wetlands are designed specifically for the purpose of
treating stormwater runoff.
      (2)   A distinction should be made between using a constructed wetland
for stormwater management and diverting stormwater into a natural wetland.
      (3)   The latter practice is not recommended because altering the
hydrology of the existing wetland with additional stormwater can degrade the
resource and result in plant die off and the destruction of wildlife habitat.
   (B)   Grassed swales. The term SWALE (also known as GRASSED CHANNEL, DRY
SWALE, WET SWALE, or BIO-FILTER) refers to a series of vegetated, open channel
management practices designed specifically to treat and attenuate stormwater
runoff for a specified water quality volume. As stormwater runoff flows through
these channels, it is treated through filtering by the vegetation in the
channel, filtering through a subsoil matrix, and/or infiltration into the
underlying soils.
   (C)   Vegetated filter strips. Vegetated surfaces that are designed to treat
sheet flow from adjacent surfaces. Filter strips function by slowing runoff
velocities and filtering out sediment and other pollutants.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.164 INFILTRATING RUNOFF ON SITE.
   (A)   Sand and organic filters. Sand filters are usually two chambered
stormwater practices; the first is a settling chamber, and the second is a
filter bed filled with sand or another filtering media. As stormwater flows
into the first chamber, large particles settle out, and then finer particles
and other pollutants are removed as stormwater flows through the filtering
medium. There are several modifications of the basic sand filter design,
including the surface sand filter, underground sand filter, perimeter sand
filter, organic media filter, and multi-chamber treatment train.
   (B)   Infiltration trenches. An infiltration trench is a rock filled trench
with no outlet that receives stormwater runoff. Stormwater runoff passes
through some combination of pretreatment measures, such as a swale and
detention basin, and into the trench. There, runoff is stored in the void space
between the stones and infiltrates through the bottom and into the soil matrix.
   (C)   Infiltration basins. A shallow impoundment which is designed to
infiltrate stormwater into the groundwater. Infiltration basins should only be
used on small drainage areas (less than ten acres), and where soils are highly
permeable.
   (D)   Porous pavements. Porous pavement is a permeable pavement surface with
an underlying stone reservoir to temporarily store surface runoff before it
infiltrates into the subsoil. This porous surface replaces traditional
pavement, allowing parking lot stormwater to infiltrate directly and receive
water quality treatment. There are a few porous pavement options, including
porous asphalt, pervious concrete, and grass pavers.
   (E)   Bio-retention.
      (1)   Bio-retention areas are landscaping features adapted to provide on-
site treatment of stormwater runoff. They are commonly located in parking lot
islands or within small pockets of residential land uses. Surface runoff is
directed into shallow, landscaped depressions. These depressions are designed
to incorporate many of the pollutant removal mechanisms that operate in
forested ecosystems. During storms, runoff ponds above the mulch and soil in
the system. Runoff from larger storms is generally diverted past the facility
to the storm drain system.
      (2)   The remaining runoff filters through the mulch and prepared soil
mix. Typically, the filtered runoff is collected in a perforated under drain
and returned to the storm drain system.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.165 PROVIDING STORMWATER RETENTION STRUCTURES.
   (A)   On lot treatment. A series of practices that are designed to collect
runoff from individual residential or small commercial lots. The primary
purpose of most on lot practices is to manage rooftop runoff and, to a lesser
extent, driveway and sidewalk runoff. Although there are a wide variety of on
lot treatment options, they can all be classified into one of three categories:
      (1)   Practices that collect and infiltrate rooftop runoff;
      (2)   Practices that divert runoff or soil moisture to a pervious area;
and
      (3)   Practices that store runoff for later use.
   (B)   Retention basins.
      (1)   Retention basins that are designed to collect and hold stormwater
runoff, with no outlet pipes or structures. They are not necessarily
infiltration basins, and are best designed to rely mostly on evaporation.
      (2)   Retention basins are only feasible when special circumstances of
land and soil type are available.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.166 PROVIDING WET OR WETLAND DETENTION STRUCTURES.
   Defined and controlled under §§
152.220 through
152.235.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.167 PROVIDING DRY DETENTION STRUCTURES.
   Defined and controlled under §§
152.220 through
152.235. Detention basins shall be designed to remove floatables from
stormwater runoff by providing trash grates or special outlet structures which
separate floatables.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.168 CONSTRUCTING STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   Manufactured products for stormwater inlets. A variety of products for
stormwater inlets known as swirl separators, or hydrodynamic structures. Swirl
separators are modifications of the traditional oil-grit separator and include
an internal component that creates a swirling motion as stormwater flows
through a cylindrical chamber. The concept behind these designs is that
sediments settle out as stormwater moves in this swirling path. Additional
compartments or chambers are sometimes present to trap oil and other
floatables. There are several different types of proprietary separators, each
of which incorporates slightly different design variations, such as offline
application.
   (B)   Catch basin inserts. Catch basin efficiency can be improved using
commercially-available inserts, which can be designed to remove oil and grease,
trash, debris, and sediment. Some inserts are designed to drop directly into
existing catch basins, while others may require being installed as part of the
construction of the basin.
   (C)   In line storage structures. In-line storage refers to a number of
practices designed to use the storage within the storm drain system to detain
flows. Storage is achieved by placing devices in the storm drain system to
restrict the rate of flow. Devices can slow the rate of flow by backing up
flow, as in the case of a dam or weir, or through the use of vortex valves,
devices that reduce flow rates by creating a helical flow path in the
structure.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.169 WATER QUALITY AND MULTIPLE USES.
   The drainage system should be designed to minimize adverse surface and
groundwater quality impacts off site and on the property itself. Detention
basins shall incorporate design features to capture stormwater runoff
pollutants. All flows from the development shall be routed through the basin
(for example, low flows shall not be bypassed). Detention of stormwater shall
be promoted throughout the property’s drainage system to reduce the volume of
stormwater runoff and to reduce the quantity of runoff pollutants. The drainage
system should incorporate multiple uses where practicable. Uses considered
compatible with stormwater management include open space, aesthetics, aquatic
habitat, recreation (boating, fishing, trails, playing fields), wetlands, and
water quality mitigation.
(Ord. passed - -)
GRADING AND DRAINAGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 152.180 PERMIT EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Except as exempted below, no person shall commence construction prior
to obtaining the appropriate grading and drainage permit as defined below. The
Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, shall issue grading and
drainage permits. In order to preclude inappropriate phasing of developments to
circumvent the intent of this chapter, when a proposed development activity
will occur on a lot or parcel of land that has contiguous lots or parcels of
lands owned by the same property owner, then the criteria as defined in this
section will be applied to the total land area compiled from aggregate
ownership parcels.
   (B)   (1)   A grading and drainage permit shall not be required for the
following:
         (a)   Any construction activity below the minimum thresholds for a
Class 1 grading and drainage permit;
         (b)   The agricultural use of land, including the implementation of
conservation measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service, and including the construction of
agricultural structures;
         (c)   The maintenance of any existing stormwater control facility
including dredging, levee restoration, tree removal, or other function that
maintains the original design capacities of the facility;
         (d)   The construction of, improvements to, or the maintenance of any
street, road, highway, or interstate highway, or other public infrastructure
performed by the county. However the requirements of this chapter will be
honored by the county for such improvements; and
         (e)   The construction of or improvements to residential accessory
structures (for example, carports, garages, pole barns, and the like).
      (2)   However, all other requirements of this chapter are still required.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 1-21-2014)
§ 152.181 CLASS 1 GRADING AND DRAINAGE PERMIT.
   Any construction that will include the addition of an impervious surface
area (for example, streets, commercial roofs, patio, or parking area, new
single-family dwellings, or any combination thereof) greater than 1,000 square
feet and less than 10,000 square feet requires a Class 1 grading and drainage
permit. The issuance of a grading and drainage permit shall constitute an
authorization to do only that work which is described on the approved sketch. A
Class 1 grading and drainage permit shall be valid for one year after the date
of issuance.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 1-21-2014)
§ 152.182 CLASS 2 GRADING AND DRAINAGE PERMIT.
   (A)   The drainage system for a parcel containing the proposed construction
site shall be designed to restrict the peak rate of discharge from the total
parcel (one-hour storm once a year) to pre-project levels. The Zoning and
Building Director, or his or her designee, may require the petitioner to
provide pre- and post-project peak discharge rates, showing the peak flows and
retention/detention rates using accepted methodology, including the Illinois
Urban Manual. If the post-development peak discharge rate must be reduced, the
Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, will recommend
appropriate stormwater control options. If a mutually-acceptable option cannot
be developed, the appeal process outlined in §§
152.140 through
152.142 will be followed. The issuance of a grading and drainage permit shall
constitute an authorization to do only that work which is described on the
approved sketch. A Class 2 grading and drainage permit shall be valid for one
year after the date of issuance.
   (B)   Any construction that meets one of the following thresholds shall
require a Class 2 grading and drainage permit.
      (1)   Any construction that will include the addition of an impervious
surface area (for example, streets, roof, patio, or parking area, or any
combination thereof) greater than or equal to 10,000 square feet and less than
one acre (43,560 square feet).
      (2)   Any land disturbing activity (for example, clearing, grading,
stripping, excavation, fill, or any combination thereof) that will affect an
area greater than or equal to 10,000 square feet and less than one acre (43,560
square feet).
      (3)   Any land disturbing activity that will exceed 100 cubic yards, but
does not otherwise require a Class 3 grading and drainage permit.
      (4)   Any land disturbing activity on the sloping side of the slope
disturbance line, but does not otherwise require a Class 3 grading and drainage
permit.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 1-21-2014)
§ 152.183 CLASS 3 GRADING AND DRAINAGE PERMIT.
   (A)   Any construction that meets one of the following thresholds shall
require a Class 3 grading and drainage permit:
      (1)   Any construction that will include the addition of an impervious
surface area (for example, streets, roof, patio, or parking area, or any
combination thereof) greater than one acre (43,560 square feet); and
      (2)   Any land disturbing activity (for example, clearing, grading,
stripping, excavation, fill, or any combination thereof) that will affect an
area greater than one acre (43,560 square feet).
   (B)   A completed application form shall include:
      (1)   Name(s), address(es), and telephone numbers of the owner and
developer of the site, the contractor(s), and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant identifying the principal contractor;
      (2)   Certification that any land clearing, construction, or development
involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved
upon issuance of the permit;
      (3)   An application fee as set may be required by the county, or its
designees;
      (4)   A faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other
improvement security satisfactory to the Zoning and Building Director, or his
or her designees, in an amount deemed sufficient by the Zoning and Building
Director, or his or her designee, to cover all costs of improvements,
landscaping, maintenance of improvements and landscaping, and soil erosion and
sediment control measures for such period as specified by the Zoning and
Building Director, or his or her designees, to cover the cost of failure or
repair of improvements installed on the site on a form acceptable to the Zoning
and Building Director, or his or her designees. Upon satisfactory completion of
the improvements, the documented security would be void;
      (5)   The following information shall be submitted for both existing and
proposed property conditions for all applicable developments: a topographic
survey of the property at two-foot contours (or one-foot contours for
relatively flat areas where additional detail will be required to see drainage
designs) unless otherwise specified or approved by the Zoning and Building
Director, or his or her designees, keyed to a consistent datum specified by the
Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designees; and an existing drainage
and proposed drainage plan for the property and 100 feet surrounding the
property at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch, and including the
following (unless otherwise specified by the Zoning and Building Director, or
his or her designees):
         (a)   Property boundary, dimensions, and approximate acreage;
         (b)   Building setback lines;
         (c)   All existing and proposed structures and sizes;
         (d)   Square feet of existing and proposed impervious surface;
         (e)   All existing, or proposed easements;
         (f)   All existing, abandoned, or proposed water or monitoring
wellhead locations;
         (g)   All existing, abandoned, or proposed water mains;
         (h)   All sanitary or combined sewer lines and septic systems;
         (i)   The banks and centerline of streams and channels;
         (j)   Shoreline of lakes, ponds, and detention basins with normal
water level elevation;
         (k)   Farm drains and tiles;
         (l)   Location, size, and slope of stormwater conduits and drainage
swales;
         (m)   Detention facilities;
         (n)   Roads, streets, and associated stormwater inlets including
finished grades;
         (o)   Base flood elevation, flood fringe, and regulatory floodway;
         (p)   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the site to its
general surroundings at a scale of not less than 2,000 feet to one inch;
         (q)   Title, scale, north arrow, legend, seal of licensed professional
engineer, date, and name of person preparing plans;
         (r)   Sub-watershed boundaries within the property;
         (s)   Abandoned mines; and
         (t)   Soil classifications.
      (6)   The following certifications and design statements shall be
provided:
         (a)   Basis of design for the final drainage system components;
         (b)   A statement giving any applicable engineering assumptions and
calculations;
         (c)   A statement by the design engineer of the drainage system’s
provision for handling events greater than the 100-year, 24-hour runoff;
         (d)   Design calculations and other submittals as required by this
chapter; and
         (e)   A statement of certification of all drainage plans,
calculations, and supporting data by a licensed professional engineer.
      (7)   A depiction of environmental features of the property and immediate
vicinity including the following:
         (a)   The limits of designated regulatory and non-regulatory wetland
areas;
         (b)   The location of trees greater than eight inches in diameter in
areas to be disturbed;
         (c)   Any designated natural areas or prime farmland; and
         (d)   Any proposed environmental mitigation features.
      (8)   Any and all local, state, or federal maps marked to reflect any
proposed change in the floodway delineation, base flood, or 100-year frequency
flood elevation will change due to the proposed project;
      (9)   Conditional approval by FEMA or other regulatory agencies of the
proposed changes in the floodway map that have been made if the floodway
delineation, base flood, or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due
to the proposed project;
      (10)   (a)   Engineering calculations and data supporting all proposed
plans. Hydrologic design shall be completed in accordance with §§
152.20 through
152.209.
         (b)   Detention system design shall be completed in accordance with §§
152.220 through
152.235;
      (11)   If the project involves channel modification, the following
information shall be submitted:
         (a)   A discussion of the purpose and need for the proposed work;
         (b)   Discussion of the practicability of using alternative locations
or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
         (c)   Analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering
cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected; and
         (d)   Additional information as required by this chapter.
      (12)   Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3) prepared in accordance
with §
152.250 through 152.259.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.184 GRADING AND DRAINAGE PERMIT APPLICATION FORMS.
   A Class 1 or Class 2 grading and drainage permit application shall include:
   (A)   Name(s), address(es), and telephone numbers of the owner and developer
of the site, the contractor(s), and of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant identifying the principal contractor;
   (B)   Certification that all construction covered by the grading and
drainage permit will be undertaken in compliance with §§
152.155 through
152.159;
   (C)   A sketch acceptable to the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her
designee, showing the amount of impervious area being created;
   (D)   A sketch acceptable to the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her
designee, showing the amount of disturbed ground area being created; and
   (E)   An application fee.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.185 SUBMITTAL, REVIEW, APPROVAL.
   If a building permit is also required for the development, the grading and
drainage permit application shall be submitted to the Zoning and Building
Director, or his or her designee, at the time application is made for a
building permit. Departments of the county and designees shall coordinate their
activities to prevent additional, unnecessary delays. In the event the Zoning
and Building Director requires submittal to a designee, fees that may be
required for the designee shall be paid up front by the petitioner.
   (A)   Each application for an approved grading and drainage permit shall be
reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures. The Zoning and
Building Director, or his or her designees, shall:
      (1)   Provide a written evaluation to the applicant regarding the
adequacy and effectiveness of the proposal to address the provisions of this
chapter. The Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designees, may retain
the services of an independent professional to perform this evaluation. The
county, or its designees, may assess a fee for this evaluation service;
      (2)   Attend a preconstruction meeting with the applicant or designated
agent to review implementation of grading and drainage permit;
      (3)   (a)   Conduct on site inspections during the active construction
phases of and development projects to determine whether site development is in
compliance with the approved grading and drainage plans, and determine
adjustments needed to the approved plans.
         (b)   After construction has been completed, determine whether
permanent site stabilization has been achieved and identify operation and
maintenance needs;
      (4)   Prepare correspondence as needed regarding the effectiveness (or
corrective measures needed) or adequacy of soil erosion and sediment control
measures;
      (5)   Consult with land developers, consultants, and contractors
concerning the design criteria, installation, and maintenance procedures, and
other information regarding best management practices recommended under the
provisions of this chapter;
      (6)   After review of the application and required submissions if it is
found to be in conformance with the provisions of this chapter:
         (a)   Approve the grading and drainage permit;
         (b)   Approve the grading and drainage permit subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of this chapter, and issue the approval subject to these conditions;
and
         (c)   Disapprove the grading and drainage permit, indicating the
deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission.
   (B)   No approval for a grading and drainage permit shall be issued for an
intended development site unless the following actions have been obtained where
applicable:
      (1)   Land use regulations that apply to the development have been
approved by the county where applicable;
      (2)   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the building official;
      (3)   The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall
development program previously approved by the Zoning and Building Director, or
his or her designees, for the area in which the site is situated;
      (4)   All relevant federal, state, and local permits; and
      (5)   The applicant is successful in the appeals process.
   (C)   (1)   Failure of the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her
designees, to act on an original or revised application within 60 days of
receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans
as filed and in compliance with the regulations contained herein, unless such
time is extended by agreement between the Zoning and Building Director, or his
or her designees, and the applicant.
      (2)   Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development
activities may be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established
by the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designees.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.186 OTHER AGENCY PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, shall
not issue a grading and drainage permit unless all required federal, state, and
drainage district permits have been obtained by the applicant and copies
thereof reviewed by the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee.
The acquisition of these permits shall be the sole responsibility of the
applicant.
      (2)   The granting of a grading and drainage permit under these
regulations shall in no way affect the owner’s responsibility to obtain the
approval required by any other statute, ordinance, or code, or to meet the
requirements of other county ordinances and regulations, including, but not
limited to, building permits, § 404 of the Clean Water Act, § 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act, § 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, or
permitting required by the State Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources in accordance with the Rivers, Lakes, and Streams Act, 615
ILCS, the Soil and Water Conservation Districts Act, 70 ILCS, the Farmland
Preservation Act, 505 ILCS, the State Groundwater Protection Act, 415 ILCS; and
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES), and § 401
of the Clean Water Act through the State Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control, and the Threatened and Endangered Species
Act, 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531 et seq.
   (B)   Any work involving the construction, modification, or removal of a
dam, as defined herein, per 92 Ill. Adm. Code 702 (rules for construction of
dams), shall require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit prior to permit being issued
by the county. Any development involving work in waters of the United States,
including wetlands and streams as identified and regulated by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, shall require permits or sign-offs from the Corps prior to
the issuance of a county permit.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.187 PERMIT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The issuance of a grading and drainage permit shall constitute an
authorization to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the
application for the permit or on the plans and specifications approved by the
Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee.
   (B)   The issuance of a permit or the approval of drawings and
specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, nor an approval of,
any violation of or deviation from the provision of these regulations or any
other ordinance, law, rule, or regulation.
   (C)   The issuance of a permit, based upon drawings and specifications,
shall not prevent the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee,
from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said drawings and
specifications or from stopping unlawful construction operations being carried
on there under.
   (D)   The grading and drainage permit shall be valid until the completion
date noted in the permit. The Zoning and Building Director, or his or her
designee, may grant an extension if relevant design and construction standards
have not changed and if, in the Zoning and Building Director’s, or his or her
designee’s, opinion, the work approved under the permit does not unduly
adversely affect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
Otherwise, a new permit shall be acquired before work is started or continued.
The Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, may require
modification of the SWP3 to prevent any increase in erosion or off-site
sediment runoff resulting from any extension.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.188 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, may revoke a
permit:
      (1)   Where there has been any false or inaccurate statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit was based; or
      (2)   When work is performed contrary to the provisions of the
application or plans on which the permit is based.
   (B)   When a permit is revoked, the Zoning and Building Director, or his or
her designee, shall inform the permittee, in writing, of the specific steps the
permittee must take in order to have the permit reissued.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to continue any work authorized by a permit after
revocation of that permit until that permit is reissued or until a new permit
is issued.
   (D)   (1)   In cases where the permittee wishes to appeal the decision of
the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, the appeal process
outlined in §§
152.140 through
152.142 will be followed.
      (2)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee,
certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after the notice of the appeal has
been filed with him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a
stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.189 RETENTION OF PLANS.
   Plans, specifications, and reports for all site developments shall be
retained as required by state statute by the Zoning and Building Director.
(Ord. passed - -)
HYDROLOGIC DESIGN CRITERIA FOR CLASS 3 PROJECTS
§ 152.200 REFERENCED STANDARDS.
   Design standards for hydrologic design shall comply with these regulations
and with the applicable provisions of either the IDOT drainage and design
manuals or the Illinois Urban Manual, latest edition. Where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by the IDOT drainage and design
manuals, the Illinois Urban Manual, or those required by other provisions of
law or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.201 RELEASE RATES.
   (A)   The drainage system for new developments or redevelopments shall be
designed to control the peak rate of discharge from the total property under
development for the two-year, 24-hour, ten-year, 24-hour, and 100-year, 24-hour
events (three recurrence interval events to consider) to pre-project levels
which will not cause an increase in flooding or channel instability downstream
when considered in aggregate with other developed properties and downstream
drainage capacities.
   (B)   Where a detailed hydrologic or hydraulic model exists, release rates
shall be established and incorporated as part of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.202 DRAINAGE SYSTEM DESIGN AND EVALUATION.
   (A)   (1)   The following criteria should be used in evaluating and
designing the drainage system. The design will provide capacity to pass the
ten-year, 24-hour peak flow in the minor drainage system and an overload flow
path (major drainage system) for flows in excess of the design capacity.
      (2)   Whenever practicable, the stormwater systems shall not result in
the inter-basin transfer of drainage unless no other alternative exists.
   (B)   The design rainfall recurrence interval shall be set by the design
application as follows:
 
Bridges                       100-year
Detention                     100-year
Emergency overflow routing    100-year
Roadway underpasses           50-year
Storm sewers                  10-year
Swales, ditches, and culverts 25-year
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.203 DESIGN METHODOLOGIES.
   (A)   An applicable hydrologic design method may be selected from the IDOT
Drainage Manual with the following modifications and clarifications. Minor
conveyance systems for areas up to 100 acres, and major conveyance systems up
to ten acres may be designed using the rational formula. Design runoff rates
may be calculated using a continuous simulation model or by event hydrographic
methods. If event hydrographic methods are used they must be HEC-HMS, HEC-1,
SCS TR20, or SCS TR55. Event methods must incorporate the following
assumptions:
      (1)   Antecedent moisture condition 2 (normal moisture); and
      (2)   Huff or SCS type 2 distribution.
   (B)   For design events the Illinois State Water Survey Bulletin 70
(northwest) rainfall data must be used. Storage volumes for detention must be
24-hour events. Stormwater conveyance capacities must be designed for the
critical duration creating the highest peak. The following table lists data
from Bulletin 70:
FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTIONS (IN INCHES) FOR ZONE 1
ILLINOIS STATE WATER SURVEY, BULLETIN 70
Duration Frequency
FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTIONS (IN INCHES) FOR ZONE 1
ILLINOIS STATE WATER SURVEY, BULLETIN 70
Duration Frequency
        2-month   6-month 1-year 2-year 5-year 10-year 25-year 50-year 100-
                                                                        year
5        0.17      0.25    0.31   0.37   0.47   0.56    0.067   0.78    0.89
minutes
15       0.38      0.57    0.70   0.84   1.07   1.25    1.51    1.76    1.99
minutes
30       0.52      0.77    0.95   1.15   1.46   1.71    2.07    2.42    2.77
minutes
1 hour   0.67      0.98    1.21   1.46   1.86   2.18    2.63    3.07    3.51
2 hours  0.84      1.23    1.52   1.83   2.33   2.74    3.31    3.86    4.47
6 hours  1.06      1.56    1.93   2.33   2.96   3.48    4.20    4.90    5.69
12 hours 1.23      1.81    2.24   2.71   3.43   4.03    4.88    5.66    6.51
18 hours 1.30      1.92    2.37   2.86   3.63   4.26    5.15    6.01    6.92
24 hours 1.40      2.08    2.57   3.11   3.95   4.63    5.60    6.53    7.36
48 hours 1.47      2.24    2.80   3.42   4.28   4.96    6.07    7.02    8.07
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.204 POSITIVE DRAINAGE.
   (A)   All developments must be provided an overland flow path that will pass
the 100-year, 24-hour flow within designated drainage easements or the public
right-of-way with a freeboard of at least one foot.
   (B)   Overland flow paths shall be provided drainage easements unless the
flow is contained in the public right-of-way.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.205 CULVERT, ROAD, DRIVEWAY CROSSINGS.
   Sizing of culvert crossings shall consider entrance and exit losses as well
as tailwater conditions on the culvert.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.206 VEGETATED FILTER STRIPS AND SWALES.
   (A)   To effectively filter stormwater pollutants and promote infiltration
of runoff, sites should be designed to maximize the use of vegetated filter
strips and swales, shall be designed to follow criteria in the Illinois Urban
Manual.
   (B)   Whenever practicable, runoff from impervious surfaces should be
directed onto filter strips and swales comprised of native grasses and forbs
before being routed to a storm sewer or detention basin.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.207 MAINTENANCE CONSIDERATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The stormwater drainage system shall be designed to minimize and
facilitate maintenance. Use of native vegetation is strongly encouraged to
reduce maintenance, increase wildlife habitat, and to provide other benefits.
Where nonnative vegetation is used, turfed side slopes shall be designed to
allow lawn mowing equipment to easily negotiate them. Wet basins shall be
provided with alternate outflows, which can be used to completely drain the
pool for sediment removal. Pumping may be considered if drainage by gravity is
not feasible.
      (2)   Pre-sedimentation basins shall be included, where feasible, for
localizing sediment deposition and removal. Site access for heavy equipment
shall be provided. A maintenance plan for the ongoing maintenance of all
stormwater management system components including wetlands is required prior to
plan approval.
   (B)   The plan shall include:
      (1)   Maintenance tasks;
      (2)   The party responsible for performing the maintenance tasks;
      (3)   A description of all permanent public or private access maintenance
easements and overland flow paths, and compensatory storage areas; and
      (4)   A description of dedicated sources of funding for the required
maintenance.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.208 PROVISIONS FOR AGRICULTURAL DRAINAGE.
   (A)   Existing easements for any agricultural drainage systems located
underneath areas that will be developed shall be preserved. If no such easement
exists, an easement shall be dedicated for access and maintenance as provided
for in this chapter.
   (B)   All agricultural drainage systems that serve upstream areas outside of
the development and that are located underneath areas that will be developed
shall be replaced with non-perforated conduit to prevent root blockage,
provided, however, that the existing drainage district system may remain in
place with the approval of the appropriate entity.
   (C)   Agricultural drainage systems that, due to development, will be
located underneath streets, driveways, and other paved areas, as allowed by
this chapter, shall be replaced with conduits meeting the county’s, or
designees’, standard specifications as needed to prevent the collapse of the
agricultural drainage conduit.
   (D)   Agricultural drainage systems may be relocated within the development
area upon the approval of the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her
designee. Such relocation shall maintain sufficient slope and capacity to
prevent sedimentation and to prevent an increase in scouring or structural
damage to the conduit. Such relocation shall only be with the consent and
approval of the appropriate entity responsible for the system. If the system is
not under the authority of a drainage district, the Zoning and Building
Director, or his or her designee, shall consider the interests of those
landowners who are served by the system.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.209 CHANNEL MODIFICATIONS.
   Channel modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural
conditions and improve water quality. If the proposed development activity
involves a channel modification, it must be demonstrated that:
   (A)   Water quality and other natural functions would be significantly
improved by the modification or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an
equivalent degree of natural resource values; and
   (B)   The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in
a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the
stream or body of water affected.
(Ord. passed - -)
DETENTION SYSTEM DESIGN CRITERIA
§ 152.220 REFERENCED STANDARDS.
   Design standards for detention basin design and construction shall comply
with the provisions of the following, unless otherwise stated by this chapter:
   (A)   Illinois Urban Manual, latest edition;
   (B)   IDOT Standard Specifications, latest edition;
   (C)   IDOT Drainage Manual, latest edition;
   (D)   State Department of Natural Resources Dam Safety Regulations;
   (E)   Clean Water Act (discharges regulated by the United States EPA through
NPDES permits);
   (F)   The county, or designees, standard details and specifications; and
   (G)   The county, or designees, subdivision, zoning, or floodplain
ordinances.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.221 DETENTION STORAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The design storage to be provided in the detention basin shall be
based on the runoff from the runoff difference before and after development
from the 100-year, 24-hour event.
   (B)   All detention basin storage shall be computed using hydrograph methods
utilizing reservoir routing (also called modified pools or level pool) or
equivalent method as described by this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.222 WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The requirement for stormwater detention and release rate does not
apply when:
      (1)   The development is in accord with the approved site plan and is on
a lot in a new subdivision for which detention is otherwise provided; or
      (2)   The development is on a lot or parcel in a subdivision for which
detention was provided and approved prior to the effective date of these
regulation.
   (B)   The requirement for stormwater detention and release rate shall be
waived by the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, when he or
she determines it is in the best interest of the county to require a fee in
lieu of detention as described in §
152.224.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.223 OWNERSHIP.
   Detention basins are owned by the property owner (often a homeowners’
association) unless otherwise described by this chapter or indicated by the
Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee. Property developers shall
contact the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, to inquire
about the ownership and maintenance responsibility of existing regional
detention basins which may affect the development.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.224 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Detention ponds and associated inflow and outflow systems are
maintained by the property owner absent any specific legal agreement to the
contrary.
   (B)   Maintenance agreements may be required at the option of the Zoning and
Building Director, or his or her designee, to define parties responsible for
the maintenance of commercial detention basins.
   (C)   The detention basin owner shall be responsible for the following
items:
      (1)   An annual report on the detention basin condition, using the
attached checklist, shall be submitted to the Zoning and Building Director, or
his or her designee;
      (2)   (a)   At five-year intervals, the basin shall be inspected by a
professional engineer registered in the state. A report of this inspection
shall be submitted to the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee,
within 60 days of the inspection.
         (b)   The inspection shall include an evaluation of the checklist
items in the attached checklist. An annual report is not required the year when
the five-year report is due;
      (3)   Detention basin owners shall notify subsequent owners of their
maintenance responsibilities and transfer basin maintenance records to the
party with active maintenance responsibility; and
      (4)   These requirements shall be effective for all detention basins
existing in the county on the adoption date hereof as well as detention basins
constructed after the effective date.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.225 GENERAL BASIN DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Erosion control. Temporary and permanent erosion control shall be
required for all detention basins in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   Verification and final approval.
      (1)   Erosion protection shall be inspected throughout the project
duration.
      (2)   Detention basin storage volume shall be verified to the
satisfaction of the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee,
through as built surveys or other means.
      (3)   Inflow, outflow, and emergency overflow elevations shall be
verified through as built surveys.
      (4)   Final vegetative cover and permanent erosion control shall be
inspected for completeness of cover.
      (5)   The basin will receive final approval upon fulfillment of divisions
(B)(2), (B)(3), and (B)(4) above, and the anniversary date of maintenance and
repair reporting will be recorded as such.
      (6)   All basins must receive final approval within 90 days of the
substantial completion as determined by the Zoning and Building Director, or
his or her designee, of any of the following:
         (a)   The first phase (as shown on approved plans) of construction of
public utilities and roadways in any approved subdivision project. Detention
structures for the ultimate development area must be constructed during the
first phase of the project, and approved at its completion. The detention
structures must then be maintained and repaired in conformance with this
chapter, during future construction phases.
         (b)   Parking areas, floor slabs, or other impervious areas (as shown
on approved plans, and not including sidewalks) for work on an individual lot
requiring an individual permit under this chapter. Phased construction will be
treated as in the above case.
         (c)   Mass earthwork or rough grading if no other phased construction
is scheduled to be started within 180 days.
      (7)   Failure to receive final approval as required will be considered a
violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Infiltration practices. To effectively reduce runoff volumes,
infiltration practices, including basins, trenches, and porous pavement, shall
follow criteria in the Illinois Urban Manual and other relevant permitting. An
appropriate sediment control device shall be provided to remove coarse sediment
from stormwater flows before they reach infiltration basins or trenches.
Stormwater shall not be allowed to stand more than 72 hours over 80% of the dry
basin’s bottom area for the maximum design event to be exfiltrated. The bottom
of infiltration basins or trenches shall be a minimum of three feet above the
seasonally high groundwater and bedrock level if practicable. Engineering
calculations demonstrating infiltration rates shall be included with the
application.
   (D)   Side slopes. The side slopes of all detention basins at 100-year, 24-
hour capacity should be as level as practicable to prevent accidental falls
into the basin and for stability and ease of maintenance. Side slopes of
detention basins and open channels shall not be steeper than three to one,
horizontal to vertical; certain types of basins have different requirements as
defined by this chapter. Detention basin side slopes above normal pool
elevation shall be designed with permanent erosion protection consisting of
grass, non-grass vegetation, or other permanent finish. At least six inches of
topsoil must be provided on side slopes above normal pool elevation whenever
nonstructural, permanent erosion control is not being used. Permanent erosion
protection shall be aesthetically suitable to the development or existing
surrounding land use.
   (E)   Overflow structures. All stormwater detention basins shall be provided
with an overflow structure capable of safely passing excess flows at a stage at
least one foot below the lowest foundation grade in the vicinity of the
detention basin. The design flow rate of the overflow structure shall be
equivalent to the 100-year, 24-hour inflow rate. Weirs, dams, and specialized
outflows shall be designed by a professional engineer registered in the state.
   (F)   Detention basin outlet design.
      (1)   Backwater. Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream
drainage system shall be addressed when designing the outlet.
      (2)   Minimum detention outlet size. Where a single pipe outlet or
orifice plate is to be used to control discharge, it shall have a minimum
diameter of 12 inches. If design release rates call for smaller outlets, a
design that minimizes the possibility of clogging shall be used.
   (G)   Other design requirements.
      (1)   “Bubble up” outlets are prohibited.
      (2)   Pumped outlets and other active control structures are discouraged
and must be preapproved on a case-by-case basis by the Zoning and Building
Director, or his or her designee.
      (3)   Temporary erosion techniques shall be used as required to ensure a
full stand of cover vegetation in minimum time.
   (H)   Location requirements.
      (1)   In subdivisions, detention basins and their 100-year design high
water shall be contained within platted lots dedicated for drainage purposes.
In redevelopments, detention basins and their 100-year design high water shall
be contained within a drainage easement.
      (2)   Detention basin lots shall have a minimum of 20 feet of frontage on
a right-of-way for the purpose of providing unrestricted access for
maintenance. Exceptions may be made for infill development.
      (3)   A 20-foot minimum setback shall be required from all property lines
to the normal pool elevation, which is considered to be the elevation of the
water level at the permanent depth of the wet basin pool rather than the
temporary depth during drainage events.
      (4)   Detention basins shall be provided with a minimum of one foot of
freeboard above the 100-year design water elevation.
      (5)   There shall be at least two feet of freeboard between the 100-year
design water elevation and all boundaries of the parcel or easement containing
the basin.
   (I)   Accommodating flows from upstream tributary areas. Stormwater runoff
from areas tributary to the property shall be considered in the design of the
property’s drainage system. Flows from upstream areas that are not to be
detained should be routed around the basin being provided for the site being
developed.
   (J)   Upstream areas not meeting chapter requirements. When there are areas
not meeting the storage and release rates of this chapter, tributary to the
applicant’s property, the following steps shall be followed:
      (1)   The applicant shall compute the storage volume needed for his or
her property using the release rates and procedures described in this chapter;
      (2)   The areas tributary to the applicant’s property, not meeting the
storage and release rate requirements of this chapter, shall be identified;
      (3)   Using the areas determined above plus the applicant’s property
area, total storage and release rates needed for the combined properties shall
be computed using the release rates and procedures described in this chapter.
If tributary areas are not developed, a reasonable fully developed land cover,
based on local zoning, shall be used for the purposes of computing storage;
      (4)   Once the necessary combined storage is computed the county, or its
designee, may choose to pay for oversizing the applicant’s detention basin to
accommodate the regional flows. The applicant’s responsibility will be limited
to the storage for his or her property as computed above. If regional storage
is selected by the county, or its designee, the Zoning and Building Director,
or his or her designee, will work with the applicant to implement the
requirements of this chapter. If regional storage is rejected by the county, or
its designee, the applicant shall bypass all tributary area flows around the
applicant’s basin whenever practicable as determined by the Zoning and Building
Director, or his or her designee. If the applicant must route upstream flows
through his or her basin and the upstream areas exceed one square mile in size,
the applicant must meet the provisions of §
152.229(C).
   (K)   Upstream areas meeting chapter requirements. When there are areas
which meet the storage and release rate requirements of this chapter, and
tributary to the applicant’s property, the upstream flows shall be bypassed
around the applicant’s detention basin if this is the only practicable
alternative as determined by the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her
designee. Storage needed for the applicant’s property shall be computed as
described in this chapter. However, if the county, or its designee, decides to
route tributary area flows through an applicant’s basin, the final design
stormwater releases shall be based on the combined total of the applicant’s
property plus tributary areas. It must be shown that at no time will the runoff
rate from the applicant’s property exceed the allowable release rate for his or
her property alone.
   (L)   Early completion of detention facilities. Where detention or retention
are to be used as part of the drainage system for a property, they shall be
constructed as the first element of the initial earthwork program. Any eroded
sediment captured in these facilities shall be removed by the applicant on a
regular basis and before project completion in order to maintain the design
volume of the facilities.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.226 WET DETENTION BASIN DESIGN.
   Wet detention basins shall be designed to remove stormwater pollutants, to
be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing, and as much as feasible to be available
for recreational use.
   (A)   Wet basin depths. Wet basins shall be at least three feet deep,
excluding near-shore banks and safety ledges. If fish habitat is to be provided
they shall be at least ten feet deep over 25% of the bottom area to prevent
winter kill.
   (B)   Wet basin shoreline slopes. The side slopes of wet basins at the
normal pool elevation shall not be steeper than five to one horizontal to
vertical. It is recommended that native aquatic vegetation be established
around the perimeter to provide protection from shoreline erosion. Slopes below
a depth of eight feet are permitted to be two to one, in accordance with IDOT
Standard Specifications, § 204.
   (C)   Permanent pool volume. The permanent pool volume in a wet basin at
normal depth shall be equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the
two-year, 24-hour event as a minimum.
   (D)   Wet basin inlet and outlet orientation.
      (1)   The distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be
maximized. Inlets and outlets shall be at opposite ends of the basin, providing
that the orientation does not create undue hardship based on topography or
other natural constraints. Designers are encouraged to use baffles or berms in
the basin bottom to prevent short circuiting.
      (2)   There shall be no low flow bypass between the inlet and outlet. The
minimum flow length shall be ten feet with a recommended minimum ratio of two
to one for width.
   (E)   Safety ledge. All wet detention basins shall have a level safety ledge
at least four feet in width two and one-half to three feet below the normal
water depth.
   (F)   Aeration. Wet bottom basins shall have a natural or artificial means
of aeration.
   (G)   Dewatering. An outlet structure shall be provided to allow dewatering
of the pond for maintenance. Gravity dewatering is strongly preferred.
   (H)   Soil permeability. Wet bottom basin design shall include an evaluation
of soil permeability. A basin liner shall be included in the design if needed
to ensure water retention to normal pool elevation.
   (I)   Detention/sedimentation. It is encouraged that consideration of
routing runoff from the development through a stilling basin be considered.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.227 DRY DETENTION BASIN DESIGN.
   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, dry basins shall be
designed to remove stormwater pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically
pleasing and as much as feasible to be available for multiple uses.
   (A)   Dry basin drainage.
      (1)   Dry basins shall be designed so that 80% of their bottom area shall
have standing water no longer than 72 hours for any runoff event less than the
100-year, 24-hour event. Grading plans shall clearly distinguish the wet
portion of the basin bottom.
      (2)   Underdrains directed to the outlet may be used to accomplish this
requirement.
   (B)   Minimum bottom slope. Dry bottom basins shall have 2% minimum bottom
slopes or underdrain systems as approved by Zoning and Building Director, or
his or her designee.
   (C)   Low flow channel. Dry bottom basins may include a low flow channel
with some form of erosion protection.
   (D)   Velocity dissipation. Velocity dissipation measures shall be
incorporated into dry basin designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets
and to minimize re-suspension of pollutants.
   (E)   Dry basin inlet and outlet orientation. Dry basin inlet and outlet
orientation shall be the same as for wet basins.
   (F)   Temporary sediment trap. A sediment trap shall be constructed at each
major inlet to a dry basin during construction. The temporary sediment trap
should be designed in accordance with criteria in the Illinois Urban Manual.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.228 DETENTION ON PRIME FARMLAND.
   The placement of detention basins shall avoid the utilization of prime
farmland. All detention basin construction shall examine potential impacts to
adjacent agricultural land and shall address measures that will be implemented
to eliminate such impacts and comply with other relevant permitting.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.229 DETENTION IN FLOODPLAINS.
   The placement of detention basins within the floodplain is strongly
discouraged because of questions about their reliable operation during flood
events. However, the stormwater detention requirements of this chapter may be
fulfilled by providing detention storage within flood fringe areas on the
project site, provided the following provisions are met as well as all required
state, federal, and local permits:
   (A)   Detention in flood fringe areas. The placement of a detention basin in
a flood fringe area shall require compensatory storage for one and one-half
times the volume below the base flood elevation occupied by the detention
basin, including any berms. The release from the detention storage provided
shall still be controlled consistent with the requirements of this subchapter.
The applicant shall demonstrate its operation for all stream flow and
floodplain backwater conditions. Excavations for compensatory storage along
watercourses shall be opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention.
All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall
be replaced below the existing ten-year elevation. All floodplain storage lost
above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the
existing ten-year flood elevation. All compensatory storage excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
   (B)   Detention in floodways. Detention basins shall be placed in the
floodway only in accordance with division (C) below.
   (C)   On-stream detention. On-stream detention basins are discouraged but
allowable if they provide regional public benefits and if they meet the other
provisions of this chapter with respect to water quality and control of the
five-year and 100-year, 24-hour events from the property. The volume of
detention shall be provided in addition to the existing stream floodway
storage. Further criteria are presented in §
152.230. If on stream detention is used in watersheds larger than one square
mile, the applicant will use hydrographic modeling to demonstrate that the
design will not increase the water level for any properties upstream or
downstream of the property. Also, impoundment of the stream as part of on
stream detention:
      (1)   Shall not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which
require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for
spawning;
      (2)   Shall not cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality
or stream aquatic habitat;
      (3)   Shall include a design calling for gradual bank slopes, appropriate
bank stabilization measures, and a pre-sedimentation basin;
      (4)   Shall not involve any stream channelization or the filling of
wetlands;
      (5)   Shall require the implementation of an effective non-point source
management program throughout the upstream watershed, which shall include as a
minimum, runoff reduction best management practices (BMPs) consistent with
division (A) above;
      (6)   Shall not occur downstream of a wastewater discharge; and
      (7)   Shall not contribute to the duration or flood frequency of any
adjacent land.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.230 DRAINAGE INTO WETLANDS, RIVERS, STREAMS, LAKES, PONDS, AND AREAS.
   (A)   Detention in wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes, or ponds. Existing
wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes, or ponds shall not be modified for the
purposes of stormwater detention unless it is demonstrated that the proposed
modifications will maintain or improve its habitat and ability to perform
beneficial functions, and shall comply with other relevant permitting. Existing
storage and release rate characteristics of wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes,
or ponds shall be maintained and the volume of detention storage provided to
meet the requirements of this division (A) shall be in addition to this
existing storage.
   (B)   Sediment control. The existing wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes, or
ponds shall be protected during construction and as further regulated §§
152.001 through
152.004 and 152.020 through 152.027.
   (C)   Alteration of drainage patterns. Site drainage patterns shall not be
altered to substantially decrease or increase the existing area tributary to
wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes, or ponds. Drainage patterns shall not be
altered by development to direct runoff off site to other than natural drainage
outlets existing prior to development.
   (D)   Detention/sedimentation. All runoff from the development shall be
routed through a preliminary detention/sedimentation basin designed to capture
the two-year, 24-hour event and hold it for at least 24 hours before being
discharged to the basin. This basin shall be constructed before property
grading begins and shall be maintained throughout the construction process. In
addition, the BMP hierarchy defined in section 3-5 of this article should be
followed to minimize runoff volumes and rates being discharged.
   (E)   Vegetated buffer strip. A buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width,
preferably vegetated with native plant species, shall be maintained or restored
around the periphery of a wetland, river, stream, lake, or pond.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.231 STREET DETENTION.
   If streets are to be used as part of the minor or major drainage system,
ponding depths shall follow the criteria below:
   (A)   Principal and minor arterials.
      (1)   Flow from a ten-year storm shall not inundate the center 20 feet of
the pavement; and
      (2)   Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any
building.
   (B)   Collector streets.
      (1)   Flow from a ten-year storm shall not inundate the center ten feet
of the pavement; and
      (2)   Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any
building.
   (C)   Local streets.
      (1)   Flow from a ten-year storm shall not top the curb; and
      (2)   Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any
building.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.232 PARKING LOT DETENTION.
   The maximum stormwater ponding depth in any parking area shall not exceed
six inches.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.233 ROOFTOP DETENTION.
   Rooftop storage of excess stormwater shall be designed and constructed to
meet with the building code, as adopted.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.234 FEE IN LIEU OF DETENTION.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   For the purpose of satisfying the requirements for
stormwater detention or compensatory storage for a development or redevelopment
on a property for which detention or compensatory storage was not previously
provided, a fee in lieu of detention or compensatory storage may be assessed
against the development prior to the issuance of a permit. Fees shall be
calculated to establish the property’s fair share of costs to provide detention
or compensatory storage for the watershed or drainage basin in which the
property exists.
         (b)   The cost figures used for detention shall be actual costs for
detention or compensatory storage being provided by contract or estimated costs
for planned detention or compensatory storage facilities approved by the Zoning
and Building Director, or his or her designee.
         (c)   All revenues received through such fees shall be used for no
purpose other than defraying public costs associated with providing detention
or compensatory storage facilities.
      (2)   The county, or its designee, also may require a fee for each acre/
foot of detention needed in lieu of the applicant building a basin on site;
provided, the property will discharge stormwater into existing or proposed
detention facilities with added capacity for the additional runoff.
   (B)   (1)   An applicant’s request for approval of the payment of a fee-in-
lieu of stormwater detention or compensatory storage shall be submitted to the
Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee. The Zoning and Building
Director, or his or her designee, shall grant or deny the request with 45 days,
unless the applicant agrees to an extension.
      (2)   Fees paid in lieu of detention shall be deposited by the community
in a separate fund created for such purpose. Provisions shall be made so that
all receipts and disbursements of such funds may be accounted for according to
the individual watershed in which the development for which they were paid was
located.
      (3)   Fees paid in lieu of detention may be expended to plan, design,
construct, administer, or improve stormwater management systems. A preference
will be given to projects within the watershed for which the fee was paid.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 1-21-2014)
§ 152.235 COOPERATIVE DETENTION.
   The county will consider joint detention facilities developed through
cooperative efforts that comply with all requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWP3)
§ 152.250 GENERAL.
   (A)   The area disturbed shall be assumed to include the entire property
area unless the applicable plans specifically exclude certain areas from
disturbance.
   (B)   The owner bears the responsibility for implementation of the SWP3 and
notification of all contractors and utility agencies on the site.
   (C)   SWP3s must be provided for all phases of development, including
sanitary sewer construction, storm drainage system construction, waterline,
street and sidewalk construction, general grading, and the construction of
individual homes. The Class 3 grading and drainage permit holder will not be
required to provide an SWP3 for the activities of utility agencies.
   (D)   The regulations for construction or post construction management will
be used for all regulated construction sites that are contained in the most
recent edition of the Illinois Urban Manual.
   (E)   The county will use the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT)
system of compliance that is outlined in the Bureau Of Design And Environment
(BDE) Design Manual.
   (F)   The subsequent owners of individual lots in a subdivision with an
approved SWP3 bears the responsibility for continued implementation of the
approved SWP3s for all construction activity within or related to the
individual lot, excluding construction managed by utility agencies.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.251 REQUIREMENTS FOR UTILITY CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Utility companies shall be responsible for compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Utility companies shall develop and implement best management
practices (BMPs) to prevent the discharge of pollutants on any site of utility
construction within the county. Disturbed areas shall be minimized, disturbed
soil shall be managed and construction site entrances shall be managed to
prevent sediment tracking. Sediment tracked onto public streets shall be
removed immediately by the utility agency.
   (C)   Prior to entering a construction site, utility agencies shall obtain a
copy of any SWP3s for the project from the owner. Any disturbance to BMPs
resulting from utility construction shall be repaired immediately by the
utility company in compliance with the SWP3.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.252 REQUIRED DOCUMENTATION.
   A Class 3 grading and drainage permit requires the execution and record
maintenance of the following forms and reports (see also the erosion control
plan action matrix, NPDES action matrix, IDOT). The most current version of the
standard forms from the Illinois Department of Transportation and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) shall be used. The approved project
erosion control documents shall be kept on file at the construction site or at
a nearby field office and must be made available to the general public upon
request.
   (A)   A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3) using the IDOT SWP3
template (form BDE 2342).
   (B)   A contractor certification statement (CCS) prepared prior to the start
of construction by the contractor responsible for erosion control using the
IDOT CCS template (form BDE 2342a). The grading and drainage permit holder
shall provide the contractor responsible for erosion control with a copy of the
IEPA NPDES statewide permit ILR10.
   (C)   A notice of intent (NOI) shall be filed at least 48 hours prior to the
start of construction and shall be prepared by the grading and drainage permit
holder (the original sent by certified mail to the IEPA with transmittal copy
to the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, and a copy kept in
the project erosion control file). Use the IDOT NOI template (found in forms
section of the IDOT Construction Manual WPC 623).
   (D)   An NPDES/erosion control inspection report (ECIR) shall be prepared by
the grading and drainage permit holder on a weekly basis and after any one-half
inch rainfall (to be kept in project erosion control file). Use the current
IDOT ECIR template (BC 2259).
   (E)   An incidence of non-compliance (ION) and corrective action shall be
filed by the grading and drainage permit holder within five working days of the
incident (the original sent by certified mail to the IEPA with transmittal copy
to the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, and a copy kept in
the project erosion control file). Use the current IDOT ION template (found in
forms section of the IDOT Construction Manual WPC 624).
   (F)   A notice of termination (NOT) shall be filed upon final stabilization
of erosion (minimum 70% viable vegetative growth) by the grading and drainage
permit holder (the original sent by certified mail to the IEPA with transmittal
copy to the Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, and a copy
kept in the project erosion control file). Use current IDOT NOT template V
(found in forms section of the IDOT Construction Manual WPC 621).
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.253 APPLICABILITY AND GUIDELINES.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of the grading and drainage permit holder to
prepare and maintain documentation to meet the NPDES permit requirements for
private grading and construction projects.
   (B)   The Zoning and Building Director, or his or her designee, shall be
given immediate access to all required project NPDES documents.
   (C)   All notices sent to the IEPA shall be copied to the Zoning and
Building Director, or his or her designee.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.254 REFERENCED STANDARDS.
   Design standards for erosion and sediment control shall comply with the most
current provisions of the USEPA regulations, IEPA regulations, IDOT erosion
control/NPDES guidelines, and per the Illinois Urban Manual, prepared by the
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service, unless otherwise stated by this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.255 GENERAL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL DESIGN FEATURES.
   The following principles shall apply to all construction undertaken under
the authorization of a Class 3 grading and drainage permit.
   (A)   New development or redevelopment shall be designed to create the least
potential for erosion. The disturbance of slopes greater than 7% should be
avoided wherever possible. Natural contours should be followed as closely as
possible.
   (B)   Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected wherever possible.
Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses, lakes, ponds, and wetlands
are to be left undisturbed wherever possible. Temporary crossings of
watercourses, when permitted, must include appropriate stabilization measures.
   (C)   Special precautions shall be taken to prevent damages resultant from
any necessary development activity within or adjacent to any stream, lake,
pond, or wetland. Preventive measures shall reflect the sensitivity of these
areas to erosion and sedimentation.
   (D)   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest
practical time during development.
   (E)   Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions, and any other
appropriate sediment or runoff control measures shall be installed prior to
site clearing and grading and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters
from land undergoing development.
   (F)   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics
and the requirements of continuing maintenance must be considered.
   (G)   Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by
changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. Drainage ways
should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities
and rates of discharge will not create additional erosion on site or
downstream.
   (H)   Permanent vegetation and structures shall be installed and functional
as soon as practical during development. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized
with approved permanent measures within seven calendar days following the end
of active disturbance or re-disturbance.
   (I)   Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land
uses shall be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior to
development.
   (J)   All waste generated as a result of site development activity shall be
properly disposed of and shall be prevented from being carried off the site by
either wind or water.
   (K)   All construction sites shall provide measures to prevent sediment from
being tracked onto public or private roadways.
   (L)   All temporary soil erosion and sediment control practices shall be
maintained to function as intended until the contributing drainage area has
been permanently stabilized, at which time they shall be removed within 30 days
after final site stabilization.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.256 MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION NOTES.
   (A)   Silt fence and coconut fiber shall be installed in accordance with the
material and construction requirements of the Illinois Urban Manual.
   (B)   Erosion control blankets, bales, seeding, and riprap shall be
installed in accordance with material and construction requirements of the
Illinois Urban Manual, latest edition.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.257 TESTING AND INSPECTION.
   Use the residents’ weekly NPDES/erosion control inspection report BC 2259
from the Illinois DOT Construction Manual.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.258 SOIL GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A soil grading and drainage plan shall be submitted showing all
measures necessary to meet the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases
of construction. The development of a soil grading and drainage plan shall
follow the requirements of this chapter and the procedures in the latest
edition of the Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control which is hereby incorporated into this chapter by
reference. Standards and specifications for BMPs shall follow the requirements
of this chapter and the criteria in the latest edition of the Illinois Urban
Manual which is hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference. The Zoning
and Building Director, or his or her designee, may waive specific requirements
for the content of submissions upon finding that the information submitted is
sufficient to show that the work will comply with the objectives and principles
of this chapter. Permanent soil erosion and sediment control features needed at
the completion of any development site shall be included in the submittal.
   (B)   The submitted soil grading and drainage plan shall include:
      (1)   Mapping and descriptions. The existing and proposed erosion and
sediment control features of the property and immediate vicinity, including:
         (a)   Items as required for the grading and drainage plan submittal;
         (b)   Location of the slope disturbance line;
         (c)   Location and description of the soil erosion and sediment
control measures to be employed during construction;
         (d)   For any structures proposed to be located on the slope side of
the slope disturbance line, the map shall include the limits of disturbance,
including tree removal, soil erosion, and sediment control measures during
construction, details of method(s) proposed for providing slope stability,
permanent stormwater control measures, and permanent erosion and sediment
control measures, all being certified by a registered professional engineer or
a certified professional erosion control specialist;
         (e)   The predominant soil types on the site, their location, and
their limitations for the proposed use as defined by the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS);
         (f)   Location and description, including standard details, of all
sediment control measures and specifics of sediment basins and traps, including
outlet details;
         (g)   Location and description (specification) of all soil
stabilization and erosion control measures, including seeding mixtures and
rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation (type and extent of tillage,
weed control, planting equipment, and the like), expected seeding dates, type,
method, and rate of lime and fertilizer application (soil fertility testing
required), kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures, and types of non-vegetative stabilization
measures; and
         (h)   Location and description of all runoff control measures,
including diversions, waterways, and outlets.
      (2)   Larger sites. Larger sites, at the discretion of the Zoning and
Building Director, or his or her designee, and those requiring a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWP3), may also require the following:
         (a)   Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of
sediment off site including construction entrance details, as appropriate;
         (b)   Description of dust and traffic control measures;
         (c)   Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including type
and frequency of maintenance, easements, and estimates of the cost of
maintenance; and
         (d)   Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person(s)
or entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of soil erosion
control structures and measures during development and after development is
completed.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.259 SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   On site sediment control measures, as specified by the following criteria,
shall be constructed as specified in the referenced handbooks, and functional
prior to initiating clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, or fill
activities on the site:
   (A)   For new developments or redevelopments of more than one acre but less
than five acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be
constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area;
   (B)   For new developments or redevelopments of one acre or greater than
five acres, a sediment basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed
at the downslope point of the disturbed area;
   (C)   Sediment basin and sediment trap designs shall provide for both dry
detention and wet detention sediment storage. The detention storage shall be
composed of equal volumes of wet detention storage and dry detention storage
and each shall be sized as regulated in this chapter. The release rate of the
basin shall be that rate as regulated in this chapter. The elevation of the
outlet structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention
storage;
   (D)   The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated sediment
load generated from the site over the duration of the construction period with
a minimum storage equivalent to the volume or sediment generated in one year.
For construction periods exceeding one year, the one-year sediment load and a
sediment removal schedule may be substituted;
   (E)   (1)   To the extent possible or as otherwise regulated in this
chapter, all desirable trees eight inches in diameter and larger shall be
protected for their present and future value for erosion protection and other
environmental benefits.
      (2)   Trees that have been selected for preservation shall be protected
following criteria from Illinois Urban Manual prior to the beginning of any
clearing, grading, stripping, excavation, or filling of the site. A “No
Construction Zone” shall be established and marked at the perimeter of the drip
line of each tree which is to be preserved;
   (F)   Stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, and
diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be designed and
constructed as regulated in this chapter. All constructed or modified channels
shall be stabilized within 48 hours, consistent with the following standards
and as required in the referenced handbooks:
      (1)   For grades up to 4%, seeding in combination with mulch, erosion
blanket, or an equivalent control measure shall be applied. Sod or erosion
blanket or mat shall be applied to the bottom of the channel;
      (2)   For grades of 4% to 8%, sod or an equivalent control measure shall
be applied in the channel; and
      (3)   For grades greater than 8%, rock, riprap, or an equivalent control
measure shall be applied over filter fabric or other type of soil protection,
or the grade shall be effectively reduced using drop structures.
   (G)   Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be avoided, where
possible, or as regulated by this chapter. If disturbance activities are
unavoidable, the following requirements shall be met:
      (1)   Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to
the maximum extent practicable. Where construction crossings are necessary,
temporary crossings shall be constructed of non-erosive material, such as
riprap or gravel;
      (2)   The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be kept
to a minimum. The stream channel, including bed and banks, shall be stabilized
within 48 hours after channel disturbance is completed, interrupted, or
stopped; and
      (3)   Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall be
constructed under dry conditions and fully stabilized before flow is diverted,
incorporating meanders, pool and riffle sequence, and riparian planting.
   (H)   Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment traps
or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and specifications;
   (I)   Soil storage piles containing more than ten cubic yards of material
shall not be located with a downslope drainage length of less than 50 feet to a
roadway, drainage channel, or abandoned mine. Filter barriers, including straw
bales, filter fence, or equivalent, shall be installed immediately surrounding
the perimeter of the pile;
   (J)   If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be protected
from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through appropriately
designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent, and shall not be deposited
into an abandoned mine;
   (K)   Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent) entrance roads, access
drives, and parking areas of sufficient length and width to prevent sediment
from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a
public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or street cleaning (not
flushing) before the end of each workday and transported to a controlled
sediment disposal area.
(Ord. passed - -)
FORMS
§ 152.270 LETTER OF CREDIT.
(name of bank)
(City bank's located) , (State)
Irrevocable Credit No.___ Date: ____________, 20_____
 
County of Rock Island, Illinois All drafts must be marked:
Illinois Drawn under Credit No.___,
dated _______, 20_______
Gentlemen:
We hereby open an Irrevocable Letter of Credit in the amount of ($ _____) in your
favor for the account of (Developer), the developer of (name of project), proposed
in the Rock Island County, Illinois, or within its territorial jurisdiction, for
the benefit of the County of Rock Island. Said money hereunder shall be available
by your drafts at sight drawn on us drawn in the name of the County of Rock Island,
Illinois. All drafts so drawn must be marked “Drawn under (name of bank) , Credit
No.____ dated _____, 20____ .”
Drafts must be accompanied by a signed statement by the Zoning & Building Director
or his/her designee of the County of Rock Island, Illinois, that the request is for
the installation or construction of improvements required pursuant to the plans,
specifications, and cost estimates dated______, 20___, and approved by the County
of Rock Island, Illinois, and on file with the Zoning & Building Director or his/
her designee. Further, all requests for disbursements under this Letter of Credit
made prior to________ (must be 2 years after filing), 20____, shall be submitted by
developer and accompanied by a certified estimate of units and value of work
completed with contractor’s sworn statement and waiver of mechanics’ liens, all
approved by the Developer’s engineer and the Zoning & Building Director or his/her
designee of the County of Rock Island, Illinois. It is understood as to all
disbursements that the Zoning & Building Director or his/her designee shall approve
partial drawings only as long as there remains a sufficient balance to the Credit
to cover his then current estimate of costs for the required improvements which at
that time remain to be completed but in no case shall his approval exceed ninety
percent (90%) of the value of work completed. In the event that all of the work for
the improvements is not completed to the satisfaction of the City/County on or
before (1 day short of 2 years after filing) _________, 20____, the funds remaining
under this Letter of Credit shall be available to the County of Rock Island,
Illinois upon presentation of their draft at sight drawn on us in the name of the
County of Rock Island, Illinois. This draft so drawn must be marked “Drawn under
(name of bank), Credit No._____, dated_______, 20____.” Further, such draft shall
be accompanied by a signed statement by the Zoning & Building Director or his/her
designee of the County of Rock Island, Illinois as follows: “I, (name) , Zoning &
Building Director or his/her designee for the County of Rock Island, Illinois, do
hereby certify that work on required improvements for the project named has not
been completed to the satisfaction of the County of Rock Island, Illinois on or
before (one day short of two years after filing) _______, 20___. This Credit shall
expire on (2 years after filing) _______, 20____; provided, however, the
undersigned shall notify the Zoning & Building Director or his/her designee by
certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 90 days prior to expiration date
that this Letter of Credit is about to expire and provided, however, in no event
shall this Credit expire except upon prior written notice, it being expressly
agreed by the undersigned that the above expiration date shall be extended as shall
be required to comply with this notice provision.
The undersigned further agrees that this Credit shall remain in full force and
effect and pertain to any and all amendments or modifications which may be made
from time to time to the specifications, and agreements for the project, without
notice from the County of the amendments or modifications.
All acts, requirements and other preconditions for the issuance of this Irrevocable
Letter of Credit have been completed.
We hereby engage with the drawers, endorsers, and bona fide holders of drafts,
drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this Credit, that same shall be
honored upon presentation to the drawer. This Credit must accompany any draft which
exhausts the Credit and must be surrendered concurrently with the presentation of
such draft.
We hereby undertake and engage that all demands made in conformity with this Credit
will be honored upon presentation. If, within ten (10) days of the date any demand
made in conformity with this Credit is presented, we fail to honor same, we agree
to pay all attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred by the:
City/County of in enforcing the terms of this Credit.
Dated:_______, 20____.
(name of bank)
By
(title)
Attest:
(title)
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.271 PERFORMANCE BOND.
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that, ___________ as PRINCIPAL, __________, as
SURETY, and _______, as ADDITIONAL SURETY, are held and firmly bound unto the City/
County of , Illinois, as OBLIGEE, in the sum of ($______) lawful money of the
United States, for the payment whereof to the Obligee, the Principal and the
Surety, and Additional Surety bind themselves, their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors, and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly to these
presents:
SIGNED, SEALED AND DATED, THIS day of ________, 20______.
WHEREAS, application was made to the Obligee for approval of a project entitled
“_________,” located in the City/County of ______________, Illinois, filed with the
Zoning & Building Director or his/her designee of the County of Rock Island,
Illinois, on______, 20_____, said project may be approved upon certain conditions,
one of which is that a performance bond in the amount of ($_____) , to be filed
with the County Clerk to guarantee certain improvements in said project.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION is such that if the above named
Principal shall within two (2) years from the date hereof will and truly make and
perform the required improvements and construction of public improvements in and
adjacent to said project in accordance with the specifications of the Rock Island
County or its designee and the Stormwater Regulations of the County of Rock Island
or its designee, then this obligation to be void; otherwise to remain in full force
and effect. It is hereby understood and agreed that in the event that any required
improvements have not been installed as provided aforesaid within the term of this
Performance Bond, the County Board of the Rock Island County may thereupon declare
this bond to be in default and collect the sum remaining payable thereunder and
upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the Rock Island County Board shall install
such improvements as are covered by this bond and commensurate with the extent of
development that has taken place in said project but not exceeding the amount of
such proceeds.
Principal
By: ________ Principal
Surety
By: ____________
Attorney in Fact
Additional Surety
Approved as to Form:
By: ____________
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.272 COVENANT FOR STORMWATER DETENTION BASIN.
Covenant to be Included in Subdivision Covenants
Stormwater Detention Basin
 
A stormwater detention basin has been constructed within the subdivision, in
accordance with the requirements of the municipal stormwater ordinance, and is so
designated as “Detention Basin” on subdivision plat. The detention basin shall
provide for the temporary detention of stormwater runoff from the subdivision to meet
release rates as required by the municipality.
The real estate upon which the detention basin is located, designated as Outlot A on
the Plat, shall be deeded from the Developer to the Homeowner’s Association upon the
sale of 75% of the lots within the Subdivision.
The Developer as owner, and subsequent to the conveyance of title, the Homeowners
Association as owner, shall be responsible for the following:
a.   An annual report on the detention basin condition, using the checklist,
designated below, shall be submitted to the Zoning & Building Director or his/her
designee.
b.   At five (5) year intervals, the basin shall be inspected by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Illinois. A report of this inspection shall be
submitted to the Zoning & Building Director or his/her designee within sixty (60)
days of the inspection. The inspection shall include an evaluation of the checklist
items in the checklist below. An annual report is not required the year the five-year
report is due.
c.   The Developer, as owner, shall notify the Homeowners Association of its
maintenance responsibilities and transfer basin maintenance records to the Homeowners
Association. Each owner of an improved lot within the Subdivision shall be assessed
by the Homeowners Association for the cost of maintaining the Detention Basin and for
the cost of complying with the requirements of these covenants and the requirements
of the municipality. The Declaration regarding the establishment of a Homeowners
Association and the procedures for the assessment and collection of dues for the cost
of maintaining the detention basin shall be filed and recorded by the Developer as a
separate document.
DECLARATION OF RESTRICTIVE AND PROTECTIVE COVENANTS AND CONDITIONS REGARDING THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION FOR THE STORMWATER DETENTION BASIN SYSTEM
AS LOCATED WITHIN
Dated Filed _______________
To The Public
This Declaration, made on the date hereinafter set forth by _______________,
hereinafter referred to as “Declarant.”
WITNESSETH:
Whereas, Declarant is the owner of certain property in the County of Rock Island,
Illinois, which is more particularly described as:
NOW, THEREFORE, Declarant hereby declares that all of the properties described above
shall be held, sold and conveyed subject to the following easements, restrictions,
covenants and conditions, all of which are for the purpose of enhancing and
protecting the value, desirability and attractiveness of the real property, and for
the purpose of complying with stormwater retention requirements of the County of Rock
island. These covenants, restrictions and conditions shall run with the real property
and shall be binding on all parties having or acquiring any right, title or interest
in the described property or any part thereof, and shall inure to the benefit of each
owner thereof.
ARTICLE I.
DEFINITIONS
1.   “Association” shall mean and refer to Homeowners Association of ________, Inc.,
an Illinois non-profit corporation, its successors and assigns.
2.   “Properties” shall mean and refer to that certain real property hereinbefore
described, more particularly described as: Lots through _____ of ____, County
of______, Illinois, and such additions thereto as may hereafter be brought within the
jurisdiction of the Association.
3.   “Lot” shall mean and refer to any plot of land shown upon any recorded
subdivision map or plat of the properties.
4.   “Member” shall mean and refer to every person or entity who hold membership in
the association.
5.   “Owner” shall mean and refer to the record owner, whether one or more persons or
entities, of a fee simple title to any lot which is a part of the Properties,
including contract sellers, but excluding those having such interest merely as
security for the performance of an obligation.
6.   “Declarant” shall mean and refer to _______ (Developers Name), to successors and
assigns, if such successors or assigns should acquire more than one undeveloped lot
from the Declarant for the purpose of Development.
7.   “Developer” shall mean the same as “Declarant.”
ARTICLE II
MEMBERSHIP AND VOTING RIGHTS
Every person or entity who is a record owner of a fee or undivided fee interest in
any Lot which is subject by covenants of record to assessment by the Association,
including contract sellers, shall be a member of the Association. The foregoing is
not intended to include persons or entities who hold an interest merely as security
for the performance of an obligation. No owner shall have more than one membership.
Membership shall be appurtenant to and may not be separated from ownership of any lot
which is subject to assessment by the Association. Ownership of such lot shall be the
sole qualification for membership.
ARTICLE III
ESCROW FUND FOR MAINTENANCE
The primary source of funds for maintenance of the master stormwater detention system
shall be an escrow fund. Declarant shall establish the Escrow Fund at some local
banking institution at such time as the first lot in The Properties is transferred to
an owner other than the Declarant. The Association shall have the power to expend the
escrow fund for maintenance authorized in accordance with the provisions of Article
V.
ARTICLE IV
COVENANT FOR MAINTENANCE ASSESSMENT
1.   Creation of the lien and Personal Obligation of Assessments. The Declarant, for
each improved Lot owned within the Properties, hereby covenants, and each Owner of
any Lot by acceptance of a Deed therefore, whether or not it shall be so expressed in
such Deed, is deemed to covenant and agree to pay to the Association: (1) annual
assessments or charges, such assessments to be established and collected from time to
time as hereinafter provided. The term “Improved Lot” shall mean any lot having a
building erected thereon and ready for occupancy as approved by the County of
_______, Illinois. The annual assessments, together with interest, shall be a charge
on the land and shall be a continuing lien upon the property against which each such
assessment is made. Each assessment together with interest, costs and reasonable
attorney’s fees for collection, shall also be the personal obligation of the person
or entity who was the owner of such property at the time the assessment fell due. The
personal obligation for delinquent assessments shall not pass to his successors in
title unless expressly assumed by them.
2.   Purpose of Assessments. The assessments levied by the Association shall be used
exclusively to maintain the stormwater detention basin system, as provided for under
the Restrictive and Protective Covenants of The Board of Directors of the Association
shall establish a budget by January 1st of each year and shall levy an assessment
upon each improved Lot without the Subdivision by February 1st of each year, payable
by the 1st day of May.
3.   Notice and Quorum for Any Action Authorized Under Section 3. Written notice of
any meeting called for the purpose of establishing the budget and making the
assessment shall be sent to all members not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days
in advance of the meeting. At the first such meeting called, the presence of Members
or of proxies entitled to cast 50% of all votes of each class of membership shall
constitute a quorum. If the required quorum is not present, another meeting may be
called subject to the same notice requirement, and the required quorum at the
subsequent meeting shall be one-half of the required quorum at the preceding meeting.
No such subsequent meeting shall be held more than 60 days following the preceding
meeting.
4.   Uniform Rate of Assessment. Annual assessments must be fixed at a uniform rate
for all improved Lots and shall be collected on an annual installment basis, except
as hereinafter provided.
5.   Date of Commencement of Annual Assessments; Due Dates. The annual assessments
provided for herein shall commence as to all improved Lots on the first day of the
month following the conveyance of any such improved Lot. The first annual assessment
shall be adjusted according to the number of months remaining in the calendar year.
The Board of Directors of the Association shall fix the amount of the annual
assessment against each lot at least 30 days in advance of each annual assessment
period. Written notice of the annual assessment shall be sent to every Owner subject
thereto. The annual assessment shall be paid in one annual payment, and the due dates
and delinquency dates shall be uniformly established by the Board of Directors of the
Association. The Association shall, upon demand, and for a reasonable charge, furnish
a certificate signed by an officer of the Association setting forth whether the
assessments on a specified Lot are current or delinquent. Such certificate shall be
conclusive evidence of payment of any assessment therein stated to have been paid.
6.   Effect of Non-payment of Assessments: Remedies of the Association. Any annual
payment not paid within 30 days after the due date shall bear interest from the date
of delinquency at the rate of 10% per annum. The Association may bring any action at
law against the Owner personally obligated to pay the same, or foreclose the lien
against the property by an action in equity. In any such action, interest, costs and
reasonable attorneys fees shall be added to the amount of the delinquent assessment
and collected as part of said judgment. In the event of such foreclosure, if the
Association waives any and all rights to a deficiency judgment against the Owner, the
period for redemption as provided by the statutes of the State of Illinois shall be
reduced to six months from the date of foreclosure sale. Any lot ultimately acquired
by the Association through Judges Deed after such a foreclosure shall be sold by the
Association within a reasonable time either at public or private sale, and any
surplus remaining after the payment of assessments, interest, costs and attorney’s
fees shall be paid over to the former Owner of said Lot. No Owner may waiver or
otherwise escape liability for the assessments provided for herein by non-use of the
Detention Basin or by abandonment of his Lot.
7.   Subordination of the Lien to Mortgages. The lien of the assessments provided for
herein shall be subordinate to the lien of any first mortgage placed upon any Lot.
Sale or transfer of any Lot shall not affect the assessment lien. However, the sale
or transfer of any lot pursuant to Mortgage foreclosure or any assessments as to
payments which became due prior to such sale or transfer, provided that such sale or
transfer shall not extinguish the personal obligation of the prior Owner or his
heirs, successors or assigns, for payment of such assessment. No sale or transfer
shall relieve such Lot from liability for any assessments thereafter becoming due or
from the lien thereof.
ARTICLE V
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.   Enforcement. The Association, or any Owner shall have the right to enforce by
any proceeding at law or in equity all restrictions, conditions, covenants or
reservations now or hereafter imposed by the provisions of this Declaration. The
Association shall have the sole right to enforce, by proceedings at law or in equity,
the liens and charges now or hereafter imposed by the provisions of this Declaration.
Failure by the Association or by any Owner to enforce any covenant or restriction
herein contained shall in no event be deemed a waiver of the right to do so
thereafter.
2.   Severability. Invalidation of any one of these covenants or restrictions by
judgment or Court Order shall in no way affect any other provisions which shall
remain in full force and effect.
3.   Duration. The covenants and restrictions of this Declaration shall run with and
bind the land, for a term of 21 years from the date this Declaration is recorded,
after which time they shall be automatically extended for successive periods of 10
years each.
4.   Amendment. This Declaration may be amended during the first 21 years period by
an instrument signed by not less than 75% of the Lot owners and thereafter by an
instrument signed by not less than 65% of the Lot Owners, provided, however, that no
such amendment shall be valid or effective until is has been, and a certified copy of
said resolution, and a certified copy of the amendment adopted by the Lot Owners,
having both been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Rock Island, Illinois.
By: _____________________________
OWNER AND DECLARANT
By: _____________________________
OWNER AND DECLARANT
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating this chapter shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or a
plea of no contest, be fined a minimum of $250 to a maximum of $1,500. Each
separate day on which a violation is committed or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Authority and title
   
153.02   Purpose
   
153.03   Jurisdiction
   
153.04   Exceptions
   
153.05   Variances
   
153.06   Fees
   
153.07   Amendments
   
153.08   Definitions
Plats and Plans
   
153.20   Pre-filing conference
   
153.21   Preliminary plats
   
153.22   Improvement plans
   
153.23   Final plat
Tables, Forms, and Specifications
   
153.35   Table of street and alley design specifications
   
153.36   Letter of credit; signature area
   
153.37   Private road construction detail
   
153.38   Township road construction detail
   
153.39   Urban street construction detail
   
153.40   Alley construction
Cross-reference:
   For building regulations, including adopted building codes as published by
the International Code Council, see §§
150.15 through
150.22
   For regulations on mobile home parks, see
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances
   For utilities, see Title V of this code of ordinances
   For zoning regulations, see
Chapter 154 of this code of ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 AUTHORITY AND TITLE.
   This chapter is adopted in pursuance of the authority granted by the 1992
Compiled Statutes of the State of Illinois, 55 ILCS 5/5-1041. This chapter
shall be known, and may be cited and referred to as, the “Subdivision
Resolution of Rock Island County, Illinois” or “this chapter.”
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.02 PURPOSE.
   The standards provided herein are necessary for promoting carefully
considered, harmonious development of the unincorporated area of the county.
Benefits to be gained by following the standards of this chapter are:
   (A)   To preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare;
   (B)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography to the maximum feasible
extent;
   (C)   To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements, and
buildings;
   (D)   To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to avoid
traffic congestion by requiring the proper location, design, and construction
of streets;
   (E)   To provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly
layout and use of land, and to create an environment conducive to the
productive development of the unincorporated area of the county.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.03 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   This chapter shall be applicable within the unincorporated area of the
county. In instances where the proposed subdivision is located within one and
one-half miles of an incorporated municipality with a formal subdivision
ordinance, the incorporated municipality shall have opportunity to review the
proposed subdivision.
   (B)   In instances where two or more incorporated municipalities with formal
subdivision ordinances are located within one and one-half miles of the
proposed subdivision, all such incorporated municipalities shall have
opportunity for review.
   (C)   Proposed subdivisions that require review by any such incorporated
municipality shall not be approved prior to formal approval by officials of the
municipalities involved.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   As provided for in the 1992 Illinois Compiled Statutues, 765 ILCS 205/1, the
following exceptions to the adherence of this chapter are noted:
   (A)   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
   (B)   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded
subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
   (C)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land;
   (D)   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a
right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipelines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
   (E)   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
   (F)   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants
or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
   (G)   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances;
   (H)   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into not more than two parts of a particular parcel or tract of land
existing on July 17, 1959 and not involving any new streets or easements of
access; and
   (I)   The sale of a single lot of less than five acres from a larger tract
when a survey is made by an State Professional Land Surveyor; provided, that
this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the same
larger tract of land, as determined and configuration of the larger tract on
October 1, 1973, and provided also that this exemption does not invalidate any
local requirements applicable to the subdivision of land.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.05 VARIANCES.
   (A)   When the subdivider can show that a provision of this chapter, if
strictly adhered to, would cause unnecessary hardship and when, in the opinion
of the Administrative Officer, because of topographical or other conditions
peculiar to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of
such provision, the particular requested variance will be presented to the
Public Works Committee of the County Board.
   (B)   The Public Works Committee will recommend approval or denial of the
variance, for further consideration by the full County Board meeting in the
next scheduled regular session. Any variance thus authorized shall be included
as and made a part of the final plat.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.06 FEES.
   The County Board shall establish a fee schedule for subdivision activities.
This fee schedule may be reviewed from time to time if requested by the
Administrative Officer or other interested party. Requests for fee schedule
review will be submitted to the Public Works Committee Chairperson in writing.
The Chairperson shall request the Administrative Officer to schedule a public
hearing as noted in §
153.07(B).
   (A)   Schedule of fees. The following fees are adopted by the County Board:
      (1)   Subdivisions requiring staff review and monument inspections only
shall be $75;
      (2)   Subdivisions less than five acres, requiring staff review, and
monument and development inspection shall be $150; and
      (3)   Subdivisions more than five acres, requiring staff review, and
monument and development inspection shall be $300.
   (B)   Schedule of payment. Fifty percent of the fee will be due upon
presentation of the preliminary plat. The remaining 50% will be due upon
presentation of the final plat. In cases where no preliminary plat is required,
the entire fee will be due upon presentation of the final plat.
   (C)   Geographic information system (GIS) requirements. All new subdivisions
shall be required to submit the line drawings for the final plat and as
developed plats in digital format (digital format to be submitted as “.dxf” or
“.dwg” file extensions).
      (1)   All plats not submitted in digital format will be submitted with a
conversion fee based on the following table:
 
1-10 lots    $25 per lot
over 10 lots $300
 
      (2)   All new subdivisions of two lots or more shall be required to have
the monuments as shown on the final plat, located by means of global
positioning system (GPS). The county will provide GPS identification of said
monuments upon notification that monuments have been set. The fee for such
service shall be $20 per monument.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-4) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.07 AMENDMENTS.
   The Administrative Officer shall review the effectiveness of this chapter on
an annual basis. From time to time, as is deemed appropriate, amendments to
this chapter may be presented to the Public Works Committee of the County
Board.
   (A)   Filing procedures. The Administrative Officer or any other interested
party may request an amendment to this chapter. Such a request shall be made in
writing and addressed to the Chairperson, Public Works Committee. The
Chairperson will review the requested amendment and advise the Administrative
Officer to schedule a public hearing regarding the proposed amendment.
   (B)   Public hearing procedures. The Administrative Officer shall follow the
criteria listed below in scheduling and formatting the hearing:
      (1)   Must be advertised in a publication of general circulation in the
county;
      (2)   Must not be published more than 30 days nor less than 15 days prior
to the hearing;
      (3)   Written notice of such hearing, along with the requested
amendments, shall be sent to the Clerks of all incorporated municipalities and
villages and to all township supervisors within the county;
      (4)   Testimony taken at the hearing will be recorded and made available
in formal minutes to any interested party;
      (5)   The Public Works Committee, at the conclusion of testimony, will
move to approve, deny, or defer a decision regarding the proposal. Any such
deferral will be acted upon within 60 days of the date of deferral;
      (6)   Recommendations to approve or deny will be presented at the next
regularly scheduled County Board meeting, for consideration by the full County
Board.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-4) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.08 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Construction of terms. In constructing the intended meaning of
terminology used in this chapter, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in division (B) below. Words not
defined in division (B) below shall have the meanings ascribed to them as found
in Chapter 154 of this code of ordinances. Words not defined in division (B)
below or Chapter 154 of this code of ordinances shall have meaning as
customarily assigned to them.
      (2)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
      (3)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
      (4)   Words used in the singular number shall included the plural number,
and the plural the singular.
      (5)   The word SHALL is mandatory; the word MAY is permissive.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
      ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. The official appointed by the County Board to
administer and enforce this chapter for the unincorporated area of the county.
This official is one and the same as the Administrative Officer as provided in
Chapter 154 of this code of ordinances.
      AMENDMENT. A change in the provisions of this chapter, properly effected
in accordance with state law and current county procedures.
      AREA, GROSS. The entire area within the lot lines of the property
proposed for subdivision/development, including any areas to be dedicated or
reserved for street and alley rights-of-way and for any other public use.
      BLOCK. An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers,
or ways (except alleys, pedestrian ways, or exterior boundaries of a
subdivision unless the exterior boundary is a street, highway, or way), or
bounded by a combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-
of-way, waterways, or corporate boundary lines. No BLOCK shall be longer than
1,000 feet nor shorter than 300 feet.
      COLLECTOR STREET. A street used primarily to collect limited amounts of
residential traffic and for access to abutting properties, and on which the
speed limit is low and traffic volume is minimal.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and
having the other end permanently terminated by a turnaround for vehicles; the
term may also be used to refer solely to said turn-around.
      CURB AND GUTTER, INTEGRAL. The rum forming the edge of a street plus the
channel for leading off surface water, constructed of poured concrete as a
single facility.
      DEVELOP. To erect any structure or to provide any improvements on a tract
of land, or to undertake any activity (such as, but not limited to, grading) in
preparation thereof.
      EASEMENT. A grant made by a property owner for use of specified portions
of his or her real property for specific and limited purposes.
      EROSION. The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind,
water, or gravity.
      IMPROVEMENTS. Any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch, catch
basin, newly planted tree, off-street parking area, or other facility necessary
for the general use of property owners in a subdivision.
      IMPROVEMENT PLANS. The engineering plans showing types of materials and
construction details for the structures and facilities to be installed in, or
in conjunction with, a subdivision.
      LETTER OF CREDIT. An engagement by a bank made at the request of a
customer that the issuer will honor drafts or other demands for payment upon
compliance with the conditions specified in the credit.
      MONUMENT, EXTERNAL BOUNDARY. Two concrete cylinders or rectangular
prisms, not less than four inches in diameter or square and 42 inches long,
shall be set at the extreme corners of the subdivision.
      MONUMENT, INTERNAL BOUNDARY. Steel pins, not less than one-half-inch in
diameter and 30 inches long, with a survey marker cap showing the land
surveyor’s registration numbers, shall be located at all corners, at each end
of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle
points in any line and all angle points along a meander line.
      PLAT, FINAL. The plan of record for a subdivision, as prepared by a state
professional surveyor, presented to the Administrative Officer for approval for
filing with the County Recorder’s office.
      PLAT, PRELIMINARY. The proposed plan of record for a subdivision, as
prepared by a state professional surveyor, presented to the Administrative
Officer, after the pre-filing conference, for review.
      PRE-FILING CONFERENCE. A conference held between the subdivider/
developer, Administrative Officer, and other authorized representatives of the
county, prior to the submission of a preliminary plat.
      ROAD, PRIVATE. An ingress/egress provided as access to building lots.
PRIVATE ROADS are not intended for public dedication to township, county, or
other incorporated jurisdictions. PRIVATE ROADS do not receive services as
provided to other dedicated streets and roadways. PRIVATE ROADS are subject to
the standards for streets as listed elsewhere in this chapter.
      SEDIMENT. Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
air, water, or gravity as a product of erosion.
      SIDEWALK. A pedestrian way constructed in compliance with the standards
of this chapter.
      SOIL. All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin
that overlies bedrock which can be readily excavated.
      SUBDIVIDER/DEVELOPER. Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, estate, or other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing
or proposing to divide land in a manner that constitutes a subdivision as
defined in this chapter.
      SUBDIVISION. Any division of land into two or more lots, any of which is
less than five acres, or any transfer involving an easement of ingress or
egress except as provided in §
153.04.
      SUBDIVISION, MINOR. A division of land less than five total acres into
two but no more than five lots. A MINOR SUBDIVISION may or may not involve new
streets, other rights-of-way, easements, improvements, or other provisions for
public areas and facilities.
      SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. A division of land less than five total acres into
not less than two by typically more than five lots. A major subdivision shall
involve new streets, other rights-of-way, easements, improvements, or other
provisions for public areas and facilities.
      TOPOGRAPHY. The relief features or surface configuration of an area of
land.
      UTILITY. A business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying
the public with some commodity or service which is of consequence and need, and
which has a duty to serve without discrimination all within its service area. A
UTILITY can be publicly or privately owned and includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Electricity;
         (b)   Gas, oil, or steam;
         (c)   Water;
         (d)   Sanitary sewerage;
         (e)   Storm sewerage;
         (f)   Telephone or telegraph;
         (g)   Cable television or other communication lines; and
         (h)   Transportation lines, such as fixed rail, but only if expressly
stated.
      VARIANCE, SUBDIVISION. A relaxation in the strict application of the
design and/or improvement standards as provided for in §
153.05.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-2) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
PLATS AND PLANS
§ 153.20 PRE-FILING CONFERENCE.
   (A)   Prior to the presentation of the subdivision preliminary plat, a
meeting will be held with the Administrative Officer, Health Department
Officials, County Highway Department Officials, the appropriate Township Road
Commissioner, County Soil and Water Conservation District Officials, and in
cases where the subdivision lies within one and one-half miles of an
incorporated jurisdiction(s), officials of the incorporated jurisdiction(s).
The purpose of this meeting will be to determine whether the proposed
subdivision meets minimum standards required for health, roads, safety,
wetlands, soil, and zoning issues. The subdivider/developer will present a
concept sketch of the proposed subdivision during the pre-filing conference.
   (B)   To the extent that it is possible, the pre-filing conference should be
held at the location of the proposed subdivision. However, the pre-filing
conference could be scheduled in the office of the Administrative Officer, or
other appropriate location.
   (C)   Officials present at the pre-filing conference will have ten business
days to file with the Administrative Officer a written summary stating any
objections to or suggested changes regarding the proposed subdivision. Copies
of all written summaries will be sent by the Administrative Officer to the
subdivider/developer prior to the submission of the preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-3) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.21 PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   Except as provided below, every person, corporation, or other entity who
proposes to subdivide land located in the unincorporated area of the county
shall file six copies of the preliminary plat, together with supporting data,
with the Administrative Officer. Such person, corporation, or other entity
shall also provide one copy of the preliminary plat, together with supporting
data, with the Soil and Water Conservation District. It is the subdividers’/
developers’ responsibility to notify the appropriate public utilities. Proof of
such notification shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
   (A)   Staged development. Whenever a subdivision is to be developed in
different stages, the preliminary plat shall reflect the entire subdivision.
   (B)   Minor subdivisions. A minor subdivision may not require a preliminary
plat. The decision of the Administrative Officer will be final.
   (C)   Information required. Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by a
state professional land surveyor. Every preliminary plat shall be drawn at a
scale that results in a maximum sheet size of 36 by 24 inches. The preferred
scale is 100 feet to the inch. A smaller scale, if used, must be clearly noted
on the drawing. Said preliminary plat, along with all supporting data, shall
provide all the following information:
      (1)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not the owner),
and state professional land surveyor;
      (2)   Name of the proposed subdivision and names of all adjoining
subdivisions;
      (3)   The Zoning District of the tract to be subdivided, with proposed
building setbacks;
      (4)   North arrow, graphic scale, and date of drawing;
      (5)   Dimensions of the tract and the gross area;
      (6)   Topography of the tract as indicated by two-foot contour data for
land having slopes of 0% to 4%, five-foot contour data for land having slopes
between 4% to 12% and ten-foot contour data for land having slopes of 12% or
greater;
      (7)   Locations of existing structures, bodies of water, natural drainage
ways, roads, rail lines, bridges, cemeteries, and any other such existing
features;
      (8)   Locations and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed
streets, alleys, or sidewalks;
      (9)   Locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed
easements;
      (10)   Any and all proposed deed restrictions and covenants;
      (11)   Location and size of any existing or proposed sanitary and/or
storm sewers, water mains, and any appurtenances thereto;
      (12)   Locations, types, and approximate sizes of any other existing and
proposed utilities;
      (13)   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all land to be reserved or
dedicated for schools, parks/playgrounds, or other public purposes;
      (14)   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots
within the subdivision, numbered sequentially;
      (15)   The location by township, range section, and parcel number(s);
      (16)   A flood statement regarding location of the property in respect to
special flood hazard areas as identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency; and
      (17)   A list, with justifications of any requested variances.
   (D)   Approvals. The Administrative Officer shall within 15 business days,
review the preliminary plat and approve, recommend corrections, or deny
approval of said play. If correction or denial is recommended, the
Administrative Officer will forward one drawing along with a letter stating
reasons for suggested corrections or denial to the subdivider. The subdivider
will have opportunity to furnish one corrected drawing of the preliminary plat
to the Administrative Officer.
   (E)   Appeals. Should the subdivider feel that the Administrative Officer
has acted contrary to the standards and intent of this chapter, he or she may
file an appeal to be heard with the Public Works Committee of the County Board.
Such an appeal will consist of a letter written to the Chairperson of the
Public Works Committee, requested agenda time at the next scheduled meeting of
the Public Works Committee. Such letter will also state the reasoning used for
the appeal. Appeals heard and decisions made by the Public Works Committee will
be final.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-3) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.22 IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   After approval of the preliminary plat by the Administrative Officer, but
prior to the submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish four
copies of the plans and specifications for all improvements to be installed
within or in conjunction with the proposed subdivision. The plans will be
sealed by the state registered civil or professional engineer responsible for
their preparation. The Administrative Officer shall have no more than 15
business days to approve or recommend correction of the improvement plans. In
cases where the subdivision lies within one and one-half miles of an
incorporated jurisdiction(s), the plans will be approved by officials of the
incorporated jurisdiction(s). All plans such approved, will be forwarded to the
Administrative Officer for incorporation into the subdivision file.
   (A)   Information required. Improvement plans shall consist of black or blue
line prints not larger than 36 by 24 inches. These plans and related
specifications shall provide all applicable information as follows:
      (1)   Topography of the tract, both before and after development at the
same scale as required in the preliminary plat;
      (2)   Existing and proposed elevations along the centerlines of all
streets;
      (3)   Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all streets;
      (4)   Locations, lengths, widths, and typical cross-section of street
pavements including curbs/gutters and catch basins;
      (5)   Locations, lengths, widths, and typical cross-sections of sidewalks
and driveway aprons;
      (6)   Locations and sizes of all water, gas, electric, and other
utilities;
      (7)   Detailed measures to be taken to prevent and control soil erosion
and sedimentation; and
      (8)   Other such information that the Administrative Officer may
reasonably require to perform his or her duties under this section.
   (B)   Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the Administrative Officer shall
be such as shown under §
153.21(E).
   (C)   Required permits. Upon approval of the improvement plans, the
Administrative Officer shall notify the subdivider/developer to make
application for necessary permits to begin the development. Such permits may
include the following:
      (1)   Building permit, issued by the County Zoning and Building
Department;
      (2)   Septic/well permits. All plans for septic systems and wells are
reviewed, permitted, and approved by the County Health Department;
      (3)   Road access permits, issued by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, County Highway Department, or Township Road Commissioner;
      (4)   Floodway permits, issued by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, Division of Water Resources; and
      (5)   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPEDS) issued by
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   (D)   Required inspections/documentation. The Administrative Officer shall
inspect planned improvements while they are under construction. Should it seem
that the improvements are being built contrary to plan, or in violation of any
article or section of this chapter, a stop work order will be issued. The
following inspections and documentation may be required.
      (1)   The Administrative Office will ensure that monuments shown on the
final plat of the subdivision have been set in accordance with the requirements
of state statutes.
      (2)   The Administrative Officer will inspect the site of the subdivision
being developed to ensure that the layout of all streets, alleys, sidewalks,
and the like meet the approved development plan.
      (3)   The subdivider/developer will prepare and maintain a daily log that
documents required information listed below. Copies of said log will be
provided to the Administrative Officer upon development completion. The
following information shall be provided:
         (a)   Weather conditions, temperature, wind velocity, and
precipitation status;
         (b)   General site conditions;
         (c)   Actual hours the site is worked;
         (d)   Actual hours an inspector is on site;
         (e)   Specific information regarding any materials testing performed;
and
         (f)   Detailed descriptions of any problems occurred on site.
   (E)   Streets and alleys. For all new public streets and alleys the
subdivider/developer shall document and provide copies of said documentation to
the Administrative Officer that such improvement meets standards as required by
the Illinois Department of Transportation. All new or proposed public or
private streets and alleys shall meet design specifications as shown in §§
153.35 through
153.40.
   (F)   Utilities. All utilities provided as new installations within a
subdivision shall be placed in the right-of-way or in easements, and shall be
provided underground, unless a variance has been granted. All electric
distribution circuits installed by the utility company within the county shall
be installed in accordance with the “Safety Rules for the Installation and
Maintenance of Electric Supply and Communication Lines,” U.S. Department of
Commerce, National Bureau of Standards and General Order No. 160, Rules for
Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines, State Commerce
Commission.
   (G)   Water facilities. All existing or proposed improvements concerning
potable water facilities shall be reviewed, permitted, and approved by the
County Health Department.
   (H)   Easements. Easements for all new subdivisions shall be provided as
follows.
      (1)   Utility. Ten-foot wide easements shall be provided for public and
private utilities along the front right-of-way lines of the public streets.
Easements located elsewhere shall be at least 20 feet wide and, if along lot
lines, they shall be centered on the lot lines.
      (2)   Sanitary sewers. All easements for proposed sanitary sewers shall
be reviewed and approved by the County Health Department.
      (3)   Drainage. Adequate easements for stormwater drainage shall be
established along any natural drainage channel and in any other locations where
necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of stormwater from streets, alleys,
and all other portions of the subdivision. The precise location and minimum
widths of said easements shall be determined by the Soil and Water Conservation
District, County Highway Department, or Township Road Commissioner.
   (I)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
      (1)   The subdivider/developer shall protect the development site from
soil erosion and shall protect downstream property from sedimentation deposits
during the construction of the subdivision. The subdivider/developer shall also
employ stormwater management practices to keep post-development peak discharge
rates equal to pre-development rates.
      (2)   Practices contained in “Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois” shall be employed in the
preparation of an erosion and sedimentation control plan, which shall be
approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District prior to any earth
disturbing activity taking place.
   (J)   Form of assurance. The Administrative Officer shall determine the need
for any special form of assurance. Generally, if the proposed subdivision
requires any new streets, utilities, or other improvements, a letter of credit
shall be required.
      (1)   The Administrative Officer shall estimate the amount of
constructing improvements as shown in the approved development plans.
      (2)   This estimated amount shall be made available in the manner shown
below:
         (a)   Irrevocable letter of credit. A commitment from a lending
institution guaranteeing to the county the availability of the escrow funds
from time to time upon demand; and
         (b)   Format. See §
153.36 for an approved format.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-3) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.23 FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat of the subdivision shall be presented to the Administrative
Officer only after formal approvals of the preliminary plat and the development
plan. The Administrative Officer will have 15 business days to review the final
plat to determine if it is in compliance with all requirements of this chapter,
including those listed below.
   (A)   Filing, time limits. The subdivider/developer of every subdivision who
desires final plat approval shall file one Mylar plat and five black or blue
line prints of the final plat and supporting data with the Administrative
Officer not later than one year after formal preliminary plat approval has been
granted.
   (B)   Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the Administrative Officer shall
be such as shown in §
153.21(E).
   (C)   Information required. Every final plat shall be prepared by a state
professional surveyor. One plat shall be prepared on Mylar at a scale not
greater than 100 feet to one inch, provided that the resultant drawing shall
not be less than eight and one-half by 14 inches and shall not exceed 24 by 36
inches. Any scale change due to drawing size limitations must be clearly marked
on the final plat. The final plat shall include the following information:
      (1)   North arrow and graphic scale used;
      (2)   Name of subdivider and subdivision’s name;
      (3)   Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal description of
the tract tied to a section or one-fourth section corner;
      (4)   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles
which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not
more than one foot in 15,000 feet and provide a copy of the closure
calculations;
      (5)   Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting the
boundaries of the subdivision;
      (6)   Names and/or numbers and right-of-way width of every proposed
street;
      (7)   Locations, widths, and purpose of any existing or proposed
easement;
      (8)   Lot numbers, lot dimensions, and building set back lines for every
proposed building lot;
      (9)   External and internal boundary monument locations;
      (10)   Purposes for which areas, other than building lots, are reserved;
      (11)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds of all lots; and
      (12)   Signature area for officials as shown in §
153.36(B).
(Prior Code, § 3-3-3) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
TABLES, FORMS, AND SPECIFICATIONS
§ 153.35 TABLE OF STREET AND ALLEY DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS.
 
Table of Street/Alley Design Specifications
Type             Allowed Parking ROW     Finished Surface Grade
Alley****        None            20 feet 18 feet          Max 10%; Min 0.5%
Private road*    None            60 feet 24 feet          Max. 10%; Min. 0.5%
Township road**  None            60 feet 36 feet          Max. 10%; Min. 0.5%
Urban Streets*** None            50 feet 32 feet          Max. 10%; Min. 0.5%
Notes to Table:
* = Detailed in §
153.37
** = Detailed in §
153.38
*** = Detailed in §
153.39
**** = Detailed in §
153.40
 
(Prior Code, § 3-3-5) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.36 LETTER OF CREDIT; SIGNATURE AREA.
   (A)   Letter of credit format.
Bank Name and Address                           Irrevocable Credit # ____________
______________________________                  Date _________________________
______________________________
All drafts must be marked: “Drawn under Credit # _______________ Dated ________________.”
Gentlemen:
We hereby open an Irrevocable Letter of Credit in the amount of ___________________
($___________) in your favor for the account of (developer) ______________________, the
developer of (subdivision) ____________________________, a proposed subdivision for final plat
in the County of Rock Island, Illinois, or within its territorial jurisdiction, for the benefit
of the County of Rock Island, Illinois. Said money shall be available by your drafts at sign
drawn on us drawn in the name of the County of Rock Island, Illinois.
Drafts must be accompanied by a signed statement by the Administrative Officer of the County of
Rock Island, Illinois, that the request is for the installation or construction of improvements
required pursuant to the plans, specifications and cost estimated dated
_______________________, as approved by the Administrative Officer. Further, all requests for
disbursements under this Letter of Credit made prior to ________________________ shall be
submitted by the developer and accompanied by a certified estimate of units and value of work
completed with contractor’s sworn statement and waiver of mechanics’ liens, all approved by the
Developer’s Professional Engineer and the Administrative Officer of the County of Rock Island,
Illinois. It is understood as to all disbursements that the Administrative Officer shall
approve practical drawings only as long as there remains a sufficient balance to the Credit to
cover his then current estimate of costs for the required improvements which at the time remain
to be completed, but in no case shall his approval exceed ninety percent (90%) of the value of
work completed.
In the event that all of the work for the improvements is not completed to the satisfaction of
the County on or before ___________________________, the funds remaining under this Letter of
Credit shall be available to the County of Rock Island, Illinois, under presentation of their
draft at sign drawn on us in the name of the County of Rock Island, Illinois. Further, such
draft shall be accompanied by a signed statement by the Administrative Officer of the County of
Rock Island, Illinois as follows: “I _______________________ Administrative Officer of the
County of Rock Island, Illinois, do hereby certify that work on required improvements in the
subdivision __________________ named has not been completed to the satisfaction of the County
of Rock Island, Illinois, on or before _________________________.”
This credit shall expire on _________________; provided, however, the undersigned shall notify
the Administrative Officer by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ninety (90)
days prior to the expiration date that this Letter of Credit is about to expire and provided,
however, in no event shall this Credit expire except upon prior written notice, it being
expressly agreed by the undersigned that the above expiration date shall be extended as shall
be required to comply with this notice provision.
The undersigned further agrees that this Credit shall remain in full force and effect and
pertain to any and all amendments or modifications which may be made from time to time to the
specifications, and agreements for the subdivision, without notice from the County of the
amendments or modifications.
All acts, requirements and other preconditions for the issuance of this Irrevocable Letter of
Credit have been completed.
We hereby engage with the drawers, endorsers, and bona fide holders of drafts, drawn under and
in compliance with the terms of this Credit, that same shall be honored upon presentation to
the drawer. This Credit must accompany any draft which exhausts the Credit and must be
surrendered concurrently with the presentation of such draft.
We hereby undertake and engage that all demands made in conformity with this Credit shall be
honored upon presentation. If, within ten (10) days of the date any demand made in conformity
with this Credit is presented, we fail to honor same, we agree to pay all attorneys fees, court
costs, and other expenses incurred by the County of Rock Island, Illinois, in enforcing the
terms of this Credit.
Dated __________________________   Bank___________________________________________
By ______________________________________________
Attest:_____________________________________________________
 
   (B)   Signature area; final plat. The following signature blocks must be
part of the subdivision final plat.
__________________________________         __________________________________
Property Owner(s)                           Illinois Professional Surveyor
 
__________________________________         __________________________________
Subdivider*                                 Incorporated Municipality**
 
Approved this _________________ Day of ____________________, A.D.
_______________
 
___________________________________________________
Rock Island County Clerk
 
Approved ____________________ this Day of _________________, A.D.
_______________
 
___________________________________________________
Rock Island County Administrative Officer
 
*If different from owner(s).
**If required for approval.
 
(Prior Code, § 3-3-5) (Res. passed 10-18-1994; Res. passed 4-21-1998)
§ 153.37 PRIVATE ROAD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d53095237a00b1625eb993db652189a9fc2b0aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1745.png]
(Res. passed 10-18-1994)
§ 153.38 TOWNSHIP ROAD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d53095237a00b1625eb993db652189a9fc2b0aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1747.png]
(Res. passed 10-18-1994)
§ 153.39 URBAN STREET CONSTRUCTION DETAIL.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d53095237a00b1625eb993db652189a9fc2b0aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1749.png]
(Res. passed 10-18-1994)
§ 153.40 ALLEY CONSTRUCTION.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d53095237a00b1625eb993db652189a9fc2b0aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1751.png]
(Res. passed 10-18-1994)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
Authority, Title, Purpose, Nature, Exemptions, Definitions
   
154.001   Authority and title
   
154.002   Purpose
   
154.003   Nature
   
154.004   Exemptions
   
154.005   Interpretation
   
154.006   Definitions
Variances, Appeals, Amendments, Special Use Permits
   
154.020   Variances
   
154.021   Appeals
   
154.022   Amendments
   
154.023   Special uses
General Provisions
   
154.035   Affects on structure and use
   
154.036   Continued existing uses
   
154.037   Non-conforming uses
   
154.038   Street frontage required; flag lots
   
154.039   Accessory buildings in all districts
   
154.040   Required yard cannot be reduced by used by another building
   
154.041   Permitted obstructions in required yards
   
154.042   Conversion of dwellings
   
154.043   Minimum ground floor area corner lots
   
154.044   Traffic visibility across corner lots
   
154.045   Essential services
   
154.046   Fences, walls, and hedges
   
154.047   Home occupations
   
154.048   Off-street parking and loading
   
154.049   Validity of existing applications for building permits
   
154.050   Uses authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals
   
154.051   Principal building
   
154.052   Minimum lot size
   
154.053   Adult regulated uses
   
154.054   Organization
   
154.055   Creation of the Board of Zoning Appeals
   
154.056   Districts and map
   
154.057   Fees
Additional Requirements, Exceptions, Modifications
   
154.070   Height limits
   
154.071   Lot area requirements
   
154.072   Lot area per family
   
154.073   Front yard exceptions, modifications
   
154.074   Side yard exceptions, modifications
   
154.075   Rear yard exceptions, modifications
   
154.076   Supplemental yard requirements
AG-1 Agricultural Preservation District
   
154.090   General description
   
154.091   Permitted principal uses
   
154.092   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.093   When authorized by special use
   
154.094   Height regulations
   
154.095   Lot area and yard requirements
AG-2 General Agricultural District
   
154.110   General description
   
154.111   Permitted principal uses
   
154.112   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.113   When authorized by special use
   
154.114   Height regulations
   
154.115   Lot area and yard requirements
SE-1 Suburban Estates Low Density District
   
154.130   General description
   
154.131   Permitted principal uses
   
154.132   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.133   When authorized by special use
   
154.134   Height regulations
   
154.135   Lot area and yard requirements
SE-2 Suburban Estates Medium Density District
   
154.150   General description
   
154.151   Permitted principal uses
   
154.152   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.153   When authorized by special use
   
154.154   Height regulations
   
154.155   Lot area and yard requirements
R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District
   
154.170   General description
   
154.171   Permitted principal uses
   
154.172   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.173   When authorized by special use
   
154.174   Height regulations
   
154.175   Lot area and yard requirements
R-2 One-Family Residence
   
154.190   Permitted principal uses
   
154.191   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.192   When authorized by special use
   
154.193   Height regulations
   
154.194   Lot area and yard requirements
R-3 One- and Two-Family Residence District
   
154.205   Permitted principal uses
   
154.206   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.207   When authorized by special use
   
154.208   Height regulations
   
154.209   Lot area and yard requirements
R-4 One- to Six-Family Residence Districts
   
154.220   Permitted principal uses
   
154.221   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.222   When authorized by special use
   
154.223   Height regulations
   
154.224   Lot area and yard requirements
R-5 Multi-Family Dwelling District
   
154.235   Permitted principal uses
   
154.236   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.237   When authorized by special use
   
154.238   Height regulations
   
154.239   Lot area and yard requirements
R-6 Multi-Family Residence District
   
154.250   Permitted principal uses
   
154.251   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.252   When authorized by special use
   
154.253   Height regulations
   
154.254   Lot area and yard requirements
R-7 Mobile Home and Manufactured Housing District
   
154.265   Permitted principal uses
U-1 University and College District
   
154.280   General description
   
154.281   Permitted principal uses
   
154.282   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.283   When authorized by special use
   
154.284   Restrictions
   
154.285   Height regulations
   
154.286   Lot area and yard requirements
C-1 Conservation District
   
154.300   General description
   
154.301   Permitted principal uses
   
154.302   When authorized by special use
C-2 Conservation District
   
154.315   General description
   
154.316   Permitted principal uses
   
154.317   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.318   When authorized by special use
O-1 Office District
   
154.330   General description
   
154.331   Permitted principal uses
   
154.332   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.333   When authorized by special use
   
154.334   Height regulations
   
154.335   Lot area and yard requirements
B-1 Neighborhood Business District
   
154.350   General description
   
154.351   Permitted principal uses
   
154.352   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.353   When authorized by special use
   
154.354   Uses prohibited
   
154.355   Lot area and yard requirements
B-2 Central Business District
   
154.370   General description
   
154.371   Permitted principal uses
   
154.372   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.373   When authorized by special use
   
154.374   Lot area and yard requirements
B-3 Community Business District
   
154.385   General description
   
154.386   Permitted principal uses
   
154.387   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.388   When authorized by special use
   
154.389   Uses prohibited
   
154.390   Lot area and yard requirements
B-4 Highway and Intensive Business District
   
154.405   General description
   
154.406   Permitted principal uses
   
154.407   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.408   When authorized by special use
   
154.409   Prohibited uses
   
154.410   Lot area and yard requirements
ORT Office and Research Park and Technology District
   
154.425   General description
   
154.426   Permitted principal uses
   
154.427   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.428   Uses on review by special use
   
154.429   Prohibited uses
   
154.430   Lot area and yard requirements
I-1 Light Industrial District
   
154.445   General description
   
154.446   Permitted principal uses
   
154.447   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.448   Prohibited uses
   
154.449   When authorized by special use
   
154.450   Lot area and yard requirements
I-2 General Industrial District
   
154.465   General description
   
154.466   Permitted principal uses
   
154.467   Permitted accessory uses
   
154.468   When authorized by special use
   
154.469   Prohibited uses
   
154.470   Lot area and yard requirements
PUD Planned Unit Development District
   
154.485   Purpose
   
154.486   Procedure
   
154.487   Specific content
   
154.488   Standards
   
154.489   Conditions and guarantees
RCO Riverfront Corridor Overlay District
   
154.500   General description
   
154.501   Permitted principal uses
   
154.502   Other uses
   
154.503   Applicable regulations
   
154.504   Public pedestrian, bike easement
   
154.505   Development incentives
   
154.506   Site plan requirement
   
154.507   Traffic analysis
   
154.508   Performance standards for site development
   
154.509   Submission of site plan
   
154.510   Review process
   
154.511   Notice of public hearing
   
154.512   Findings of fact
   
154.513   Exemptions from site plan requirements
   
154.514   Amendments to approved site plans
   
154.515   Site plan review requirements outside of district
Additional Requirements, Exceptions, and Modifications
   
154.530   Additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications
Performance Standards
   
154.545   Compliance with provisions
   
154.546   Certification may be required
   
154.547   Smoke emissions
   
154.548   Particulate matter
   
154.549   Toxic matters
   
154.550   Vibration
   
154.551   Glare illumination
   
154.552   Sewage waste
   
154.553   Storage
   
154.554   Screening
   
154.555   Noise
Illuminations Provisions
   
154.570   Purpose
   
154.571   Lighting plan
   
154.572   Illumination performance standards
   
154.573   Compliance
   
154.574   Point of measurements
   
154.575   Applicability
Landscape and Bufferyard Requirements
   
154.590   Site plans
   
154.591   Site plan review
   
154.592   Appeal process
   
154.593   Exemption from site plan requirements
   
154.594   Parking lots
   
154.595   Bufferyard requirements
   
154.596   Minimum standards for plantings
   
154.597   Prohibited trees
   
154.598   Maintenance of landscaping and screening
   
154.599   Schedule of bufferyard requirements
Development in a Special Flood Hazard Area
   
154.610   Purpose
   
154.611   Definitions
   
154.612   Base flood elevation
   
154.613   Duties of the Director of the County Department of Zoning and
Building Safety
   
154.614   Development permit
   
154.615   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
   
154.616   Protecting buildings
   
154.617   Subdivision requirements
   
154.618   Public health and other standards
   
154.619   Carrying capacity, notification
   
154.620   Variances
   
154.621   Disclaimer of liability
Signs
   
154.635   Purpose and intent
   
154.636   Definitions
   
154.637   General regulations
   
154.638   Attached signs
   
154.639   Freestanding signs
   
154.640   Roof signs
   
154.641   Temporary signs
   
154.642   Permitted signs for non-conforming uses
   
154.643   Prohibited signs
   
154.644   Administration and appeal
Energy Systems
   
154.655   Authority
   
154.656   Purpose
   
154.657   Applicability
   
154.658   Wind energy systems
   
154.659   Solar energy systems
   
154.660   Battery energy storage systems (BESS)
   
154.661   Violations
   
154.662   Administration and enforcement
Tables and Diagrams
   
154.675   Sample yard setbacks
   
154.676   Site distance triangle
   
154.677   Building height
   
154.678   County rural living contract
 
   
154.999   Penalty
AUTHORITY, TITLE, PURPOSE, NATURE, EXEMPTIONS, DEFINITIONS
§ 154.001 AUTHORITY AND TITLE.
   This chapter, in pursuance of the authority granted by the 1969 Ill. Rev.
Stat., Ch. 34, §§ 3151 through 3162 and §§ 3201 through 3204, shall be known
and cited as the “Zoning Resolution of Rock Island County, Illinois,” or “this
chapter.”
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE.
   The provisions contained herein are necessary to promote the public health,
safety, morals, comfort, and general welfare; to conserve the value of property
throughout the county; to lessen or avoid the traffic congestions and hazards
on public streets and highways; to reduce fire hazards and improve public
safety; to prevent undue concentration of population; and to create a stable
pattern of land uses upon which to plan for transportation, water supply,
sewers, schools, parks, and other facilities. The aforementioned purposes shall
be the guide to the enforcement of the provisions contained herein.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.003 NATURE.
   (A)   This chapter shall divide the unincorporated area of the county into
districts; regulate therein the use of land, buildings, and structures;
regulate the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, and alteration
of such buildings and structures; regulate the height, number of stories, and
size of all buildings; and regulate the density of the population.
   (B)   This chapter shall also provide for change and amendment of the
provisions and boundaries of districts, provide for a Zoning Board of Appeals,
and provide for the administration and enforcement of the chapter, including
prescription of penalties for violation of the provisions herein.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.004 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   In compliance with the 1969 Ill. Rev. Stat., Ch. 34, § 3151, this
chapter shall not deprive the owner of any existing property of its use or
maintenance if such property and structures are established before the adoption
of this chapter.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply with respect to specification or
regulation of the type or location of any poles, towers, wires, cables,
conduits, vaults, laterals, or any similar distribution equipment of a public
utility as defined in the 1969 Ill. Rev. Stat., Ch. 111-2/3, §
10.3.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.005 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be minimum requirements, adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort,
prosperity, and general welfare.
   (B)   Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use of
buildings or other structures, or law or ordinance, the provisions of this
chapter shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural and the plural the singular. The word BUILDING shall
include the word STRUCTURE, and the word SHALL is mandatory, and MAY is
permissive.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A subordinate structure detached but located on the
same lot as the principle structure, the use of which is incidental and
accessory to that of the principle structure.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE(S). A structure that is on the same parcel of property
as a principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure; an ACCESSORY STRUCTURE specifically excludes structures
used for human habitation.
   ACCESSORY USE. A structure or use that:
      (1)   Is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a
principle building or use;
      (2)   Is subordinate to and serves a principle building or a principle
use;
      (3)   Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principle
building or principle use serviced;
      (4)   Contributed to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants,
business, or industry in the principle building or principle use served; and
      (5)   Is located on the same lot as the principle building or use served.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. The official appointed by the County Board to
administer and enforce this chapter and building codes as adopted in the
unincorporated areas of the county. The ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER’S title will be
the Director of Economic Development and GIS. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER and
DIRECTOR, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GIS shall be inferred to be one and the same.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment for the sale, rental, or exchange of
books, magazines, or video cassettes, distinguished or characterized by primary
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to SPECIFIC SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIC ANATOMICAL AREAS as defined below, including
instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection
with SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. ADULT BOOKSTORES do not include businesses
which sell, rent, or exchange books, magazines, or video cassettes as a
sideline or adjunct to sales or rental of books, magazines, or video cassettes
not relating to SPECIFIC SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIC ANATOMICAL AREA.
   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATERS. An enclosed building with a capacity for
less than 50 persons, used for presenting materials distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specific ANATOMICAL AREAS or SPECIFIC SEXUAL ACTIVITIES for observation by
patrons therein.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS. An enclosed building with capacity of 50 or
more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to SPECIFIC SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIC ANATOMICAL AREAS for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT MODELING AND ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY. An establishment having its
primary activity the presentation of live models displaying lingerie, or
otherwise presenting live, artistic modeling, with said modeling displaying the
human body in a nude or semi-nude state, distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on SPECIFIC ANATOMICAL AREAS for observation by patrons therein.
   AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE(S). A structure that is used exclusively in
connection with the production, harvesting, storage, raising, or drying of
agricultural commodities and livestock; as AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE specifically
excludes any structure used for human habitation.
   AGRICULTURAL WIND SYSTEM. A wind system that has a nameplate capacity of
less than the average electrical usage for the previous 12 months on the
specific farm being served. A WIND ENERGY SYSTEM that creates more energy than
is needed for agricultural uses will have the excess sold back to the grid, and
thus, is not exclusively for agricultural uses, and is not exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to the side or rear of premises that front on a nearby street.
   ALTERATION. Any change, addition, or modification in construction,
occupancy, or use.
   AMUSEMENT CENTER. Any premises which contains four or more coin or token
operated devices played for a fee, such as pinball machines, foosball tables,
pool tables and other similar entertainment or amusement devices.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family structure which is
arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit.
Complete kitchen, bath, and toilet facilities, permanently installed must
always be included for each APARTMENT.
   APARTMENT/DORMITORY. A multi-unit dwelling for which each dwelling unit
contains fewer than ten occupants, whether related or unrelated. Each unit
shall have two exits and a common area of not less than 300 square feet which
may include cooking and dining facilities, and shall be subject to relevant
codes or regulations for behavior by students and others in effect at such
educational facility which are enforced by resident personnel of such
educational facility.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. General repair, or rebuilding of, or
reconditioning of, engines of any type, motor vehicles, trucks, buses or
trailers. Collision service, including body work, frame or fender straightening
or repair, overall painting of motor vehicles, trucks, trailers, or painting
booth.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Minor repairs, incidental body and fender work,
touch-up painting and upholstering, replacement of minor parts and general
tune-up service to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding one and one-
half tons’ capacity.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION.
      (1)   Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries,
tires, and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and
where, in addition the following services, may be rendered and sales made, and
no other:
         (a)   Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, distributors, and
distributor parts;
         (b)   Tire servicing and repair, but no recapping or regrooving;
         (c)   Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hose, fan belts,
brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and
wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors, and the like;
         (d)   Radiator cleaning and flushing;
         (e)   Washing and polishing where no mechanical conveyor, blower, or
steam cleaning device is employed, provided that no more than one single car
bay of the service station shall be equipped with washing equipment; and
provided that the lot on which the washing equipment is to be located shall be
sufficient to provide on-site waiting storage for a total number of vehicles
equal to the number capable of being processed during one-half hour; and
provided that a drip area shall be provided where vehicles can be dried,
located such that water will be confined to the site and will not run onto any
street or alley so as to cause a hazard;
         (f)   Greasing and lubrication;
         (g)   Providing and repairing fuel pumps and lines;
         (h)   Minor servicing and repair of carburetors;
         (i)   Emergency wiring repairs;
         (j)   Adjusting and repairing brakes;
         (k)   Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or
crank case or racing the motor;
         (l)   Sale of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and similar
convenience goods for filling station customers, as accessory and incidental to
principle operation; and/or
         (m)   Provision of road maps and other informational material to
customers, and provision of restroom facilities.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to provide major mechanical and body work,
straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles, trucks,
or trailers not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare,
fumes, smoke, or other such characteristics. An AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION is
not a repair garage, a body shop, a car wash, an automobile wrecking yard, or
junk yard, nor a storage place for rental trailers.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. Any place where two or more vehicles not in
running condition, or parts thereof are stored in the open and are not being
restored to operation, or any land, building, or structure used for wrecking or
storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, and including any used farm
vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being
restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any
other goods, articles, or merchandise.
   BALCONY. An outside deck located at least on the second floor or any higher
floor of a dwelling building, and can be cantilevered or supported on piers.
   BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM (BESS). An energy storage system that can
store and deploy generated energy, typically a group of batteries that charge
(for example, collect energy) and store electrical energy from the grid or
energy generation facility and then discharge that energy at a later time to
provide electricity or other grid services when needed. BESS generally consist
of batteries, battery storage containers, on-site switchyard, inverters,
associated interconnection transmission line, and supervisory control and data
acquisition system.
   BATTERY ENERGY APPLICANT. The entity who submits to the county an
application for the siting and operation of any battery energy storage system
(BESS). All references to the applicant in this chapter shall include the
applicant’s successors-in-interest and assigns, which includes a COMMERCIAL
SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY PERMITTEE (as defined herein).
   BED AND BREAKFAST. An operator-occupied residence providing accommodations
for a charge to the public with no more than five guest rooms for rent, in
operation for more than ten nights in a 12-month period. Breakfast may be
provided to the guests only. BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS shall not include
motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food service establishments.
   BOARD. The Zoning Board of Appeals.
   BOARDING HOUSE. An establishment with lodging for compensation offering
accommodations for short term transients or extended periods of time. Meals may
or may not be provided (also referred to as BOARDING HOUSE, ROOMING HOUSE,
LODGING HOUSE, or LODGING ROOM; it does not include bed and breakfast).
   BODY OF WATER. A lake, pond, or pool where 40% of the surface area is more
than nine feet deep and total surface area is not less than 2,500 square feet,
or, the Rock or Mississippi Rivers.
   BOOK/STATIONERY STORE. An establishment dealing in books, printed materials,
and stationery supplies, which is not an adult bookstore.
   BUILDING. Any permanently anchored structure used or intended for supporting
or sheltering any use or occupancy. When a building is divided into separate
parts by unpierced walls, each part shall be deemed a separate BUILDING (see
STRUCTURE).
   BUILDING CODE. The County Building Code, as adopted.
   BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED. A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows
and normal entrance or exit doors.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance above a reference datum measured
to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a
mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or
hipped roof (see § 154.682). The reference datum shall be selected by either of
the following, whichever yields a greater HEIGHT OF BUILDING:
      (1)   The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface
within a five-foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building
when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet above lowest
grade;
      (2)   An elevation ten feet higher than the lowest grade when the
sidewalk or ground surface described in division (1) above is more than ten
feet above lowest grade; and/or
      (3)   The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum of any
segment of the building.
   BUILDING, STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location
on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
STRUCTURES include, but not limited to, buildings, walls, swimming pools,
signs, and fences.
   BUILDING SET-BACK LINE. See SETBACK.
   BULK STORAGE. The storage of flammable or combustible liquid in an above-
ground tank that is not for dispensing purposes. If an above-ground tank is
used for any BULK STORAGE purposes, it is classified as a “bulk storage tank”
for the remainder of the calendar year in which it was so used.
   CARE HOME, LARGE RESIDENTIAL. A residential care home for more than eight
persons, plus supervisory or oversight personnel, living together as a single
housekeeping unit who are disabled, as defined by DISABILITY in this section,
for the primary purpose of providing shelter.
   CARE HOME, SMALL RESIDENTIAL. A residential care home containing a single
one-family dwelling unit for eight persons or fewer, plus supervisory or
oversight personnel, living together as a single housekeeping unit for the
primary purpose of providing shelter in a family-like atmosphere.
   CHURCH. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where
persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which building, together
with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a
religious body organized to sustain public worship.
   CLINIC or MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER. A building containing an individual
practitioner or an association or group of physicians, dentists, clinical
psychologists, or similar professional health care practitioners, including
assistants. The CLINIC may include apothecary, dental, and mental laboratories,
and/or x-ray facilities, but shall not include inpatient or overnight care.
   CLUB or LODGE, PRIVATE. Non-profit association of persons, who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building, or portion
thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises, provided
adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of
alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed, provided such
sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal,
state, and municipal laws.
   COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY. Any device or assembly of devices that:
      (1)   Is ground installed; and
      (2)   Uses solar energy from the sun for generating electricity for the
primary purpose of wholesale or retail sale and not primarily for consumption
on the property on which the device or devices reside.
   COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY FACILITY. A wind energy conversion facility of equal
or greater than 500 kilowatts in total nameplate generating capacity. Also
referred to herein as WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, or WECS or WECS PROJECT.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the county to
guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the county. The
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN includes, but is not limited to, plans and programs
regarding the location, character, and extent of highways, bridges, public
buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial, or industrial
land uses, parks, drainage facilities, and the like.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. Any retail establishment offering for sale of prepackaged
food products, household items, commercial products associated with minor auto
servicing (but not automobile parts), and other goods commonly associated with
the same, including the retail dispensing of vehicular fuels.
   COUNTY. Rock Island County, Illinois.
   DAYCARE CENTER. A child care facility which regularly provides daycare for
less than 24 hours per day for:
      (1)   More than eight children in a family dwelling unit; or
      (2)   More than three children in a facility other than a family dwelling
unit.
   DAYCARE HOME. A family dwelling unit occupied by attending family which
receives more than three and up to a maximum of eight children for less than 24
hours a day. The maximum of eight children includes the family’s natural or
adopted children and all other person under the age of 12. A DAYCARE HOME may
also be a family home which receives adults who are 60 years of age or older.
   DECK. Is an outside porch without a roof not necessarily attached to a
dwelling wall, whose floor is built on a foundation, piers, or blocks, as a
distinct structure requiring a building permit above-ground grade.
   DISABILITY. As defined by the Americans with Disability Act (ADA), a person
who has:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more major life activities;
      (2)   A record of such an impairment; or
      (3)   Is regarded as having such an impairment.
   DISTRICT ZONING. A portion of the territory of the county wherein uniform
requirements or various combinations thereof apply to structures, lots, and
uses under the terms of this chapter.
   DORMITORY. A building used as group living quarters for a student body
operated by a college or university, or other such institution of higher
education, subject to relevant codes and regulations for behavior of students
and others in effect at such educational facility which are enforced by
resident personnel at such institution.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof designed or altered
for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for use and occupancy
by one family, and entirely separated from any other dwelling by space totaling
at least 900 square feet, and the structures length does not exceed four times
its width and is affixed to a permanent masonry or concrete footing and/or
foundation, as defined in the County Building Codes as adopted. The structure
shall have a minimum three to 12 nominal roof pitch, conventional residential
roofing material, conventional residential siding which must extend to within
eight inches of the ground elevation, except when placed upon a masonry or
concrete foundation, and a six-inch minimum eave overhang.
   DWELLING, ROW (TOWNHOUSE). A row of two to 12 attached, one-family, party-
wall dwellings.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed or altered to provide dwelling
units for occupancy by two families.
   DWELLING GROUP. Two or more one-family, two-family, or multiple-family
dwellings, or boarding or lodging houses, located on one zoning lot, but not
including tourist courts or motels.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as
living quarters for a family or for a community residence as a single
housekeeping unit. A DWELLING UNIT includes bathroom and kitchen facilities in
addition to sleeping and living areas.
   EASEMENT. A right to use a portion of another person’s real property for
certain limited purposes.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Public, private, or parochial school, charitable or
non-profit junior college, college, or university, other than trade or business
schools, including instructional and recreational uses, with or without living
quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants, and other incidental
facilities for students, teachers, and employees.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance
by public utilities, or municipal or other governmental agencies, of
underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or
distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems,
elevated and underground water storage tanks, including poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by such public utilities, or municipal or other governmental agencies,
or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including
buildings.
   FACILITY OWNER.
      (1)   A person with a direct ownership interest in a commercial wind
energy facility or a commercial solar energy facility, or both, regardless of
whether the person is involved in acquiring the necessary HB4412 Enrolled
LRB102 22343 SPS 31480b Public Act 102-1123 rights, permits, and approvals, or
otherwise planning for the construction and operation of the facility.
      (2)   At the time the facility is being developed, a person who is acting
as a developer of the facility by acquiring the necessary rights, permits, and
approvals or by planning for the construction and operation of the facility,
regardless of whether the person will own or operate the facility.
   FAMILY. One or more persons each related to them by blood, marriage, or
adoption (including foster children), together with such relatives of the
respective spouses who are living with the family in a single dwelling and
maintaining a common household. A FAMILY may also be composed of not to exceed
three persons not so related, provided that such unrelated persons live in a
single dwelling and maintain a common household and single housekeeping unit. A
FAMILY includes any domestic servants and not more than one gratuitous guest
residing with said FAMILY; such servants or guest shall be included in the
unrelated persons attained by this definition, and shall not be in addition
thereto.
   FARM. An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such
as vegetables, fruit, trees, flora, fauna, and grain, and their storage on the
area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm
animals, such as horses, cattle, sheep, and swine, provided that the raising
and feeding of such farm poultry and farm animals shall be subject to the
regulations of the State Environmental Protection Agency. The term FARMING
includes the operating of such an area for one or more of the above uses,
including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating and
storing the produce, provided, however, that the operation of any such
accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming activities, and
provided further that FARMING does not include the extraction of minerals. The
term FARM includes FARM DWELLINGS.
   FARM ANIMALS. Animals other than household pets that shall be permitted to,
where permitted, be kept and maintained for commercial production and sale and/
or family food production, education, or recreation. FARM ANIMALS are
identified by these categories: large animals, for example, horses and cattle;
medium animals, for example, sheep and goats; or small animals, for example,
rabbits, chinchillas, chickens, turkeys, pheasants, geese, ducks, and pigeons.
   FARM LAND. Land that is currently and actively being used for the production
of food and fiber crops. Land in CRP is not being actively used for production
of food or fiber crops.
   FAST FOOD RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principle business is the sale
of rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state
for consumption either within the restaurant building or off premises. The
establishment may include a drive-up or drive-through service facility or
offers curb service.
   FENCE. A structure, other than a building, which is an artificially
constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials or plantings/
shrubbery planted or erected to enclose or screen areas of land. Decorative
corner treatments which do not exceed six feet in length and three feet in
height are not considered fences if it allows for 50% or more open visibility.
   FLOOD-RESISTANT MATERIAL. Any building material capable of withstanding
direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining significant
damage. Examples are given in FEMA TB 2, 4 and 7, FEMA 348, ASCE 24, and the
like.
   FOSTER FAMILY HOME. A family home which provides full-time family care to
foster children unrelated to them. FOSTER FAMILY HOMES are limited to a maximum
of eight children, including the foster family’s children, unless all of the
children unrelated to the foster family are of common parentage, or the
applicable department of the state has waived the limit of eight unrelated
children to facilitate an adoptive placement.
   FOSTER GROUP HOMES. A child care facility which regularly provides care for
no more than ten children placed by and under the supervision of a child
welfare agency licensed by the applicable department of the state. Adult
supervision shall be provided on a 24-hour basis.
   FRONTAGE LOTS. See LOTS, MULTIPLE FRONTAGE.
   GARAGE, BUS or TRUCK. A building which is used or intended to be used for
the storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors, commercial vehicles, and
buses exceeding one and one-half ton capacity.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or portion of a principle
building used for storage of self-propelled passengers vehicles or trailers of
the occupants of the premises and/or not more than a truck of a rated capacity
exceeding one and one-half tons.
   GRADE (ADJACENT GROUND ELEVATION). The lowest point of elevation of the
existing surface of the ground, within the area between the building and a line
five feet (1,524 mm) from the building.
   HALFWAY HOUSE/GROUP HOME. A temporary residential living arrangement for up
to five persons, excluding staff, who are receiving therapy, counseling, and/or
care from support staff who are present at all times residents are present, for
the following purposes:
      (1)   To help them re-enter society while housed under supervision while
under constraints of alternatives to imprisonment, including, but not limited
to, pre-release, work release, and probationary programs;
      (2)   To help persons with family or school adjustment problems that
require specialized attention and care in order to achieve personal
independence;
      (3)   To provide temporary shelter for persons who are victims of
domestic abuse and/or neglect; or
      (4)   To provide adult congregate living arrangements without nursing
care.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE.
      (1)   Any substance or material that, by reason of its toxic, caustic,
corrosive, abrasive, or otherwise injurious properties, may be detrimental or
deleterious to the health of any person handling or otherwise coming into
contact with such material or substance.
      (2)   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has developed a list
of hazardous wastes based upon corrosivity, reactivity, and toxicity. Hazardous
substances include, but are not limited to, inorganic mineral acids of sulfur,
fluorine, chlorine, nitrogen, chromium, phosphorous, selenium and arsenic and
their common salts, lead, nickel, and mercury, and their inorganic salts, or
metallo-organic derivatives, coal, tar acids, such as phenol and cresols and
their salts, and all radioactive materials.
   HEALTH/RECREATIONAL AND PHYSICAL TRAINING CLUB. An indoor facility including
uses such as game courts, exercise equipment, locker rooms, training studios,
jacuzzi and/or sauna, and pro-shop.
   HEIGHT. See BUILDING, HEIGHT OF.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession customarily carried on by an
occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use, and which is clearly incidental
to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. There are major and
minor home occupations which are clearly addressed under §§
154.035 through
154.056.
   HOSPITAL or SANITARIUM. An institution which patients or injured persons are
given medical or surgical care, or for the care of contagious diseases or
terminal patients.
   HOTEL. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate
to the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, and recreational facilities, and is not a bed and breakfast
(also see MOTEL).
   HOTEL, TRANSIENT. See BOARDING HOUSE.
   HOUSEHOLD PETS. Dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, and the like, for family use
only (non-commercial) with cages, pens, and the like.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. A hazardous waste that can catch fire, react, or
explode under certain circumstances, or that is corrosive or toxic. Common
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE items, and others not included on this list, might
contain materials that are ignitable, corrosive, reactive, or toxic such as
drain openers, oven cleaners, wood and metal cleaners and polishers, automotive
oil and fuel additives, grease and rust solvents, carburetor and fuel injection
cleaners, air conditioning refrigerants, starter fluids, paint thinners, paint
strippers and removers, adhesives, herbicides, insecticides, and fungicides/
wood preservatives.
   INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH or INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A transportable non-
permanent single-family dwelling unit on wheels suitable for year-round
occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal, heating and air
condition, electrical conveniences, and with self-contained toilet and bath or
shower facilities as conventional housing. This definition is not intended to
include recreational vehicle types.
   JUNK YARD. Open area where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags, or similar
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including auto and building wrecking yards.
   KENNEL. Any structure or premises where five or more dogs and/or cats over
six months of age are kept as pets, or is intended and used for the breeding of
animals for sale, or the training and/or overnight boarding of animals other
than those of the owner of the lot. This does not include a veterinary clinic
in which the overnight boarding of animals is necessary for and accessory to
the testing and medical treatment of the physical disorders of animals.
   LANDSCAPING. The finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas. Materials
and treatment generally include naturally growing elements such as grass,
trees, shrubs, and flowers. This treatment shall be permitted also to include
the use of logs, rocks, fountains, water features, and contouring of the earth.
   LAND USE PLAN. The comprehensive long range plan for the desirable use of
land in the jurisdiction, as officially adopted and as amended from time to
time by the County Board, the purpose of such plan being, among other things,
to serve as a guide to the zoning and prospective changes in the zoning of land
to meet changing community needs in the subdividing and use of undeveloped
land.
   LARGE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy conversion system consisting of a
wind turbine, a tower or mounting, and any associated control or conversion
electronics, which has a rated capacity of 51 kW to 499 kW, and which is used
for on-site power generation or wholesale or retail sale.
   LEGAL OBJECTOR.
      (1)   The owner of a lot, parcel, or tract of land which is next to a
lot, parcel, or tract of land, for which a special use is proposed or which is
the subject of an amendment of this chapter.
      (2)   For the purposes of this chapter, a lot shall be deemed to be next
to another if the lots, parcels, or tracts share a common lot boundary line in
whole or in part, or if a common lot boundary in whole or in part would occur
if all streets, highways, or alley rights-of-way between such lots were
excluded.
   LIVESTOCK. Includes, but not limited to, bovine animals, sheep, goats,
swine, reindeer, donkeys, mules, and other hoofed animals raised for food
production. Does not include horses.
   LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An open hard-surfaced area of land
other than a street or public way, the principle use of which is for the
standing, loading, and unloading of motor trucks, tractors, and trailers, to
avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.
   LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE. See BOARDING HOUSE.
   LODGING ROOM. See BOARDING HOUSE.
   LOT. A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate
or future) of development or transfer of ownership. A LOT may or may not
coincide with a lot of record.
   LOT AREA/COVERAGE. The area of the lot covered by buildings above grade,
excluding permitted projections.
   LOT OF RECORD. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat recorded with
the Recorder of Deeds of the county, in accordance with state law.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot having at least two adjacent sides that abut for their
full length upon streets.
   LOT, FRONT or FRONTAGE. The length of any one property line of a premises,
which property line abuts a legally accessible street right-of-way, except
alleys.
   LOT, MULTIPLE FRONTAGE. A lot that fronts on two or more street rights-of-
way, such as corner lots, through lots, and the like.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel and most
remote from the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. A lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that
abut two approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be deemed
front lot lines.
   LOT, WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to the side lot lines at the front building line.
   LOT, ZONING. A single tract of land located within a single block, which (at
the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under
single ownership or control. Therefore, a ZONING LOT may or may not coincide
with a lot of record.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A factory-built structure that is manufactured or
constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. § 5401 and is to be used as a
place for human habitation, but which is constructed or equipped with a
permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the
purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not have permanently
attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles.
   MOBILE HOME. A detached residential dwelling unit designed for
transportation after fabrication on streets of highways on its own wheels or on
a flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be
occupied as a dwelling, complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other
temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities, and the like. A
travel trailer, self-contained motor home, or other recreational vehicle is not
to be considered a MOBILE HOME. Dwelling Units built prior to enactment of the
Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,
which became effective June 15, 1976.
   MODULAR HOME. Factory-built housing certified to meet the currently adopted
building codes and amendments as adopted by the county, and the requirements of
the State Department of Public Health, applicable to modular housing. Once
certified by the state, MODULAR HOMES shall be subject to the same standards as
site built homes.
   MOTEL. A building or a group of buildings, whether attached or in connected
units, used as individual sleeping units designed primarily for transient
travelers and providing for accessory off-street parking facilities. The term
MOTEL includes, but is not limited to, buildings designated as auto courts,
tourist courts, motor hotels, motor lodges, and similar terms.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which trucks, including
tractor or trailer units, are parked, stored, or serviced, including the
transfer, loading, or unloading of goods. A TERMINAL may include facilities for
the temporary storage of loads prior to transhipment.
   NIGHTCLUB. A tavern or other commercial establishment where alcoholic
beverages and/or food are served for consumption on premises and a dance floor
and/or entertainment are provided. See also TAVERN.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use
regulations for its zoning district, but which complied with applicable
regulations at the time the use was established.
   NON-CONVERSION AGREEMENT. A form provided by the Floodplain Administrator to
be signed by the owner and recorded in the public records stating the owner
agrees to not convert or modify the following in any manner that is
inconsistent with the terms of the building permit and this chapter:
      (1)   An enclosure below an elevated building;
      (2)   Crawl/underfloor spaces that are more than five feet in height
(measured from the lowest interior grade or floor to the bottom of the floor
system above); and
      (3)   A detached structure that is not elevated and is larger than 70
square feet in area.
   NON-PARTICIPATING PROPERTY. Real property that is not a participating
property.
   NON-PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residence that is located on non-
participating property and that is existing and occupied on the date that an
application for a permit to develop the commercial wind energy facility or the
commercial solar energy facility is filed with the county.
   NURSERY SCHOOL. An institution providing instructional/educational services
for six pre-school aged children.
   OCCUPIED COMMUNITY BUILDING. Any one or more of the following buildings that
is existing and occupied on the date that the application for a permit to
develop the commercial wind energy facility or the commercial solar energy
facility is filed with the county: a school, place of worship, daycare
facility, public library, or community center.
   OPERATOR. The owner of the bed and breakfast establishment, or the owner’s
agent, who is required to reside in the bed and breakfast establishment or on
contiguous property.
   ORDINANCE. Shall be construed as the Zoning Ordinance.
   OWNER. The entity in which title is vested in the building or land.
   PARKING AREA, ACCESSORY. An area of one or more parking spaces located at
the same property as the building, structure, or premises it is intended to
serve, or on adjoining or nearby property and of such shape and nature as to be
appropriate and usable for the parking or storage, loading, and unloading of
self-propelled vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. Space within a public or private parking area of
not less than 160 square feet (eight and one-half feet by 19 feet) exclusive of
access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office and work areas, for the
storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under one and one-
half ton capacity.
   PARTICIPATING PROPERTY. Real property that is the subject of a written
agreement between a facility owner and the owner of the real property that
provides the facility owner an easement, option, lease, or license to use the
real property for the purpose of constructing a commercial wind energy
facility, a commercial solar energy facility, or HB4412 enrolled LRB102 22343
SPS 31480b Public Act 102-1123 supporting facilities. PARTICIPATING PROPERTY
also includes real property that is owned by a facility owner for the purpose
of constructing a commercial wind energy facility, a commercial solar energy
facility, or supporting facilities.
   PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residence that is located on participating
property and that is existing and occupied on the date that an application for
a permit to develop the commercial wind energy facility or the commercial solar
energy facility is filed with the county.
   PERSON. An individual, group of individuals, corporation, association,
partnership, joint venture, or other entity, and includes any trustee, estate,
receiver, assignee, or personal representative.
   PLAN COMMISSION. Zoning Board of Appeals.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land of a size sufficient
to create its own environment, controlled by a single land-owner or by a group
of landowners in common agreement as to which is compatible with adjacent
parcels, and the intent of the zoning district or districts in which it is
located.
      (2)   The developer or developers of a PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT may be
granted relief from specific land-use regulations and design standards and may
be awarded certain premiums in return for assurances of an overall quality of
development, including any specific features which will be of exceptional
benefit to the community as a whole.
   PORCH. A roofed (either enclosed or unenclosed), attached to one or two
permanent exterior walls of a dwelling building, whose floor is at or just
below the level of the dwelling first floor adjacent to the porch.
   PRINCIPLE BUILDING. A building in which the primary use of the lot on which
the building is located is conducted.
   PROLONGED CONTACT. At least 72 hours.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Any individual, group of individuals, association,
corporation, joint stock association, joint venture, or any other entity in
whose name the legal title to the real estate is recorded.
   PROTECTED LANDS. Real property that is:
      (1)   Subject to a permanent conservation right consistent with the Real
Property Conservation Rights Act; or
      (2)   Registered or designated as a nature preserve, buffer, or land and
water reserve under the State Natural Areas Preservation Act.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, (PUBLIC OR PRIVATE). A site used for specific or
general recreation, which may include gear or equipment (for example, camp
ground, golf course, marina, shooting range, racetrack, bicycles, motorcycles,
tennis, or gathering places not addressed elsewhere in this code). The facility
may be a private club or open to the public.
   RECREATIONAL USE, SEASONAL.
      (1)   Camping use on land that is located along a river or body of water
allowed by special use in some zoning districts.
      (2)   One structure of a seasonal, temporary, movable nature such as a
tent, travel trailer, or motor home, but not a mobile home, may be permitted on
vacant land. Said temporary structure shall be permitted on site from April 1
through October 31 of each year. Accessory structures are prohibited. (The
construction of a permanent residence on said lot shall cause the expiration of
a special use permit.)
   REFUSE EQUIPMENT OPERATION. The storage, repair, maintenance, sale, or lease
of equipment used in the collection, storage, or transportation of refuse,
including, but not limited to, vehicles, containers, and any repair, parts,
accessories, and appurtenances thereof.
   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE. Waste that normally originates in a residential
environment.
   RESTAURANT. A food establishment serving full course meals prepared on the
premises and which may serve alcoholic beverages.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land dedicated to the county or other unit of
government for streets, alleys, and other public improvements.
   RURAL RESIDENTIAL BUILDING LOT. A building lot (parcel) in the AG-1, AG-2,
or SE-1 Zoning Districts created without the minimum area required for the
district because the parcel meets the criteria outlined in §
154.023(F)(8).
   SEPTIC TANK. A sewerage system with a seepage field designed to function on
an individual lot basis, as approved by the County Health Department.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between the lot or property line
and the nearest front, side, or rear line of the building, including terraces
or any covered projection thereof, including steps.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM, CENTRAL. A type approved by the State Environmental
Protection Agency as properly designed to serve one or more subdivisions. A
septic tank is not a CENTRAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
   SIGNIFICANT DAMAGE. Any damage requiring more than low-cost cosmetic repair
(such as painting).
   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy conversion system consisting of a
wind turbine, a tower or mounting, and any associated control or conversion
electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 50 kW and which is
exclusively used for on-site power generation.
   SOLAR APPLICANT.
      (1)   The entity who submits to the county an application for the siting
and operation of any commercial solar energy facility or substation.
      (2)   All references to the applicant in this chapter shall include the
applicant’s successors-in-interest and assigns, which includes a COMMERCIAL
SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY PERMITTEE (as defined herein).
   SOLAR ARRAY. Multiple solar panels combined together to create one system.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR. A device that captures solar radiation for use as a source
of energy.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Equipment that converts and then stores or transfers
energy from the sun into usable forms of energy and includes any solar
collectors, lines, pumps, batteries, inverters, mounting brackets, framing,
and/or foundation used for or intended to be used for the collection and
conversion of solar radiation into energy suitable for use.
   SOLAR PRIVATE. Solar collectors and supplementary solar energy equipment
that is accessory to a residential or non-residential use and covers an area no
more than two acres. In no instance can private solar be the only use on a
parcel. PRIVATE SOLAR is designed for on-site use by the owner or tenant of the
residential or non-residential use to reduce payments to the utility company.
   SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEM. A solar energy system that directly heats water or
other liquid using sunlight. Consists of a series of tubes that concentrate
light to heat either water or a heat-transfer fluid. The heated liquid is used
for such purposes as space heating and cooling, domestic hot water, and heating
pool water.
   SPECIFIC ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIC SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; and
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breasts.
   STABLE, RIDING. A building/buildings including other structures and grounds
used for the boarding or housing of horses used for riding sessions or pleasure
riding on the premises.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
STORY shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a usable or unused under floor space is more than six feet above
grade as defined herein for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is more
than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such usable or unused
under-floor space shall be considered as a STORY.
   STORY, HALF. A partial story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four
feet above the floor of such story.
   STREET. A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term STREET
includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, and similar designations, but excludes an
alley or way for pedestrian use only.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any changes in the supporting members of a building
including, but not limited to, bearing walls, load-bearing walls, load-bearing
partitions, columns, beams, or girders or any substantial change in the roof or
the exterior walls.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner.
   SUPPORTING FACILITIES. The transmission lines, substations, access roads,
meteorological towers, storage containers, and equipment associated with the
generation and storage of electricity by the commercial wind energy facility or
commercial solar energy facility.
   TAVERN.
      (1)   Any premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for
consumption on the premises as the principle uses; and where sandwiches,
snacks, and other food products are available for purchase.
      (2)   TAVERN does not include restaurants, where the principle business
is serving food (includes BAR and COCKTAIL LOUNGE). (See NIGHTCLUB.)
   TERRACE/PATIO. Is an unroofed deck located outside at ground grade, which is
paved as concrete, stone, brick, or wood paver blocks (also known as a PATIO).
   THEATER. An establishment used to observe films and other visual material
which is neither an ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER nor an ADULT MINI-MOTION
PICTURE THEATER.
   TILT. The angle of the solar panels as installed per manufacturers
installation instructions.
   TOTAL HEIGHT. The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of a wind
turbine blade when the tip is at its highest point.
   TOURIST COURTS, MOTOR LODGES, MOTELS. A group of attached or detached
buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or used
temporarily by automobile, tourists, or transients, with garage attached or
parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts, motels,
motor lodges, or other similar type uses.
   TOURIST HOME. A dwelling in which accommodations are provided/offered for
transient guests.
   TOXIC WASTE. Any combination of pollutants, including disease-carrying
agents, that, after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or
assimilation into any organism, can cause death or disease, mutations,
deformities, or malfunctions in such organisms or their offspring, and that
adversely affect the environment which are being discarded by being disposed,
incinerated, or recycled.
   TRAILER PARK or MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land upon which two or more
occupied trailer coaches or mobile homes are harbored either free of charge or
for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent,
vehicles, or enclosure used or intended for as, a part of the equipment of such
trailer coach park.
   TRUCK PARKING AREA OR YARD. Any land used or intended to be used for the
storage or parking of trucks, tractors, truck trailers, and including
commercial vehicles, while not loading or unloading. Does not include Class B
trucks.
   UNRELATED GROUP FAMILY. A group of no more than five unrelated adults living
together as a common household by doing their own cooking and living together,
as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, club,
fraternity, sorority, or hotel. UNRELATED GROUP FAMILIES are permitted with
administrative approval, provided that they comply with the standards and
conditions specified in §
154.054.
   USE, TEMPORARY. A use that is authorized by this code to be conducted for a
fixed period of time. TEMPORARY USES are characterized by such activities as
the sale of agricultural products, contractors’ offices and equipment sheds,
fireworks, carnivals, flea markets, and garage sales.
   VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL. Any motorized vehicle or trailer designed to be pulled
by a vehicle that is not a passenger vehicle or recreational vehicle. For
example, semi/tractor trailers, excavators, bulldozers, skid steers, backhoes,
graders, shipping containers, and the like.
   VEHICLE, PASSENGER. Any motorized vehicle under 16,000 GVW with not more
than two axles.
   VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL.
      (1)   A general term for a vehicular unit bearing a current license and/
or registration, not exceeding 40 feet in overall length, eight and one-half
feet in width or 12 and one-half feet in overall height, which includes, but is
not limited to, the following specific vehicle types.
         (a)   BOAT TRAILER. A vehicular structure without its own motive power
designed to transport a boat for recreation and vacation use, and which is
licensed and registered for highway use.
         (b)   CAMPER TRAILER. A folding or collapsible vehicular structure
without its own motive power designed as temporary living quarters for travel,
camping, recreation, and vacation uses, and to be licensed and registered for
highway use.
         (c)   HORSE TRAILER. A vehicular structure without its own motive
power designed primarily for the transportation of horses and which, in
combination with the towing vehicle, is licensed and registered for highway
use.
         (d)   MOTOR HOME. A vehicular unit built on or as a part of a self-
propelled motor vehicle chassis, primarily designed to provide temporary
dwelling for travel, camping, recreation, and vacation use, and to be licensed
and registered for highway use. This category shall include converted bus
campers.
         (e)   RECREATIONAL BOAT. A vessel, whether impelled by wind, oars, or
mechanical devices, and which is designed primarily for recreation or vacation
use. A recreation vessel when mounted upon a boat trailer shall be considered
one unit.
         (f)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A rigid structure without its own motive power
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation, and vacation
use, to be licensed and registered for highway use; and which, when equipped
for the road, has a body width of not more than eight feet, six inches.
         (g)   TRUCK CAMPER. A portable structure without its own motive power
designed to be transported on a power vehicle as a temporary dwelling for
travel, camping, recreation, and vacation use, and which, in combination with
the carrying vehicle, shall be licensed and registered for highway use.
         (h)   UTILITY TRAILER. A vehicular structure without its own motive
power designed and/or used for the transportation of all manner of motor
vehicles, goods, or materials, and licensed and registered for highway use.
      (2)   If the recreational vehicle is equipped with liquefied gas
containers, they shall meet the standards of the Interstate Commerce Commission
or the Federal Department of Transportation standards in existence at the
passage of this chapter.
   WAREHOUSE, WHOLESALE, or STORAGE. A building or premises in which goods,
merchandise, or equipment are stored for eventual distribution.
   WIND APPLICANT. The entity who submits to the county an application for the
siting and operation of any WECS or substation. All references to the applicant
in this chapter shall include the applicant’s successors-in-interest and
assigns, which includes a WECS PERMITTEE (as defined below).
   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. Equipment that converts and then stores or transfers
energy from the wind into usable forms of energy and includes any base, blade,
foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, turbine, vane, wire,
or other component used in the system. This includes both COMMERCIAL WIND
ENERGY FACILITIES, LARGE WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS, and SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
Also referred to herein as WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM or WECS or WECS
PROJECT.
   WIND TOWER. The wind turbine tower, nacelle, and blades.
   YARD. The space adjacent to lot lines which is required to be open and
unobstructed from its lowest level upward except as otherwise permitted. The
minimum depth of width of a YARD shall consist of the horizontal distance
between the lot line and nearest point of the foundation or exterior wall of a
building.
   YARD, FRONT. An open space extending the full width of the lot between a
principle building and the street right-of-way except for an alley, unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified. When
a property is situated along a body of water, the front yard shall be the open
space extending the full width of the lot between the principal building and
the body of water.
   YARD, REAR. An open space extending the full width of a lot between a
building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as hereinafter specified.
   YARD, SIDE. An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between a building and the side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
   ZONING MAPS. The map or maps incorporated into this chapter as a part
hereof.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023) Penalty, see §
154.999
VARIANCES, APPEALS, AMENDMENTS, SPECIAL USE PERMITS
§ 154.020 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals, after a public hearing, may
vary the regulations of this chapter in harmony with its general purpose and
intent only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth and only in
accordance with the standards hereinafter prescribed.
   (B)   Initiation of variance. Variances may be requested by any person,
firm, corporation, or government.
   (C)   Application for variance. An application for a variance shall be filed
in writing with the Administrative Officer. Said application shall contain such
information as the Zoning Board of Appeals may by rule require.
   (D)   Hearing on application. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a
public hearing on each application for a variance at such time and place as
shall be established by the Zoning Board of Appeals. A record of such
proceedings shall be preserved in such a manner as the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall by rule prescribe from time to time.
   (E)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing
shall be published at least once, not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days
before the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The
published notice may be supplemented by such additional forms of notice as the
Zoning Board of Appeals by rule may require.
   (F)   Standards for variances.
      (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not vary the regulations of this
chapter, as authorized in this section, unless there is evidence presented to
it in each specific case that:
         (a)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience
if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
         (b)   The conditions, upon which a petition for a variation is based,
are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not
applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning classification;
         (c)   The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make money out of the property;
         (d)   The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this chapter and
has not been created by any persons presently having an interest in the
property;
         (e)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located;
         (f)   The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion of
the public streets increase the danger of fire, endanger the public safety, or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood; and
         (g)   The purpose of the variance shall not be to establish a use
otherwise excluded from the particular district in which it is requested.
      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and
restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variance as may be necessary to
comply with the standards established in this section.
   (G)   Authorized variances. Variances from the regulations of this chapter
shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals only in accordance with the
standards established in §
154.023(F) and may be granted only in the following instances and in no others:
      (1)   To permit any yard or setback line of less dimension than required
by the applicable regulations;
      (2)   To permit any building or structure to exceed the height
limitations imposed by the applicable regulations;
      (3)   To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited
solely because of the insufficient area or width of the lot or lots;
      (4)   To permit the same off street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two or more uses provided that substantial use of such
facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours of
the same days of the week;
      (5)   To reduce the parking and loading requirements in any of the
districts whenever the character or use of a building is such as to make
unnecessary the full provision of parking or loading facilities or where such
regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as
contrasted with merely being granted for a convenience;
      (6)   To permit the alteration or enlargement of an existing building or
use located on premises
in a district which prohibits that use of land or building, or the height and
area of buildings existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter where
such alteration or enlargement is a necessary incident to the use of the
structure existing at the time of the adoption, amendment, or change of this
chapter; and
      (7)   To permit the reconstruction of a non-conforming building which has
been damaged by
explosion, fire, act of God, or the public enemy to the extent of more than 50%
of its actual cash value, as determined by the official county tax assessment
and equalization rate, where the Board finds some compelling public necessity
requiring a continuance of the non- conforming use, and the primary purpose of
continuing the non-conforming use is not to continue a monopoly; and
      (8)   To permit other variances as authorized in §
154.618.
   (H)   Findings of fact. All decisions by the Zoning Board of Appeals on
requests for variances must be supplemented with a written finding of fact
stating the conformity or non-conformity, as the case may be, of their decision
with the standards set forth in this section.
   (I)   Granting a variance. The concurring vote of three members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to grant a variance. No decision of
the Zoning Board of Appeals granting a variance shall be valid for a period
longer than 12 months from the date of such decision the building permit is
obtained within such period and the erection or alteration of a building is
started or the use is commenced within such period.
   (J)   Effect of denial of variance. No application for a variance that has
been denied wholly or in part by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial,
except on the grounds of new evidence found to be valid by the Administrative
Officer.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.021 APPEALS.
   (A)   Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals, after a hearing, may determine
and vary any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Administrative Officer.
   (B)   Initiation of appeal. Any person, firm, corporation, or any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the county may request an appeal.
   (C)   Application for appeal. An application for an appeal shall be filed in
writing with the Administrative Officer. Said application shall contain such
information as the Zoning Board of Appeals may, by rule, require.
   (D)   Imminent peril to life and property. An appeal shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the
Administrative Officer certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after the
application for the appeal has been filed with him or her, that by reason of
acts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life and property.
   (E)   Hearing on application. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a
hearing on each application for an appeal at such time and place as shall be
established by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (F)   Notice of hearing. Due notice of the time and place of said hearing on
an appeal shall be sent
to all affected parties.
   (G)   Findings on appeals.
      (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may affirm or may, upon the concurring
vote of four members, reverse wholly or in part or modify, the interpretation.
To that end, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken.
      (2)   The Administrative Officer shall maintain records of all actions of
the Zoning Board of Appeals relative to appeals.
   (H)   Finality of decision. All final administrative decisions of the Zoning
Board of Appeals hereunder, shall be subject to judicial review related to the
provisions of the Administrative Review Act, approved May 8, 1945, and all
amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.022 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Authority. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, and general welfare; conserving the value of property
throughout the county; and lessening or avoiding congestion in the public
streets and highways, the County Board may from time to time in the manner
hereinafter set forth amend the regulations imposed in the districts created by
this chapter. The chapter may be amended, provided that in all amendatory
resolutions adopted under the authority of this section, due allowance shall be
made for the existing conditions, the conservation of property values, the
direction of building development to the best advantages of the entire county,
and the uses to which the property is devoted at the time of the adoption of
such amendatory chapter.
   (B)   Initiation of amendment. Amendments may be proposed by the County
Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, or by any interested person or organization.
   (C)   Application for amendment. An application for an amendment shall be
filed with the Administrative Officer in such form and accompanied by such
information as may be required by the Administrative Officer. Such application
shall be forwarded to the Zoning Board of Appeals with the request to hold a
public hearing on said application for amendment.
   (D)   Hearing on application. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a
public hearing on each application for an amendment in the township or road
district affected by the terms of such proposed amendment or in the County
Office Building. If the owner of any property affected by such proposed
amendment so requests, such hearing shall be held in the township or road
district affected by the terms of such proposed amendment. For the
consideration of general amendments to the chapter, hearings may be held in the
County Office Building. A record of such proceedings shall be preserved in a
manner as the Zoning Board of Appeals, may, by rule, prescribe.
   (E)   Notice of hearing. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be
published at least once in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the
county not less than 15 nor more than 30 days before such hearing. Supplemental
or additional notices may be published or distributed as the Zoning Board of
Appeals, may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
   (F)   Findings of fact and recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (1)   Within 45 days after the close of the hearing on a proposed
amendment, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall make written findings of fact and
shall submit same together with its recommendations to the County Board. Where
the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning
classification of particular property, the findings of fact and recommendation
shall include the following information:
         (a)   Existing use of property within the general area of the property
in question;
         (b)   The zoning classification of property within the general area of
the property in question;
         (c)   The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question, including changes, if any, which have taken place since
the day the property in question was placed in its present zoning
classification; and
         (d)   The suitability of the property in question to the uses
permitted under the existing and the proposed zoning classification.
      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall recommend the adoption of a
proposed amendment when it finds that the adoption of such amendment is in the
public interest and is not solely for the interest of the applicant. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may recommend the adoption of an amendment changing the zoning
classification of the property in question to any higher classification than
that requested by the applicant. For the purposes of this division (F), the AG-
1 Rural Agricultural District shall be considered the highest classification
and the I-2 Heavy Industrial District shall be considered the lowest
classification.
      (3)   A lot, lots, or parcel of land shall not qualify for a zoning
amendment unless it possesses at least 200 feet of frontage or contains at
least 25,000 square feet of area, or adjoins a lot, lots, or parcel of land
which bears the same zoning district classification as the proposed zoning
amendment.
   (G)   Action by the County Board.
      (1)   The County Board shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this
chapter until they have received written report and recommendation from the
Zoning Board of Appeals on the proposed amendment.
      (2)   The County Board may grant or deny an application for an amendment
provided, however, that in case of a written protest against any proposed
amendment, and signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage
proposed to be altered, or by the owner of 20% of the frontage immediately
adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owner of 20% of the frontage
directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, or in cases where the
land affected lies within one and one-half miles of the limits of a zoned
municipality, or in the case of a proposed test amendment to the chapter, by
resolution of the corporate authorities of the zoned municipality with limits
nearest adjacent, filed with the County Clerk such amendment shall not be
passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the
County Board. In such cases a copy of the written protest shall be served by
the protestor or protestors on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a
copy upon the applicant’s attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of
such applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed
amendment.
   (H)   Effect of denial of an amendment. No application for an amendment that
has been denied wholly or in part by the County Board shall be resubmitted for
a period of one year from the date of said denial except on the grounds of new
evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the
Administrative Officer.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.023 SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Authority.
      (1)   The development and administration of this chapter is based upon
the division of the county into zoning districts, within which districts the
use of land and buildings, and the bulk and location of buildings and
structures in relation to the land, are substantially uniform.
      (2)   It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses that may
have unique, special, or unusual impact upon the use or enjoyment of
neighboring property and planned developments and cannot be properly classified
in any particular district or districts without consideration in each
individual case. A use may be permitted in one or more zoning districts and a
special use in one or more other zoning districts. Such cases are classified in
this chapter as special uses and fall into two categories:
         (a)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest; and
         (b)   Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
   (B)   Initiation of special use. Any person having a freehold interest in
land, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual
interest which may become a freehold interest of an exclusive possessory
character, any of which is specifically enforceable, may file an application to
use such land for one or more of the special uses provided for in this chapter
in the zoning district in which the land is located.
   (C)   Application for special use.
      (1)   An application for a special use shall be filed with the
Administrative Officer on a form as he or she shall prescribe. The application
required by the Administrative Officer shall, at a minimum, include the
substance of the applicant’s proposal. The applicant shall also disclose in
writing the applicant’s interest in real estate in any of the property
adjoining and adjacent to the subject site property lot lines. The applicant’s
hearing presentation of the special use application shall be restricted to the
general substance of the application as initially filed with the Administrative
Officer. This restriction is not intended to limit the applicant’s responses
during any hearing, nor is it intended to restrict the presentation of project
details or other information within the general substance of the application.
The filing of the application and the notices required in division (E) below
shall be construed as jurisdictional requirements. The application shall be
accompanied by such plans and/or data prescribed by the Zoning Board of Appeals
and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence
showing that the proposed special use will conform to the standards set forth
in division (F) below.
      (2)   Such application shall be forwarded from the Administrative Officer
to the Zoning Board of Appeals with a request for a public hearing and report
relative thereto. All documents filed by the applicant or other interested
persons shall be date stamped or otherwise marked by the Administrative
Officer, and the Administrative Officer shall keep a separate file of the
special use application, with a docket sheet adequately describing each
document filed by the applicant or otherwise submitted by objectors and other
interested persons.
   (D)   Hearing an application.
      (1)   Upon receipt in proper form of the application and statement
referred to in division (C) above, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold at
least one public hearing on the proposed special use. The hearing shall be
preserved in such manner as the Zoning Board of Appeals shall, by rule,
prescribe from time to time.
      (2)   All testimony by witnesses in any hearing shall be given under
oath. The oath shall be administered to each witness and shall not be
administered to a group of persons. Each witness shall be duly identified on
the record at the time of taking the oath.
      (3)   (a)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold at least one hearing
on the application and may hold as many hearings as necessary when the nature
of the application and the nature of any proposed evidence may require
additional hearings.
         (b)   All hearings shall be conducted to assure fundamental fairness
and a full opportunity by the applicant, objectors, and a reasonable number of
other interested citizens to participate fully in the hearing process,
including, but not limited to, the right to present witnesses on the applicable
standards in division (F) below and the opportunity to question any witness of
the other party. The Chairperson shall have the right to restrict repetitive
testimony. Any party appearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals may exercise
the right to transcribe or record the proceedings at the expense of the party.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall accommodate any request to transcribe or
record the proceedings.
      (4)   The Zoning Board of Appeals reserves the right to control the
location of recording devices to ensure the orderly nature of the proceedings.
The party exercising their right to transcribe or record the proceedings shall
have recording equipment and/or person(s) who will transcribe the proceedings
available at the commencement of the hearing. The failure of said party to
provide recording equipment and/or persons to transcribe said hearing shall not
be just cause to request continuance.
   (E)   Notice of hearing.
      (1)   Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published not
less than 15 or more than 30 days preceding said hearing and at least once in
one or more newspapers of general circulation in the county.
      (2)   The Administrative Officer shall also cause service of written
notice not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing in person or
by mail, upon the Township Supervisor and the County Board member representing
the township or district of the subject site, and to all property owners whose
property adjoins the subject site property lot lines, and to any other person
or entities required by law to be notified and to all persons or entities
entitled to object to such special uses.
      (3)   In the event that property adjoining the subject site is owned by
the applicant, notice will be sent to the owners of property which adjoin such
other property owned by the applicant, if such property is not more than 1,500
feet from the subject site property lot lines. The owners shall be identified
as those persons or entities which appear upon the authentic tax records of the
county in the County Supervisor of Assessment’s office as of January 1 of the
calendar year of the filing of the special use request.
      (4)   The calculations of the distance and the determination of adjoining
and adjacent property owners shall exclude all public roads, streets, alleys,
and other public ways.
      (5)   In computing distances, the Administrative Officer is entitled to
rely on the property records as such exist as of the date the applications is
filed. The written notice shall contain the date, time, and place of the
hearing, the name and address of the applicant, location of the proposed site,
the nature of the special use and a statement that persons have a right to
participate in the special use hearing. The notice to the Township Supervisor
and County Board Member, and adjacent and adjoining property owners, shall
include the above referenced information.
   (F)   Standards.
      (1)   No special use shall be granted by the County Board unless such
Board shall find:
         (a)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, or general welfare;
         (b)   The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood,
and will be located and operated to minimize incompatibility with the character
of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value of the
surrounding property. The applicant need not demonstrate complete
compatibility, but the applicant shall demonstrate reasonable efforts to
minimize incompatibility;
         (c)   The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the districts;
         (d)   The adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and/or other
necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
         (e)   The adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public
streets;
         (f)   The plan of operations for the special use is designed to
minimize the danger to the surrounding area from fire or other operational
accidents; and
         (g)   The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the County Board.
      (2)   (a)   After a special use permit has been granted, the
Administrative Officer or any person whose property is being, or may be
adversely affected by operation of the special use, may file a petition in
writing with the Zoning Board of Appeals requesting that the special use permit
be modified or revoked.
         (b)   The petitioner shall specifically allege the violation of the
conditions under which the permit was granted or facts which would justify
modification or revocation of the special use permit.
      (3)   If the petition is filed by the Administrative Officer, the matter
shall be set for hearing. The provision of divisions (D) and (E) above
pertaining to hearings and notices shall be applicable. The hearing shall be
held within 60 days of the filing of the petition. The petitioner and the
holder of the special use permit must be notified. Copies of the petition shall
be sent to the holder of the special use permit along with the notice.
      (4)   In the event the petition is filed by persons other than the
Administrative Officer, the petition shall be first referred to the
Administrative Officer for investigation. Within 45 days after the petition has
been filed, the Administrative Officer shall report his or her findings and
conclusions to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Within 15 days after receiving the
Administrative Officer’s report, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall set the
matter for hearing within 60 days or shall recommend to the County Board to
dismiss the petition. If the petition is dismissed, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall state its reasons for dismissal and notify the petitioners and the holder
of the special use permit accordingly. In the event a hearing is scheduled,
division (D) and (E) above pertaining to hearing and notice shall be
applicable. The petitioner and the holder of the special use permit shall be
notified. The holder of the special use permit shall be sent a copy of the
petition with the notice.
      (5)   Prior to filing a petition with the Zoning Board of Appeals, or
reporting findings and conclusions to the Zoning Board of Appeals, pursuant to
the section, the Administrative Officer shall give the holder of the special
use permit a reasonable period of time to correct violations. The other time
requirements of this section shall not be stayed during the period of time the
holder of the special use permit is given to correct violations.
      (6)   The County Board shall be guided, but not controlled, by the
findings and conclusions of the Administrative Officer. After a hearing, the
Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend to the County Board to deny the prayer of
the petition, or if the evidence so warrants, recommend to the County Board to
revoke the special use permit or modify the conditions of the permit. The
burden of proof shall be on the petitioner.
      (7)   The hearing shall be governed under the general standards as
described in division (D) above. Any decision of the County Board under this
section shall be final.
      (8)   Special use permit applications for rural residential building lots
shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this division (F), provided the
Board finds:
         (a)   The parcel contains 43,560 square feet (one acre);
         (b)   The property shall have 165 feet of frontage;
         (c)   Access to the property (the driveway) shall be directly onto an
asphalt or concrete roadway maintained by either the State Department of
Transportation or the County Highway Department (no township roads, private
roads, gravel, or chip and seal);
         (d)   Efforts shall be taken to reduce the amount of farm ground
removed from production while realizing the minimum lot size;
         (e)   The parcel shall be adequate for two complete septic systems
(one now, and one for replacement upon failure of the original), with written
confirmation from the County Health Department;
         (f)   Signed acknowledgment of the “Rock Island County Rural Living
Contract;”
         (g)   Land evaluation site assessment score of less than 225;
         (h)   The property shall have no buildable area in a floodplain as
delineated on the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) for the county, as adopted;
         (i)   Where determined to be necessary by the Zoning Administrator, a
60-foot wide area
shall be left between parcels for future road access to properties lying behind
the subject property, with the intent to maintain the possibility of long term
development. Appeals of the Administrator’s decision shall be heard by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, said decision being final; and
         (j)   The property shall be in an area where the proposed lot size
does not meet the requirements of the current the county land use map.
   (G)   Conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of any special use,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall recommend to the County Board such conditions
and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance,
and operation for the special use as it is deemed necessary for the protection
of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards specified in
division (F) above. In all cases in which special uses are granted, the County
Board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as
proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will
be complied with.
   (H)   Effect of denial of a special use. No application for a special use
that has been denied wholly or in part by the County Board shall be resubmitted
for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial, except on the
grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by
the Administrative Officer.
   (I)   Revocation. In any case, where a special use has not been established
within one year after the date of granting thereof, then without further action
by the County Board, the special use or authorization shall be null and void,
unless otherwise specified by the County Board. The provisions of division (F)
(7) above pertaining to modification or revocation of special use permits shall
be applicable to special use permits or special use permits previously issued
by the Zoning Board of Appeals under prior versions of this chapter.
   (J)   Action by the County Board. The County Board shall not act upon a
proposed special use until they have received written report and recommendation
from the Zoning Board of Appeals on the proposed special use.
      (1)   The concurring vote of three members of a Board consisting of five
members is necessary to recommend to the County Board to approve the petition.
      (2)   The County Board may grant or deny an application for a special
use, provided, however, that in case of a written protest against any proposed
special use, and signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage
to be altered, or by the owner of 20% of the frontage immediately adjoining or
across an alley therefrom, or by the owner of 20% of the frontage directly
opposite frontage proposed to be altered, or in the cases where the land
affected lies within one mile of the limits of a zoned municipality, by
resolution of the corporate authorities of the zoned municipality with limits
nearest adjacent, filed with the County Clerk, such special use shall not be
passed except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all of the members of the
County Board. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be served by
the protestor or protestors on the applicant for the proposed special use and a
copy upon the applicant’s attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of
such applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed special
use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.035 AFFECTS ON STRUCTURE AND USE.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure, or land shall
hereafter be used and no building or part thereof of a structure shall be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, occupied, moved, altered, or repaired,
except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the class of
district in which it is located.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.036 CONTINUED EXISTING USES.
   Any building, structure, or use lawfully existing at the time of enactment
of this chapter may be continued, except certain non-conforming uses as
provided in §
154.038. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring
to a safe condition any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by
the Building Inspector.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.037 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Any lawfully established use of a building or land, at the effective
date of this chapter, or of amendments thereto, that does not conform to the
use regulations for the district in which it is located (except residential
building lots, with existing single-family dwellings, located in the AG-1 and
AG-2 Districts with less than the required minimum lot size, which shall be
deemed conforming), shall be deemed to be a legal non-conforming use and may be
continued, except as otherwise provided herein.
   (B)   Any legal non-conforming building or structure may be continued in
use, provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and
repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
   (C)   Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date of this chapter, or of amendments thereto, may be completed in
accordance with the approved plans; provided, construction is started within
six months and diligently prosecuted to completion. Such building shall
thereafter be deemed a lawfully established building.
   (D)   Any non-conforming building or structure which has been or may be
damaged by fire, flood,
explosion, earthquake, war, riot, or other act of God, may be reconstructed and
used as before if it be done within 12 months of such calamity, unless damaged
more than 50% of its fair market value, as determined by the Board of Appeals,
at the time of such damage, in which case, reconstruction shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   No building, structure, or premises where a non-conforming building or
structure which has been or may be discontinued for more than one year, or has
been or may be changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, shall again be devoted to a non-conforming use.
   (F)   Any building or structure devoted to a non-conforming use with a fair
market value of less than
$500, as determined by the Board of Appeals, may be continued for a period not
to exceed three years after enactment of this chapter, where upon such non-
conforming use shall be removed or changed to a conforming use.
   (G)   (1)   Any legal, non-conforming use shall be enclosed in all sides by
a solid wall or tight board fence not less than eight feet high if said use
includes storage, repair or maintenance of vehicles, equipment, or materials on
the premises and not within the building.
      (2)   Said wall or fence shall be maintained to the satisfaction of the
Building Inspector. Any use so described that is in existence at the time of
this amendment is adopted shall comply with said fencing requirement within 180
days of the adoption of this amendment.
   (H)   A non-conforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the
entire building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use, and only if the
required yards for the district in which it is located are maintained for such
enlargement, except as provided for under variances of this chapter.
   (I)   No building partially occupied by a non-conforming use shall be
altered in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space
occupied by such non-conforming use.
   (J)   No non-conforming building in any Residential District shall be so
altered as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
   (K)   No non-conforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required usable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries of the
zoning lot as it existed at the effective date of this chapter, or to displace
any conforming use in the same building or the same parcel.
   (L)   Where a use is classified as a special use under this chapter and
exists as a special use or permitted use at the date of the adoption of this
chapter, it shall be considered to be a legal special use.
   (M)   Where a use is not allowed as a special or permitted use under this
chapter or at the date of the adoption of this chapter and exists as an
additional use as provided in the County Zoning Ordinance adopted July 1995, as
amended, it shall be considered to be a non-conforming use and shall be subject
to the applicable non-conforming use provisions of this section.
   (N)   Where non-conforming setbacks are a result of road widening on behalf
of a municipality, county, state, or township highway department, it shall not
be subject to the applicable non-conforming use provisions of this section.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.038 STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED; FLAG LOTS.
   Every lot shall have at least 20 feet of frontage which provides reasonable
access onto the public right-of-way dedicated to street purposes. No building
in the rear of a principle building on the same lot shall be used as a
dwelling. Setbacks for flag lots will be determined at the start of the
buildable area of the lot.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.039 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN ALL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   No accessory building or buildings shall be erected in any required
court or yard. When erected in a side yard in an AG-1, AG-2, SE-1, SE-2, or any
R District, the accessory building shall maintain a five-foot setback. When
erected in a rear yard in an AG-1, AG-2, SE-1, SE-2, or any R District, the
accessory building shall maintain a five-foot setback. In any zoning district,
accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 30% of the lot area, and in any
R District, it or they shall not exceed the total ground floor footage of the
primary structure, except for swimming pools, and shall be a distance of five
feet from any lot line that adjoins an AG-1, AG-2, SE-1, SE-2, or any R
District. Accessory buildings in all Residential Districts shall not exceed 15
feet in height, except that an accessory building used in part or wholly as a
dwelling for domestic employees of the owners or of the tenants of the
principle building shall not exceed two stories or 25 feet in height, provided
it shall conform to the open space requirements of this chapter for a principle
building, and for the purpose of determining the front yard in such case, the
rear line of the rear yard required for the principle building shall be
considered the front lot line for the building in the rear. Where the natural
grade of a lot at the front wall of the principle building is more than eight
feet above the average established curb grade in front of the lot, a private
garage may be erected within any yard or court, but not within ten feet of any
street line, provided that at least one-half of the height of such private
garage shall be below the level of the yard or court.
   (B)   Any accessory building may be erected as an integral part of the
principle building, or if at least six feet from the principle building, may be
connected to the principle building by a breezeway or similar structure,
provided all yard and court requirements of this chapter for the principle
building are complied with, unless such accessory building is in a rear yard,
in which case the applicable provisions of §
154.040(A) shall apply.
   (C)   (1)   For zoning lots with a gross area of 25,000 square feet or
greater in an AG-1, AG-2, or SE-1 District, accessory building may be allowed
in the front yard, provided all other requirements of this chapter are met.
      (2)   For zoning lots in any R District, or the SE-2 Suburban Estates
Medium Density District with a lot area of 25,000 square feet or greater, one
accessory building may be erected in the front yard as follows;
      (1)   Lot size building maximum standards are as follows:
 
25,000 square feet to 2 acres 900 square feet
2+ acres to 5 acres           1,200 square feet
5+ acres to 15 acres          1,600 square feet
Notes to Table:
-The principle building is, or shall be, located a minimum of 100 feet from
the front property line.
-The accessory building shall be located at or behind the front yard setback
for the Zoning District in which the lot is located.
 
      (2)   For zoning lots greater than 15 acres, no more than two accessory
buildings will be allowed in the front yard and no size limitation will be
placed on the size of the accessory building, provided:
         (a)   The principle building is, or shall be, located at a minimum of
200 feet from the front property line; and
         (b)   The accessory building(s) shall be located at, or behind, the
front yard building setback for the Zoning District in which the lot is
located.
   (D)   For zoning lots that abut upon a river, accessory buildings may be
located in front yards, provided:
      (1)   The principle building fronts the river; and
      (2)   (a)   Accessory buildings are located in front yards on zoning lots
with frontage upon the same side of the street between two intersecting streets
or within a distance of 300 feet in each direction from the lot in question.
         (b)   The front setback of the proposed accessory building will not be
less than the average of the front setbacks of the adjacent zoning lots and the
side yard setbacks will be at least five feet.
   (E)   No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any SE-2 or
R lot prior to the time of construction of the principle building to which it
is accessory.
   (F)   On all corner lots, the setback for accessory buildings shall be the
same as that which is required for the principle building.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.040 REQUIRED YARD CANNOT BE REDUCED BY USED BY ANOTHER BUILDING.
   (A)   No lot, yard, court, parking area, or other open space shall be so
reduced in area or dimension as to make any such area or dimension less than
the minimum requirement. No required open space provided about any building or
structure shall be included as part of any open space required for another
building or structure.
   (B)   The space occupied by a required private garage or parking area shall
be considered the same as any required open space provided about a principle
building, and such space shall not be reduced or included as any part of any
required open space for another building or structure.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.041 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS.
   The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the
required yards specified.
   (A)   In all yards. Porch awnings and canopies; steps which are necessary
for access to a permitted building, or for access to a zoning lot from a street
or alley; chimneys projecting not more than 18 inches into the yard; clothes
lines; flag poles; arbors, trellises, closed and open-type fences, and hedges
six feet or less in height, provided no such fence, the top rail of which is
between two and six feet above the roadway surface or no other ground level
sight obstructions, exceptions being trimmed tree trunks and poles, shall be
placed or permitted to remain on any corner or reversed corner lot within the
triangular area formed by the right-of-way lines and a line connecting them at
points 25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, or in the case
of a rounded right-of-way corner, from the intersection of the right-of-way
lines extended; and open fences exceeding six feet in height.
   (B)   In front yards. One-story bay windows projecting three feet or less
into the yard, and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet or less
into the yard. In the A-1 District, permitted roadside stands.
   (C)   In rear yards. Open decks not enclosed; attached or detached off-
street parking spaces; open off-street parking spaces; accessory sheds, tool
rooms, similar buildings, or structures for domestic or agricultural storage;
balconies; breezeways and open porches; one-story windows projecting three feet
or less into the yard; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet
or less into the yard.
   (D)   In side yards. Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting into the yard
for a distance not exceeding 10% of the required yard width, but in no case
exceeding 18 inches.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.042 CONVERSION OF DWELLINGS.
   The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any
dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or
families, shall be permitted only within a district in which a new building for
similar occupancy would be permitted under this chapter, and only when the
resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new
construction in such a district, with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per
dwelling unit, dimensions of yards, and other open spaces and off-street
parking. Each conversion shall be subject to such further requirements as may
be specified hereinafter with the subchapter applying to such district.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.043 MINIMUM GROUND FLOOR AREA CORNER LOTS.
   A one story dwelling or a one and one-half story, or two story dwelling
shall meet the minimum floor area standards in the Building Code, as adopted by
the county, and be at least 900 square feet with the length being no more than
four times the width.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.044 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY ACROSS CORNER LOTS.
   In any district, except B-2, on any lot, no fence, structure, or planting
shall be erected or maintained within 20 feet, measured horizontally from the
property line where they intersect on a street corner.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.045 ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
   Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and
other ordinances of the county, it being the intention hereof to exempt such
essential services from the application of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.046 FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   Fences, walls, and hedges located in a yard adjacent to a public
street and on property zoned R-1 or U-1 shall be no more than 42 inches in
height, provided the top rail is not between two and six feet above the roadway
surface or other ground level sight obstructions and the smooth, finished,
nonstructural, or dressed side of a fence, if any, shall be directed toward the
neighboring properties.
      (2)   Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed six feet in height,
except trimmed tree trunks and poles in any side or rear yard, and the smooth,
finished, nonstructural, or dressed side of the fence, if any, shall be
directed toward neighboring properties.
      (3)   All fences, walls, or hedges may be placed up to the property line,
except in cases of a corner lot or reversed corner lot, where they shall not be
placed within the triangular area formed by the right-of-way lines and a line
connecting them at a point 25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way
lines, or in the case of a rounded corner from the intersection of the right-
of-way lines extended.
      (4)   Fences up to ten feet in height shall be permitted in any I
District.
      (5)   (a)   All refuse and/or discard areas for all commercial,
industrial, and multi-family residential uses shall be screened on a minimum of
three sides by a six-foot solid or tight board fence.
         (b)   All refuse and/or discard areas for all commercial and
industrial uses which do not conform to all applicable provisions of this
section shall be made to conform within three years from the effective date of
this chapter. The Administrative Officer, or his or her designee, shall make
the determination if it is an unreasonable hardship to require existing refuse
and/or discard to be screened on a case-by-case basis.
      (6)   Snow fencing shall only be used on a temporary basis by public
jurisdictions for public safety purposes or in Agricultural Districts, or as a
permitted use for temporary festival/event enclosure purposes.
      (7)   Fencing shall not be allowed in floodways.
      (8)   Swimming pool fencing requirements are outlined in the County
Building Code.
   (B)   Optional.
      (1)   Barbed wire fences shall be permitted only in Agricultural or
Suburban Estate-1 Districts, and on review by the Zoning Board of Appeals in
Industrial Districts, and the bottom strand shall be a minimum of eight feet
above grade.
      (2)   Electric fences shall be permitted only in Agricultural, or
Suburban Estate-1 Districts, and only for the enclosure of livestock. Electric
fences shall not carry a charge greater than 25 milliamperes nor a pulsating
current lower than one-tenth second in a one-second cycle. All electric fence
charges shall carry the seal of an approved testing laboratory.
      (3)   Barbed wire and electric fences shall be prohibited within five
feet of a public sidewalk or within four feet of the street right-of-way line
where a public sidewalk does not exist. In the latter case, however, either
fence may be installed or constructed along the right-of-way line if the
property owner agrees to move the fence back the required distance within two
months after the installation of a public sidewalk.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.047 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Home occupation, major. MAJOR HOME OCCUPATIONS are home occupations
where customers and employees may come to the home and where the occupation:
      (1)   Shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit or one accessory
structure, and carried on by the inhabitants thereof and one employee not
residing on the parcel;
      (2)   Shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes, and the appearance of the structure shall not
be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner that
would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the
use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of
sounds or vibrations that carry beyond the premises;
      (3)   Shall have no more than 200 square feet of floor area used for the
home occupation;
      (4)   Shall have no signs present on the property except for one sign,
not exceeding two square feet and not illuminated;
      (5)   (a)   Shall not be conducted on the premises the business of
selling stocks of merchandise, supplies, or products, provided that incidental
retail sales may be made in connection with other permitted home occupations,
for example, a single-chair beauty parlor would be allowed to sell combs, hair
spray, and other miscellaneous items to customers.
         (b)   However, a dressmaker would be required to do only custom work
for specific clients and would not be allowed to develop stocks of dresses for
sale to the general public on-site.
      (6)   Shall have no storage or display of goods visible from outside the
structure;
      (7)   Shall have no highly explosive or combustible material used or
stored on the premises unless approved by the Fire Inspector. No activity shall
be allowed that would interfere with radio or television reception in the area,
nor shall there be any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, or
glare noticeable at or beyond the property line;
      (8)   Shall have adequate off street parking spaces available to
compensate for additional parking needs generated;
      (9)   Deliveries from commercial suppliers may be made more than once a
week, and the deliveries shall not be made from semi-tractor trailer trucks;
and
      (10)   Shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
         (a)   Single-chair beauty parlors and barber shops;
         (b)   Photo developing and printing;
         (c)   Organized classes with up to six students at a time;
         (d)   Television and other electric or electronic repair, excluding
major appliances such as refrigerators or storage;
         (e)   Upholstering;
         (f)   Dressmaking and millinery; and
         (g)   Woodworking, excluding cabinet making.
   (B)   Home occupation, minor. MINOR HOME OCCUPATIONS are home occupations
which shall not have non-resident customers and employees, and where:
      (1)   Shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the
inhabitants thereof and no other;
      (2)   Shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes, and the appearance of the structure shall not
be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner that
would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the
use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or other emission of
sounds or vibrations that carry beyond the premises;
      (3)   Shall have no more than 200 square feet of floor area used for the
home occupation;
      (4)   Shall have no advertising, display, or other indications of a home
occupation on the premises;
      (5)   Shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling
stocks of merchandise, supplies, or products, provided that orders previously
made by telephone or at a sales party may be filled on the premises. That is,
direct sales of products off display shelves, racks, or from inventory is not
allowed, but a person may pick up an order placed earlier as described above;
      (6)   Shall have no storage or display of goods visible from outside the
structure;
      (7)   Shall have no highly explosive or combustible material used or
stored on the premises unless approved by the Fire Inspector. No activity shall
be allowed that would interfere with radio or television reception in the area,
nor shall there be any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or
glare noticeable at or beyond the property line;
      (8)   Shall not create greater vehicle or pedestrian traffic than normal
for the district in which it is located, including commercial and general
delivery services;
      (9)   Shall have no use of material or equipment not recognized as being
part of the normal practices of owning and maintaining a residence allowed;
      (10)   (a)   Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the
contrary, garage, basement, yard, or other similar sales shall not be allowed
more than twice a year, and each sale shall not last more than 72 consecutive
hours, and only goods which have been generated from within the household and
not purchased elsewhere for resale.
         (b)   Sales shall be conducted on the owner’s property, except that
multiple family sales are permitted if they are held on the property of one of
the participants, and any such sale shall be considered to be a sale for all
participants;
      (11)   Shall have no deliveries from commercial suppliers made more than
once a week, and the deliveries shall not be made from semi-tractor trailer
trucks;
      (12)   Shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
         (a)   Artists and sculptors;
         (b)   Authors, desktop publishers, and composers;
         (c)   Home crafts for sale off-site;
         (d)   Office facility of clergy;
         (e)   Office facility of a salesperson, sales representative, or
manufacturer’s representative, provided that no transactions are made in person
on the premises;
         (f)   Address of convenience used solely for receiving and making
telephone calls including computer usage, mail, or keeping business records in
connection with a profession or occupation;
         (g)   Individual tutoring;
         (h)   Preserving and home cooking for sale off-site;
         (i)   Individual instrument and vocal instruction, provided that no
instrument may be amplified; and
         (j)   Telephone solicitation work.
      (13)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.048 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of the public streets and promote the safety and welfare of the
public by establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking and
loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use of the
property.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   An application for a building permit for a new or enlarged
building, structure, or use shall include a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully
dimensioned showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   In all districts, in connection with every building or part thereof
hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more,
which is to be occupied by uses requiring the receipt or distribution by
vehicles of materials and merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained
on the same premises with such building at least one off-street loading space
accessible from any alley, easement of access, or when there is no such alley
or easement of access from a street, plus one additional such loading space for
each 2,000 square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area so used in
excess of 20,000 square feet. Such space may occupy all or any part of any
required rear yard or upon authorization from the appropriate board of review
any part of any other yard or court space.
      (3)   In all districts, except B-2, an off-street parking area in the
open or in a garage shall be
provided in connection with the uses set forth herein after and to the extent
indicated therewith, in addition to the above required loading and unloading
spaces. Such areas in the case of R Districts and for dwellings in other
districts, shall be on the premises intended to be served; and in the case of
other districts, and in connection with uses other than property within 100
feet of any part of said premises and in the same or less restricted district.
      (4)   Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use and
developed in any Residential District in accordance with the requirements of
this section shall be used solely for the parking of passenger vehicles owned
and occupied.
   (C)   Units of measure.
      (1)   (a)   Floor area as employed in this parking and loading section in
the case of office, merchandising, or service types of use shall mean the gross
floor area of a building or structure used or intended to be used for service
to the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients, or tenants, including
areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of
merchandise.
         (b)   Floor area for the purposes of this section shall not include
any area used for storage accessory to the principle use, incidental repairs,
processing or packaging of merchandise, show windows, incidental management
offices, restrooms, utilities, and dressing/fitting rooms.
      (2)   Parking spaces shall not be less than eight and one-half feet wide
and 19 feet long or not less than 160 square feet in area exclusive of access
drives or aisles.
      (3)   Loading spaces shall not be less than ten feet wide, 50 feet in
length, and 14 feet in height, exclusive of access and turning areas.
   (D)   Schedule. Parking requirements shall be as follows, reference to
maximum number of patrons shall be based on the figure provided by fire code
for a given facility:
      (1)   Athletic field. Five parking spaces per acre;
      (2)   Auditorium/theater. One parking space for every four seats or one
parking space for every 150 square feet plus one for every two employees during
a maximum shift;
      (3)   Auto repair. Three per bay, plus one per employee during a maximum
shift;
      (4)   Auto gas and sales. Two parking spaces per pump, plus two per
service bay plus one per employee during a maximum shift;
      (5)   Banks and business offices. Four parking spaces per 1,000 square
feet, plus drive through requirements if applicable;
      (6)   Barber/beauty shop styling and tanning salons. Two parking spaces
per personal grooming station, plus one for every two employees during a
maximum shift;
      (7)   Bowling alleys. Six parking spaces per alley plus bar and
restaurant requirements, if applicable;
      (8)   Car wash. Six parking spaces per bay;
      (9)   Care homes. One parking space for every two residents, plus one for
each employee during a maximum shift;
      (10)   Churches. One parking space for every four sanctuary seats;
      (11)   Community center. One parking space for every three maximum
patrons;
      (12)   Daycare centers. One parking space for every two employees during
a maximum shift, plus one for every ten children served plus one per
institutional vehicle;
      (13)   Drive through facility. Six stacking spaces for each drive through
station or automatic teller machine, plus appropriate employee parking for
principle use;
      (14)   Dry cleaning. One parking space for every two employees during a
maximum shift, plus four for patrons;
      (15)   Durable goods sales (appliances, furniture, and the like). One
parking space per 500 square feet, plus one per employee during a maximum
shift;
      (16)   Elderly housing facility. Three parking spaces for every four
units, plus one per employee during a maximum shift;
      (17)   Fraternities, sororities, and boarding houses. One parking space
per lodging resident, plus one per employee during a maximum shift;
      (18)   Funeral home. One parking space per 50 square feet of public
access area, plus one per business vehicle;
      (19)   Group home/halfway house/boarding house. One parking space per
bedroom;
      (20)   Health recreation and physical training facility. Five parking
spaces per 1,000 square feet, plus additional parking for outdoor accessory use
if applicable;
      (21)   Hospital. One parking space per overnight bed, plus one per
affiliated doctor plus one per employee during a maximum shift, plus six per
1,000 square feet devoted to outpatient service;
      (22)   Laundromats. One parking space for every two washers;
      (23)   Manufacturing plants and testing labs. Three parking spaces for
every four employees during a maximum shift, plus one per business vehicle plus
four per 1,000 square feet devoted to office space;
      (24)   Medical, dental, or veterinary office or clinic. Two parking
spaces per treatment room, plus one per employee during a maximum shift;
      (25)   Motel, hotel, or apartment hotel. One parking space per unit, plus
one for every two employees during a maximum shift plus banquet, restaurant,
and/or bar requirements if applicable;
      (26)   Mobile home park. One parking space and one for every four units;
      (27)   Nursing home. One parking space per overnight bed, plus one per
affiliated doctor plus one per employee during a maximum shift;
      (28)   Park, neighborhood. Five parking spaces per first two acres, plus
one for each additional acre;
      (29)   Park, community. Five parking spaces per acre, plus requirements
for major facilities as noted elsewhere in this list if applicable;
      (30)   Residences. Two parking spaces per unit and for six-plexes or
greater; guest parking equal to 10% of the total dwelling units;
      (31)   Restaurants, taverns, or night clubs. One parking space for every
75 square feet of public floor area or for each two persons allowed by the fire
code, whichever is greater, plus drive through requirements if applicable;
      (32)   Retail, freestanding, and shopping centers. Five parking spaces
per 1,000 square feet gross floor area, and one for every two employees on a
maximum shift;
      (33)   Schools, elementary, and junior high. One parking space per
employee, plus one per class room, plus one per institutional vehicle;
      (34)   Schools, high schools. One parking space per employee, plus one
for every four students, plus one per institutional vehicle;
      (35)   Sports stadium, outdoor. One parking space for every three maximum
patrons, plus parking for buses;
      (36)   Swimming pool. One parking space for every three maximum patrons;
and
      (37)   Wholesale and warehouse. Two parking spaces per 1,000 square feet
for first 10,000 square feet, plus one per 2,000 square feet for the remaining
space with office area parking calculated separately at four per 1,000 square
feet.
   (E)   Development standards.
      (1)   Off-street accessory parking areas shall be of usable shape and
shall be improved in accordance with requirements of the County Engineer with
asphalt cement concrete, Portland cement concrete, or alternate equivalent
materials acceptable to the County Engineer, and so graded and drained as to
dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area. Any lighting used to
illuminate such parking shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from
adjoining premises in any R District and in accordance with illumination
standards further described in this chapter.
      (2)   Parking lot layout shall be designed so the maneuvering
requirements are accomplished without backing into adjacent public streets.
Stack parking shall not be allowed to meet parking requirements for uses other
than one- and two-family uses.
   (F)   Exceptions. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, on appeal, authorize a
modification, reduction, or waiver of the foregoing requirements. Such
modification, reduction, or waiver shall be justified by the particular nature
of the use, or other exception, situation, or condition.
   (G)   Parking, storage, or use of recreational vehicle.
      (1)   No recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored on any lot in a
Residential District except in a required side or rear yard providing all yard
setbacks are met by the recreation vehicle and the vehicle is parked on an
impervious surface. However, such equipment may be parked anywhere on
residential premises for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours during loading
and unloading no more than twice in any consecutive period of seven days. At
least 30 hours must separate each occurrence. No such equipment shall be used
for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a
residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use, however, that
such equipment may be used for the housing of guests of occupants of the
principle resident if:
         (a)   Occupancy shall not exceed 30 consecutive days; and
         (b)   No charge is made for such occupancy.
      (2)   No recreational vehicle shall be stored out of doors on residential
premises unless it is in condition for safe and effective performance of the
function for which it is intended or can be made so at a cost not exceeding the
value of the equipment in its existing state. In no case shall any such
equipment be so stored for a period of more than six months if not in condition
for safe and efficient performance of the function for which it is intended.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.049 VALIDITY OF EXISTING APPLICATIONS FOR BUILDING PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout,
plans, construction, size, or designated use of any development, building,
structure, or part thereof, for which official approvals and required building
permits have been granted before the enactment of this chapter as amended, the
construction of which, conforming with such plans shall have been started prior
to the effective date of this chapter, as amended, and completion thereof
carried on in a normal manner within the subsequent six-month period, and not
discontinued until completion, except for reasons beyond the builder’s control.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.050 USES AUTHORIZED BY THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   Any use or structure as regulated by the Zoning Board of Appeals in the
various districts shall be accumulative in nature beginning with the most
restrictive district.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.051 PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on
a lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one principle
building on one lot unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.052 MINIMUM LOT SIZE.
   Every residential building hereafter erected on a lot or parcel of land
created subsequent to the effective date of this chapter shall provide a lot or
parcel of land having not less than the minimum area and width specified for
the particular zoning district in which it is located.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.053 ADULT REGULATED USES.
   To prevent undue adverse effects upon adjacent areas in I-1and I-2 Districts
from uses, the following will apply:
   (A)   Not more than two such adult use special use will be established
within 1,000 feet of each other;
   (B)   Adult special uses must not be located closer than 1,000 feet in any
direction to the following zoning districts and land uses: Agricultural,
Suburban Estates, Residential, or Commercial Districts, public or private
schools, licensed daycare centers, churches or religious centers, public parks,
or designated pedestrian/bicycle paths;
   (C)   No building in which adult use special use operates shall display mat
photos, live models, or drawings on the exterior of said building. Any displays
of such materials, photos, live models, or drawings will be limited to the
interior portion of the building which cannot readily be seen from any
entrance, exit, or exterior window opening.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.054 ORGANIZATION.
   The administration of this chapter is hereby vested in three offices of the
government of the county. They are as follows: Administrative Officer, Zoning
Board of Appeals, and County Board.
   (A)   Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer of the county, and
such deputies or assistants that have been, or shall be, duly appointed by the
County Board, shall enforce this chapter, and in addition thereto, and in
furtherance of such authority shall:
      (1)   Issue all zoning certificates and certificates of occupancy, and
make and maintain records thereof;
      (2)   Conduct inspection of buildings, structures, and use of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;
      (3)   Transmit to the Clerk of any city or village copies of all requests
for amendments and special uses within one and one-half miles of their
municipal boundaries for review and recommendations;
      (4)   Provide and maintain a public information service relative to all
matters arising out of this chapter, and initiate, direct, and review from time
to time a study of the provisions of the chapter and make reports of his or her
recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals;
      (5)   Transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals applications for appeals,
variances, or other matters on which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to
pass, and act as secretary to the Zoning Board of Appeals maintaining permanent
and current records of this chapter, including, but not limited to, all maps,
amendments, special conditional uses, variances, appeals, and applications
therefor;
      (6)   Issue certificates of occupancy regulating the erection of
buildings or structures and use of land for periods not to exceed ten days for
specific purposes such as temporary carnivals, music festivals, churches,
revival meetings, charities, and other uses of a similar nature, any of which
has less than 200 persons in attendance and are not detrimental to the public
health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, or general welfare; provided,
however, that said use of operation and any incidental temporary structures or
tents are in conformance with all other resolutions and codes of the county;
      (7)   Issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a mobile home
dwelling during a period of not to exceed six months to allow the applicant of
a building permit for a single-family dwelling to occupy said mobile home
dwelling during construction of the single-family dwelling. Said temporary
occupancy permit may be renewed for one additional six-month period;
      (8)   Issue a permit for an accessory building to be constructed prior to
the construction of the principle building on a lot when said accessory
building is needed for protection of equipment and materials used in the
construction of the principle building. Any permit granted under this provision
shall be granted only after adequate assurances have been provided, and that
the construction of the principle building will be initiated within one year
from the issuance of the permit for the accessory building; and
      (9)   Authorize variances of 10% or less of the regulations as to
location of structures or as to bulk requirements under such regulations.
   (B)   County Board. The County Board shall discharge the following duties
under this chapter:
      (1)   Appoint the Administrative Officer whose responsibility it should
be to enforce the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Appoint members to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided for in
the State Revised Statutes and in this chapter;
      (3)   Receive and decide upon all recommendations concerning adoption,
amendment, or repeal of this chapter submitted to them by the Zoning Board of
Appeals;
      (4)   Receive from the Zoning Board of Appeals all recommendations on the
effectiveness of this chapter; and
      (5)   To decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter.
   (C)   Zoning certificates.
      (1)   Issuance of zoning certificates. Except as hereinafter provided, no
permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by any
officer, department, or employee of the county unless the application for such
permit has been examined by the Administrative Officer. Any permit issued in
compliance with this chapter shall indicate thereon that the proposed building
or structure complies with all the provisions of this chapter. Any permit or
certificate issued in conflict with the provisions of the chapter shall be null
and void.
      (2)   Plats. In order to ensure that the building or structure conforms
with all the provisions of this chapter, the Administrative Officer may require
the following prior to the issuance of a building permit:
         (a)   A plat (original or reproduction thereof), in duplicate of the
piece or parcel of land, lot, lots, block or blocks, drawn to scale showing the
actual dimensions, as certified by a registered land surveyor registered with
the state, as a true copy of the piece or parcel, lot, lots, block, or blocks,
or portions thereof, according to the registered or recorded plat of such land;
and
         (b)   A plat, in duplicate, drawn to scale in such form as may, from
time to time, be prescribed by the Administrative Officer, showing the ground
area, height, and bulk of the building or structure, the building lines in
relation to lot lines, the use to be made of the building structure or land,
and such other information as may be required by the Administrative Officer for
the proper enforcement of this chapter.
   (D)   Certificate of occupancy. No building, or addition thereto,
constructed after the effective date of this chapter, shall be occupied, and no
land vacant on the effective date of this chapter shall be used for any purpose
until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Administrative Officer.
No change in a use, other than that of a permitted use to another permitted
use, shall be made until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Administrative Officer. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the use
or occupancy complies with the provisions of this chapter.
      (1)   Application for certificate of occupancy. Every application for a
building permit shall be deemed to be an application for a certificate of
occupancy. Every application for a certificate of occupancy for a new use of
land where no building permit is required shall be made directly to the
Administrative Officer.
      (2)   Issuance of certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy
for a building, or portion thereof, constructed after the effective date of
this chapter, shall be issued until construction has been completed and the
premises inspected and certified by the Administrative Officer to be in
conformity with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning certificate
and building permit was based. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate of
occupancy, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued to be valid for a
period not to exceed six months from its date during the completion of any
addition or during partial occupancy of the premises. Reasons in writing for
refusal to issue a certificate of occupancy shall be forwarded to the applicant
no later than 14 days after the Administrative Officer is notified that the
building or premises are ready for occupancy.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.055 CREATION OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established under the applicable
provisions of the State Revised Statutes, is the Zoning Board of Appeals
referred to in this chapter. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five
members and two alternate members appointed by the Chairperson of the County
Board and approved by the County Board to serve respectively for the following
terms: one for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four
years and one for five years, the successor to each member so appointed to
serve for a term of five years, and the alternate members to serve
respectively, one for four years and one for five years. Alternate members
shall serve as members of the Board only in the absence of regular members,
with the alternate member with the greatest amount of time remaining in his or
her term to have priority over the alternate member in determining which
alternate member shall serve in the absence of a regular member. One of the
members so appointed shall be named as Chairperson at the time of his or her
appointment, and in case of a vacancy the appointing power shall designate a
Chairperson.
      (2)   No person who resides in any congressional township wherein an
incumbent member of the Zoning Board of Appeals resides may be appointed a
member of the same Zoning Board of Appeals to serve during any part of the term
of office during which such incumbent member residing in said township
continues to serve, and all members of the Zoning Board of Appeals thereafter
created shall be residents of separate congressional townships at the time of
their appointments. The appointing authority shall have the power to remove any
member of the Board for cause after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled
by the appointing authority for the unexpired term of any member whose place
has become vacant.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby vested with the
following jurisdiction and authority:
      (1)   To hear all applications for amendments to this chapter and report
their findings and recommendations to the County Board in the manner prescribed
in this chapter;
      (2)   Receive from the Administrative Officer his or her recommendations
as related to the effectiveness of this chapter and report its conclusions and
recommendations to the County Board not less frequently than once a year;
      (3)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the Administrative Officer under this chapter;
      (4)   To hear and pass upon the applications for variances from the terms
provided in this chapter in the manner prescribed and subject to the standards
established herein;
      (5)   To hear and pass on all applications for special uses in the manner
prescribed in this chapter; and
      (6)   To hear, interpret, and decide all matters referred to it or upon
which it is required to pass under this chapter.
   (C)   Meetings and rules. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such times as the Zoning Board of
Appeals may determine. All hearings conducted by said Board shall be open to
the public. Any person may appear and testify at the hearing either in person
or by duly authorized agent or attorney. The Chairperson, or in his or her
absence the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
hearings and other official actions. A copy of every rule, regulation, order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
filed immediately in the office of the Administrative Officer and shall be a
public record. The Board shall adopt its own rules and procedures not in
conflict with this chapter or with the applicable State Revised Statutes, and
select or appoint such officers as it deems necessary.
   (D)   The hearing procedure. The following rules for the Zoning Board of
Appeals have been duly adopted by the County Board to govern the general
procedures by which Zoning Board of Appeals hearings are conducted. These rules
apply in instances where administrative or quasi-judicial action is to be
taken, not legislative or policy acts.
      (1)   All hearings of the public body shall be subject to the State Open
Meetings Act.
      (2)   The Chairperson may impose reasonable limitations on evidence or
testimony presented by persons and parties, such as time limits and barring the
repetitious, irrelevant, or immaterial testimony. Time limits, if imposed,
shall be fair and equally administered. The public body shall not be bound by
strict rules of evidence; however, the irrelevant and immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence shall not be admissible. The Chairperson shall rule on all
questions related to the determination of the qualification of a party as an
“interested party” (see division (D)(7) below) and admissibility of evidence,
which ruling may be overruled by a majority of the public body in attendance.
The Chairperson may impose reasonable conditions on the hearing process based
on the following factors:
         (a)   The complexity of the issue(s);
         (b)   Whether the witness possesses special expertise;
         (c)   Whether the testimony reflects a matter of taste or personal
opinion, or concerns a disputed issue of fact;
         (d)   The degree to which the witnesses’ testimony relates to the
factors to be considered in approving or denying the proposal; and
         (e)   Such other factors appropriate for the hearing.
      (3)   The Chairperson may take such actions as are required to maintain a
fair and orderly hearing.
      (4)   A record of the proceedings shall be made as directed by the public
body.
      (5)   At a public hearing a petitioner may appear on his or her own
behalf or may be represented by an attorney.
      (6)   In addition to the petitioner, any person may appear and
participate at the hearing.
      (7)   If the notice of the pending public hearing so provides, persons
wishing to appear as interested parties with the right of cross-examination
shall identify themselves as such by completing and filing an appearance with
the Zoning and Building office at the County Building no later than five
business days before the date of the meeting on appearance forms available from
the County Zoning Building office during regular business hours, and the
Chairperson shall determine if such persons are interested parties based on the
degree of impact the issue(s) has/have on such person. The Chairperson shall
qualify someone as an interested party based on the following guidelines,
although it is recognized that there may be other relevant factors considered
or that the public body may overrule the Chairperson by a majority vote of
those in attendance:
         (a)   Those persons designated by statute or ordinance who received a
notice of the public hearing via the postal service;
         (b)   Persons who have a direct property or economic interest; and
         (c)   Representatives of a duly organized group with a specific
interest in a subject issue such as a neighborhood association, environmental
organization, or those with an interest in a specific public policy issue as it
relates to the subject of the public hearing.
      (8)   To avoid repetition, the Chairperson may require that people with a
similar interest in the proceeding select among themselves a spokesperson to
present their position.
      (9)   The Chairperson may determine the order of presentation of
evidence, which shall generally be as follows:
         (a)   Presentation by staff of its written report, if any, oral
presentation of additional or conflicting information, if any, and questions
from the public body of staff regarding said report and additional comments;
         (b)   Testimony and other evidence by the petitioner;
         (c)   The public body examination of the petitioner’s witnesses and
other evidence;
         (d)   Cross-examination of the petitioner’s witnesses and other
evidence by interested parties; and
         (e)   Testimony and other evidence by interested parties according to
the following sequence:
            1.   Proponents.
               a.   Present testimony and other evidence;
               b.   Questions from the public body; and
               c.   Cross-examination by interested parties.
            2.   Opponents.
               a.   Present testimony and other evidence;
               b.   Questions from the public body; and
               c.   Cross-examination by interested parties.
            3.   Other.
               a.   Present testimony and other evidence;
               b.   Questions from the public body; and
               c.   Cross-examination by interested parties.
         (f)   Statements by persons who have not qualified as interested
parties according to the following sequence:
            1.   Proponents.
               a.   Comments or questions; and
               b.   Questions from the public body.
            2.   Opponents.
               a.   Comments or questions; and
               b.   Questions from the public body.
            3.   Other.
               a.   Comments or questions; and
               b.   Questions from the public body (the Chairperson shall
determine if cross-examination of any of the persons speaking during this phase
of the public hearing is appropriate).
         (g)   Closing/rebuttal by petitioner.
      (10)   At the conclusion of an evidentiary portion of the public hearing,
the Zoning Board of Appeals may, among other actions, act on the proposal, move
to deliberate its decision on the evidence presented, or continue the hearing
to a date, time, and location certain, or pursuant to, further notice.
      (11)   These rules for public hearing may be amended by a vote of a
majority of the public body (rules can be amended during the public hearing
based on circumstances, ruling by the Chairperson, and which ruling may be over
ruled by a majority of the public body in attendance).
   (E)   Finality of decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals. All decisions and
findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeals or variances after a hearing
shall, in all instances, be the final administrative decisions and shall be
subject to judicial review as may be provided by law.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.056 DISTRICTS AND MAP.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the county is hereby divided into 23
classes of districts as follows:
AG-1 Agricultural Preservation District
AG-2 General Agricultural District
B-1  Neighborhood Business District
B-2  Central Business District
B-3  Community Business District
B-4  Highway Intensive Business District
C-1  Conservation District
C-2  Conservation District
I-1  Light Industrial District
I-2  General Industrial District
O-1  Office District
ORT  Office/Research and Technology District
PUD  Planned Unit Development District
R-1  One-Family Residence District
R-2  One-Family Residence District
R-3  One- and Two-Family Residence District
R-4  One- to Six-Family Residence District
R-5  Multi-Family Dwelling District
R-6  Multi-Family Residence District
R-7  Mobile Home District
SE-1 Suburban Estates Low Density District
SE-2 Suburban Estates Medium Density District
U-1  University/College District
 
   (B)   The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on a
map entitled “Zoning Map, County of Rock Island, Illinois,” hereinafter
referred to as the “zoning map,” which accompanies and is hereby made a part of
this chapter. The district boundary lines on said map are intended to follow
lot lines, the centerlines of streets or alleys, the centerline of streets or
alleys projected, railroad right-of-way lines, or the corporate limit lines,
all as they existed at the time of enactment of this chapter; but when a
district boundary line does not clearly coincide with lot lines, it shall be
determined by scaling.
   (C)   Where a district boundary lines divides a lot which was in single
ownership and of record at the time of enactment of this chapter, the use
authorized on and the other district requirements applying to the less
restricted portion of such lot is more than 50 feet beyond said dividing
district boundary line, such less restricted use shall be limited to the
portion of the lot lying within 50 feet of said boundary line.
   (D)   Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines
shall be determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals Authority according to the
rules and regulations which it may adopt.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.057 FEES.
   (A)   All applications for map amendments, special uses, and variances filed
for or on behalf of the property owner, shall be accompanied by payment of a
fee as adopted by the County Board from time to time. No application shall be
considered complete and subject to review by the Zoning Board of Appeals until
such fee has been paid. Where a LESA (land evaluation site assessment) report
is required, the appropriate fee will be collected and forwarded to the County
Soil and Water Conservation District for the preparation of the LESA report.
   (B)   Communication tower fees:
      (1)   New tower will have a fee of $30 per foot of tower height.
      (2)   A co-locate will have a fee of $1,500.
      (3)   All other improvements/repairs shall be based upon the bid price of
the work being done and referred to the fee schedule.
   (C)   Temporary use permits: $125.
   (D) Zoning Board of Appeals*:
      (1)   Rezoning to any AG, SE, R or PUD, and any not listed plus any
special use within these Districts:
 
5 acres or less       $400
5+ acres to 20 acres  $400 plus $20 per acre for acres 6-20
Greater than 20 acres $700 plus $15 per acre for acres over 20
 
      (2)   Rezoning to any U, C, O, B, I, or ORT, and any special use within
these Districts:
 
5 acres or less       $800
5+ acres to 20 acres  $800 plus $20 per acre for acres 6-20
Greater than 20 acres $1,100 plus $15 per acre for acres over 20
   * In addition to the ZBA hearing fees, the cost of publishing any notice
required to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
will be paid by the applicant prior to the case being heard by the Zoning Board
of Appeals. The applicant is also responsible for any applicable fees related
to consultation under the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act (EcoCAT)
and Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act (LESA).
      (3)   The fees found in this division (D) shall become effective on May
1, 2024.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-1)
(Res. passed 4-19-2005; Ord. passed 5-16-2023; Ord. 2024-04-A, passed 4-16-
2024)
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS
§ 154.070 HEIGHT LIMITS.
   Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this chapter shall not apply:
   (A)   To barns, silos, or other farm buildings, provided these are not less
than 50 feet from every lot line, to church spires, belfries, cupolas and
domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, masts, and aerials; to
parapet walls extending not more than four feet above the limiting height of
the building. However, if, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, such
structures would adversely affect adjoining or adjacent properties, such
greater height shall not be authorized except by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (B)   To places of public assembly such as churches, schools, and other
permitted public and semi-public buildings not to exceed six stories or 75
feet, provided that for each foot by which the height of such building exceeds
the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards
shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the side and
rear yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the
district.
   (C)   To bulkheads, conveyors, derricks, elevators, penthouses, water tanks,
monitors, and scenery lofts; to monuments, fire towers, hose towers, cooling
towers, grain elevators, gas holders, or other structures, where the
manufacturing process requires a greater height. Where a permitted use for the
highest building otherwise is permitted in the district.
   (D)   To hospitals, provided that for each foot by which the height of such
building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its
side and rear yards shall be increased in width and depth by an additional one-
half foot over the side and rear yards required for the highest building
otherwise permitted in the district.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.071 LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Existing lots of record. In any district where dwellings are
permitted, a one-family detached dwelling may be constructed on any lot of
official record at the time of enactment of this chapter, provided that
proposed yard spaces satisfy requirements stipulated for the district in which
said lot is located, or requirements as may be modified by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
   (B)   Lots unserved by sewer and water. In any district where neither public
water supply nor public sanitary sewer is accessible, the otherwise specified
lot area and width requirement shall be 20,000 square feet and 100 feet,
respectively, provided however, that where a public water supply system is
accessible and will be installed, these requirements shall be 10,000 square
feet and 75 feet respectively, provided further, that the Health Officer has
certified that the said areas will be large enough to satisfy all applicable
requirements concerning water supply and the disposal of sanitary wastes.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.072 LOT AREA PER FAMILY.
   (A)   Where part or all of the off-street parking spaces required for
dwelling are provided within the principle building, the minimum lot area per
dwelling unit specified may be reduced by a maximum of 20%.
   (B)   Division (A) above shall be in accordance with the following formula:
a/b x 20%, where:
      (1)   “a” is the number of spaces provided within the principle building;
and
      (2)   “b” is the number of spaces required for the dwellings.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.073 FRONT YARD EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Front yard requirements do not apply to bay windows or balconies
occupying, in the aggregate, not more than one-third of the front wall,
provided that these projections come entirely within planes drawn from either
main corner of the front wall, making the interior angle of 22 and one-half
degrees in the horizontal planes with the front wall; to chimneys, flues, belt
courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, uncovered porches, or similar features not
over three feet high above the average finished grand and distant five feet
from every lot line.
   (B)   Interior lots in any district where the average depth of two or more
existing front yards on lots within 150 feet in either direction of the lot in
question and within the same block front less than the average depth of said
existing front yards or the average depth on the two lots immediately
adjoining, provided, however, that the depth of a front yard in any R District
shall be at least ten feet and need not exceed 30 feet.
   (C)   Corner lots. In any district where the average depth of two or more
existing front yards on lots within 150 feet of the lot in question and within
the same front is less than the least front yard described, the depth of the
front yard on such lot shall not be less than the average depth of said
existing front yards or depth of the front yard on the lot immediately
adjoining; provided, however, that the depth of a front yard on a lot in any R
District shall be at least ten feet and need not exceed 30 feet, except as
provided in §
154.045.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.074 SIDE YARD EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Along any district boundary line, an abutting side yard on a lot in
the less restricted district shall have at least a width equal to that required
in the more restricted district; and in a B-2 or I District, on a lot abutting
a lot in any R District, such side yard for a building higher than the limiting
height in such R District shall be increased by three feet for each story over
such limiting height.
   (B)   Side yards shall be increased in width by two inches for each foot by
which the length of the side wall of the building, adjacent to the side yard,
exceeds 40 feet in any R-1 or R-2 District, or 50 feet in any R-3 District.
   (C)   Side yards may be reduced by three inches from the otherwise required
least width or sum of the least widths for each foot by which a lot of record,
at the time of enactment of this chapter, is narrower than the lot width
specified for the district in which the lot is located in the case of buildings
not higher than two and one-half stories, and in case the owner of record does
not own any adjoining property; provided, however, that no side yard shall be
narrower at any point than three feet.
   (D)   No part of any accessory building shall be nearer a side street lot
line than the least depth of any front yard required along such side street.
   (E)   Side yards may be varied where the side walls of a building are not
parallel with the side lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular, in which
case the average width, or narrower than three feet in any case.
   (F)   (1)   Structures or projections into side yards may be permitted as
follows:
         (a)   Fences, plantings, or walls not over six feet above the average
natural grade;
         (b)   Fire escapes three feet from a side lot line; and
         (c)   Bays and balconies not more than three feet from the building,
provided these projections are entirely within planes drawn from either main
corner of the side wall, making an interior angle of 22 and one-half degrees in
the horizontal plane with the side wall.
      (2)   The sum of the lengths of such projection shall not exceed one-
third of the length of the side yard.
   (G)   Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sill, pilasters, lintels,
ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters, and the like into or over a
required side yard not more than one and one-half feet.
   (H)   Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, stoops or similar features not
higher than the elevation of the ground story of the building and distant three
feet from a side lot line.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.075 REAR YARD EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Rear yards may be reduced by three inches from the required least
depth for each foot by which a lot at the time of enactment of this chapter is
less than 100 feet deep, in the case of a building not higher than two and one-
half stories, and in the case the owner of record does not own adjoining
property to the rear, provided, however, that no required rear yard shall be
less than ten feet deep.
   (B)   (1)   Structures or projections into rear yards may be permitted as
follows:
         (a)   Fences, plantings, or walls not over six feet above the average
natural grade;
         (b)   Fire escapes six feet from the building; and
         (c)   Bays and balconies not more than three feet from the building,
provided these projections are entirely within the planes drawn from either
main corner of the rear wall, making an interior angle of 22 and one-half
degrees in the horizontal plane with the rear wall.
      (2)   The sum of the lengths of such projections shall not exceed one-
half of the width of the rear wall.
   (C)   Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilaster lintels,
ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters and the like, into or over a
required rear yard not more than one and one-half feet.
   (D)   Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, or similar features not more than
ten feet into a required rear yard, nor:
      (1)   Closer than six feet of an alley;
      (2)   Within ten feet of a rear lot line nor an alley lot line; or
      (3)   Within six feet of an accessory building.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.076 SUPPLEMENTAL YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   When 40% or more of the frontage on the same side of the street is
improved with buildings that have a front yard that is greater or less than the
required front yard in the district, a building may project to the average
front yard so established.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a lot of record has an average width that is 20% or
more less that the minimum average width required in the district in which it
is located, the width of the side yards may be reduced to 10% of the average
width of the lot.
      (2)   No side yard shall be less than three feet in width unless
authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (C)   The required front yard setbacks on corner lots shall be provided on
both streets where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets.
   (D)   On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on
each street.
   (E)   (1)   Temporary structures that are used in conjunction with
construction work only may be permitted in any district during the period that
the construction work is in progress.
      (2)   Such temporary structures shall be removed upon completion of the
construction work.
      (3)   This temporary structure shall not be used as a dwelling.
   (F)   Exterior storage of goods, materials, or equipment shall not be
permitted in any AG-1, AG-2,
SE-1, SE-2, or R Districts, or any other district except as explicitly
authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
AG-1 AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT
§ 154.090 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   (1)   The AG-1 District is established to conserve farmland and to
encourage continued agricultural activities, thereby helping to ensure that
sustainable agriculture will continue as a long term land use and a viable
economic activity within the District. The AG-1 District is also established to
preserve natural features and the rural landscape, while allowing low density
residential development that minimizes its impact on agricultural land, farming
operations, and sensitive environmental features. The preferred use in the AG-
1 District is agriculture.
      (2)   The District is intended to permit a range of uses related to
agriculture, to encourage preservation of large blocks of farmland, and to
permanently protect from development the tracts of land which remain after
permitted residential development has occurred.
   (B)   More specifically, the District is established to severely restrict
non-farm development in predominantly agricultural areas in order to:
      (1)   Preserve productive agricultural land for continued food and fiber
production;
      (2)   Protect productive farms from encroachment by incompatible non-farm
uses;
      (3)   Maintain the existing agricultural processing and related service
industries; and
      (4)   Preserve the maximum freedom of operation for those legitimate
agricultural purposes permitted in this District.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.091 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the AG-1 District:
   (A)   Agriculture;
   (B)   Dwelling, single-family detached (one per tax parcel);
   (C)   Home occupation, minor;
   (D)   Private stable;
   (E)   Roadside stand offering for sale only products grown on the premises;
   (F)   Transmission and distribution lines, and pipelines of public utility
companies within existing public rights-of-way;
   (G)   Public parks and forest preserves;
   (H)   Uses customarily accessory to farm operations; and
   (I)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.092 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the AG-1 District:
   (A)   Small wind energy systems;
   (B)   Solar, private; and
   (C)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.093 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the AG-1 District when authorized:
   (A)   Airstrips/runways and heliports;
   (B)   Aircraft hangars/tie downs;
   (C)   Agribusiness;
   (D)   Battery energy storage system (BESS);
   (E)   Bulk storage of fuel and fertilizers;
   (F)   Cemetery;
   (G)   Churches;
   (H)   Commercial excavation of natural materials and improvements of a
stream, lake river channel, and removal of dirt and/or topsoil, quarry, or
borrow pits;
   (I)   Commercial solar energy facility;
   (J)   Commercial wind energy facility;
   (K)   Daycare home;
   (L)   Density increase for farm dwellings on a single 40-acre parcel when 40
acres per dwelling requirement is met on an entire farmstead;
   (M)   Government buildings;
   (N)   Grain elevator;
   (O)   Home occupation, major;
   (P)   Kennels;
   (Q)   Mobile home dwelling for a period of one year with the right of
renewal for additional periods of one year for those instances where a unique
and substantial hardship is found to be in existence for the protection of
property or for the shelter of an immediate blood relative with a severe
physical condition, with appropriate documentation;
   (R)   Large wind energy system;
   (S)   Recreational use, seasonal;
   (T)   Public stable;
   (U)   Recreational camps;
   (V)   Schools;
   (W)   Rural residential building lot; and
   (X)   Any other similar use deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.094 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No structure shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet for the
principle structure.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.095 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be met for primary structures.
Accessory structures shall meet the requirements of §
154.039.
 
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Depth Least Side Yard Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
                                    Width
40 acre  165 feet  40 feet          15 feet         30 feet       40 feet
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
AG-2 GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 154.110 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   The AG-2 General Agricultural District is established to protect and
maintain the agricultural economy and the open space and natural features of
rural areas of the county in order to protect lands for continued farming,
allow non-farm residential development on a limited basis, and minimize
conflicts between agricultural and non-agricultural areas.
   (B)   (1)   The AG-2 District is also established to protect those
agricultural lands which, due to their location, soils, and use for
agricultural activities, warrant protection from indiscriminate development.
      (2)   However, their proximity to existing development, combined with
pressures for new development, makes these lands unsuitable for preservation
according to the more restrictive regulations of the AG-1 Agricultural
Preservation District.
      (3)   The AG-2 District is also intended to protect those agricultural
lands that would otherwise be subject to residential subdivision activity which
could render these important farmlands useless for farming.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.111 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the AG-2 District:
   (A)   Agriculture;
   (B)   Cemeteries;
   (C)   Churches;
   (D)   Dwelling, single-family detached (one per tax parcel);
   (E)   Governmental uses;
   (F)   Greenhouses, commercial;
   (G)   Home occupation (non-impact, minor impact);
   (H)   Nurseries, commercial;
   (I)   Private stable;
   (J)   Public parks and forest preserves;
   (K)   Roadside stand offering for sale only products grown on the premises;
   (L)   Schools;
   (M)   Transmission and distribution lines, and pipelines of public utility
companies within existing public rights-of-way;
   (N)   Uses customarily accessory to farm operations; and
   (O)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.112 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the AG-2 District:
   (A)   Small wind energy systems;
   (B)   Solar, private; and
   (C)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.113 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the AG-2 District when authorized:
   (A)   Airstrips/runways and heliports;
   (B)   Aircraft hangars/tie downs;
   (C)   Agribusiness;
   (D)   Auction barns;
   (E)   Battery energy storage system (BESS);
   (F)   Bulk storage of fuel and fertilizers;
   (G)   Commercial excavation of natural materials and improvements of a
stream, lake, or river channel, and removal of dirt and or topsoil, quarry, or
borrow pits;
   (H)   Commercial solar energy facility;
   (I)   Commercial wind energy facility;
   (J)   Daycare home;
   (K)   Density increase for residential dwellings;
   (L)   Government buildings;
   (M)   Grain elevator;
   (N)   Home occupation (major impact);
   (O)   Kennels, animal hospitals, veterinary clinics;
   (P)   Landscape contractors;
   (Q)   Large wind energy system;
   (R)   Mobile home dwelling for a period of one year with the right of
renewal for additional periods of one year for those instances where a unique
and substantial hardship is found to be in existence for the protection of
property or for the shelter of an immediate blood relative with a severe
physical condition, with appropriate documentation;
   (S)   Public stable;
   (T)   Public or private recreational facilities (for example, golf course,
marina, and boat dock);
   (U)   Recreational camps;
   (V)   Recreational use, seasonal;
   (W)   Recreational vehicle parks;
   (X)   Residential care homes;
   (Y)   Rural residential building lot;
   (Z)   Temporary uses; and
   (AA)   Any other similar used deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.114 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No structure shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet for the
principle structure.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
Cross-references:
   Building, construction regulations, see
Chapter 150
§ 154.115 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The following minimum requirements shall be met for primary
structures.
   (B)   Accessory structures shall meet the requirements of §
154.039.
 
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Depth Least Side Yard Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
                                    Width
15 acres 165 feet  40 feet          15 feet         30 feet       40 feet
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
SE-1 SUBURBAN ESTATES LOW DENSITY DISTRICT
§ 154.130 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   The SE-1 Suburban Estates District is established to provide for
single-family detached housing opportunities in a rural setting at a low
density and to preserve open space and natural features. This District is
intended to provide a natural buffer between the strictly urban characteristics
of the SE-2 Suburban Estates Medium Density District and the R-1 Residential
District.
   (B)   The primary difference between the SE-1 and the SE-2 Districts is lot
size and the allowance of livestock.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.131 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the SE-1 District:
   (A)   Farm;
   (B)   Livestock not less than 100 feet from residentially zoned private
property;
   (C)   Nursery or greenhouse;
   (D)   Structure for storage or treatment of seeds;
   (E)   Roadside stand selling products grown on premises;
   (F)   Dwelling, single-family detached (one per tax parcel); and
   (G)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.132 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the SE-1 District:
   (A)   Private garages or parking areas;
   (B)   Living quarters for persons employed on the premises;
   (C)   Small wind energy systems;
   (D)   Solar private; and
   (E)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.133 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the SE-1 District when authorized:
   (A)   Battery energy storage system (BESS);
   (B)   Commercial solar energy facility;
   (C)   Commercial wind energy facility;
   (D)   Daycare home;
   (E)   Grain elevator;
   (F)   Kennel with buildings and outdoor facilities at least 100 feet from
residentially zoned private property;
   (G)   Large wind energy system;
   (H)   Recreational facilities such as golf courses, country clubs and tennis
courts with no building or pool not less than 100 feet from any lot in an R
District;
   (I)   Recreational use, seasonal;
   (J)   Riding stable, subject to:
      (1)   (a)   All buildings in which horses are kept shall be at least 200
feet from any lot line contiguous with any residentially zoned lot.
         (b)   Animals shall not be permitted to graze or be ridden within 50
feet of any residentially zoned property, and shall not be ridden off the
premises;
      (2)   All wastes shall be disposed of in accordance with any applicable
laws, regulations, or policies of any agency having jurisdiction over such
matters; and
      (3)   No odors shall be discernable at the perimeter of the site.
   (K)   Rural residential building lot;
   (L)   Utility stations without service yard storage; and
   (M)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.134 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No principle structure shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35
feet.
   (B)   Farm buildings such as barns, silos, and windmills, and places of
public assembly, such as schools and other permitted public and semi-public
buildings, shall not to exceed six stories or 75 feet, provided that for each
foot by which the height of such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise
permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in width
or depth by an additional foot over the side and rear yards required for the
highest building otherwise permitted in the District.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.135 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be met for primary structures.
Accessory structures shall meet the requirements of §
154.039.
 
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Depth Least Side Yard Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
                                    Width
5 acres  165 feet  40 feet          15 feet         30 feet       40 feet
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
SE-2 SUBURBAN ESTATES MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT
§ 154.150 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The SE-2 Suburban Estates District is established to provide for single-
family detached housing opportunities in a rural to urban transitional setting
at a medium residential density level to preserve open space and natural
features. This District is intended to provide a natural buffer between the
strictly urban characteristics of the R-1 High Density District. The primary
difference between the SE-1 and the SE-2 Districts is lot size and the
allowance of livestock.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.151 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the SE-2 District:
   (A)   Dwelling, single-family detached (one per tax parcel);
   (B)   Public libraries;
   (C)   Public cultural buildings;
   (D)   Public parks, playgrounds, and community center;
   (E)   Structure or storage for treatment of seeds;
   (F)   Roadside stand selling products grown on premises;
   (G)   Essential services and municipal administrative or public service
buildings not less than 20 feet from any lot; and
   (H)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.152 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the SE-2 District:
   (A)   Nursery or greenhouse, private;
   (B)   Private garages or parking areas;
   (C)   Solar, private; and
   (D)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.153 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the SE-2 District when authorized:
   (A)   Daycare home;
   (B)   Gardening;
   (C)   Kennel with buildings and outdoor facilities at least 100 feet from
residentially zoned private property;
   (D)   Major home occupation as defined;
   (E)   Municipal buildings and libraries;
   (F)   Off-street parking facilities;
   (G)   Outdoor recreational facilities such as golf courses, country clubs,
and tennis courts;
   (H)   Public and parochial schools, churches, and centers not less than 20
feet from any lot in an R District;
   (I)   Recreational use, seasonal;
   (J)   Utility stations without service yards or storage; and
   (K)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.154 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No structure shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet for the
principle structure.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.155 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be met for primary structures.
Accessory structures shall meet the requirements of §
154.039.
 
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Depth Least Side Yard Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
                                    Width
1 acre   165 feet  40 feet          15 feet         30 feet       40 feet
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
§ 154.170 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This District is established in order to protect public health, and
promote public safety, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and welfare.
   (B)   These general goals include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious
fumes, offensive noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, odors, heat, glare, and other
objectionable factors;
      (2)   To protect residential areas to the greatest extent possible and
appropriate in each area against unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic, especially
through-traffic, and to alleviate congestion by promoting off-street parking;
      (3)   To protect residential areas against undue congestion of public
streets and other public facilities by controlling the density of population
through regulations of the bulk of buildings;
      (4)   To protect and promote the public health and comfort by providing
for ample light and air to buildings and the windows thereof;
      (5)   To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable open
space on the same zoning lot with residential development;
      (6)   To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the
probable need for future residential expansion and to meet the need for
necessary and desirable services in the vicinity of residences, which increase
safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert objectionable
influences; and
      (7)   To promote the best use and development of residential land in
accordance with a comprehensive land use plan, to promote stability of
residential development and protect the character of desirable development, and
to protect the value of land and improvements and so strengthen the economic
base of the county.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.171 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the R-1 District:
   (A)   One-family detached dwellings;
   (B)   Daycare home;
   (C)   Foster family homes;
   (D)   Unrelated group family uses;
   (E)   Municipal fire and police station;
   (F)   Care home small residential;
   (G)   Essential services and municipal administrative or public service
buildings not less than 80 feet from any lot line;
   (H)   Public parks and playgrounds;
   (I)   Existing railroad right-of-way, but not switching, storage or freight
yards, or sidings; and
   (J)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.172 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-1 District:
   (A)   Daycare home licensed by the state and with occupancy permit;
   (B)   Living quarters for persons employed on the premises;
   (C)   Minor home occupations, as defined;
   (D)   Private garages or parking areas;
   (E)   Private office of lawyer, architect, or engineer within their own
dwelling;
   (F)   Solar, private; and
   (F)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.173 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the R-1 District when authorized:
   (A)   Community center;
   (B)   Major home occupation, as defined;
   (C)   Utility stations without service yards or storage;
   (D)   Outdoor recreational facilities such as golf courses, country clubs,
and tennis courts;
   (E)   Public and parochial schools and churches not less than 20 feet from
any lot in an R District;
   (F)   Municipal buildings and libraries;
   (G)   Off-street parking facilities for permitted uses and/or uses permitted
upon review of Zoning Board of Appeals in this zoning district;
   (H)   Daycare home, as defined, but serves between nine and 12 children;
   (I)   Kennel, when lot size is over one acre and accessory to residence;
   (J)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent; and
   (K)   Recreational use, seasonal.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.174 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No principle structure shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in
height. No accessory structure shall exceed one story 15 feet in height, except
as provided in §§
154.070 and
154.071.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.175 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be met for primary structures.
Accessory structures shall meet the requirements of §
154.039.
 
Number of  Lot Area  Lot Width Front Yard Least Side Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
Stories    (sq. ft.)           Depth      Yard Width Width         Depth
All*       20,000    100 feet  40 feet    15 feet    30 feet       40 feet
1 to 1-1/2 7,500     75 feet   25 feet    8 feet     20 feet       35 feet
2 to 2-1/2 7,500     75 feet   25 feet    10 feet    25 feet       35 feet
Notes to Table:
* = When not served by central or municipal sewerage systems.
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
R-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
§ 154.190 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the R-2 District:
   (A)   Any permitted use in an R-1 District; and
   (B)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.191 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-2 District:
   (A)   Any permitted accessory use in an R-1 District; and
   (B)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.192 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the R-2 District when authorized:
   (A)   Any use authorized by Zoning Board of Appeals in an R-1 District;
   (B)   Dwelling groups; and
   (C)   Any other similar uses deemed consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.193 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No principle structure shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in
height. No accessory structure shall exceed one story 15 feet in height, except
as provided in §
154.071.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.194 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed and shall be served by
central or municipal sewerage systems.
 
Number of  Lot Area  Lot Width Front Yard Least Side Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
Stories    (sq. ft.)           Depth      Yard Width Width         Depth
1 to1-1/2  6,000     60 feet   25 feet    6 feet     15 feet       30 feet
2 to 2-1/2 6,000     60 feet   25 feet    8 feet     20 feet       30 feet
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
R-3 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
§ 154.205 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the R-3 District:
   (A)   All permitted uses in an R-2 District;
   (B)   Two-family dwellings; and
   (C)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.206 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-3 District: Any
permitted accessory use in an R-2 District.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.207 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the R-3 District when authorized:
   (A)   Bed and breakfast inns;
   (B)   Boarding and lodging houses; and
   (C)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.208 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No principle structure shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in
height and no accessory structure shall exceed one story, 15 feet in height,
except as provided in §
154.071.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.209 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed and shall be served by
central or municipal sewerage systems.
 
                    Lot Area            Front
Number of Lot Area  per       Front Lot Yard    Least Side Side Yard Rear Yard
Stories   (sq. ft.) Family    Width     Depth   Yard Width Sum       Depth
                    (sq. ft.)
          5,000 -
1 to 1-1/ single    3,000     50 feet   25 feet 6 feet     15 feet   30 feet
2         6,000 -
          duplex
          5,000 -
2 to 2-1/ single    3,000     50 feet   25 feet 8 feet     20 feet   30 feet
2         6,000 -
          duplex
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
R-4 ONE- TO SIX-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
§ 154.220 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the R-4 District:
   (A)   All permitted uses allowed in an R-3 District;
   (B)   Boarding and lodging houses;
   (C)   Public and parochial schools and churches not less than 20 feet from
any lot in an R District; and
   (D)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.221 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-4 District:
   (A)   All permitted accessory uses in an R-3 District; and
   (B)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.222 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the R-4 District when authorized:
   (A)   Care home, large residential;
   (B)   Any use authorized by Zoning Board of Appeals in an R-4 District;
   (C)   Nursing homes at least 50 feet from any lot line;
   (D)   Halfway house/group home;
   (E)   Daycare centers licensed by the state;
   (F)   Private clubs, lodges, and union halls;
   (G)   Parking lots accessory to use in an adjoining or less restrictive
district when abutting or directly across an alley; and
   (H)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.223 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No principle structure shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in
height, and no accessory structure shall exceed one story 15 feet in height,
except as provided in §
154.071.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.224 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed along with bufferyard
requirements as described in §
154.599, and shall be served by central or municipal sewerage systems.
 
          Minimum   Lot Area            Front
Number of Lot Area  per       Front Lot Yard    Side Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Stories   (sq. ft.) Family    Width     Depth   Width     Sum       Depth
                    (sq. ft.)
1 to 1-1/ 5,000     2,000     50 feet   25 feet 6 feet    15 feet   30 feet
2
2 to 2-1/ 5,000     2,000     50 feet   25 feet 8 feet    20 feet   30 feet
2
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
R-5 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
§ 154.235 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the R-5 District:
   (A)   All permitted uses in an R-4 District;
   (B)   Dwellings, multi-family; and
   (C)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.236 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-5 District:
   (A)   Any permitted accessory use in an R-4 District; and
   (B)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.237 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the R-5 District when authorized:
   (A)   Any use authorized by Zoning Board of Appeals in an R-4 District; and
   (B)   Any other similar use deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.238 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No principle structure shall exceed six stories or 75 feet in height at the
required front, side, and rear yard lines, other than as provided in §
154.071. No accessory building shall exceed one story or 15 feet in height,
except as provided in §
154.071.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.239 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed along with bufferyard
requirements as described in §
154.599, and shall be served by central or municipal sewerage systems.
 
                    Required
                    Lot Area
Number of Minimum   per Family Front Lot Front   Least Side Side Yard Rear Yard
Stories   Lot Area  for Multi- Width     Yard    Yard Width Sum       Depth
          (sq. ft.) Family               Depth
                    Structures
                    (sq. ft.)
1         N/A       2,000      50 feet   30 feet 6 feet     12 feet   30 feet
2         N/A       2,000      50 feet   30 feet 6 feet     15 feet   30 feet
3         N/A       2,000      50 feet   30 feet 8 feet     20 feet   35 feet
4         N/A       2,000      50 feet   30 feet 10 feet    25 feet   40 feet
5         N/A       2,000      50 feet   30 feet 12 feet    30 feet   45 feet
6         N/A       2,000      50 feet   30 feet 14 feet    35 feet   50 feet
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
R-6 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
§ 154.250 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the R-6 District:
   (A)   Any permitted use in an R-5 District;
   (B)   Housing designed for the elderly; and
   (C)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.251 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-6 District:
   (A)   Any permitted accessory use in an R-5 District; and
   (B)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.252 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the R-6 District when authorized:
   (A)   Any use authorized by Zoning Board of Appeals in an R-5 District; and
   (B)   Any other similar use deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.253 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No principle structure shall exceed 12 stories or 150 feet in height
at the required front, side and rear yard lines, other than as provided in §
154.071.
   (B)   No accessory building shall exceed one story or 15 feet in height.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.254 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed along with bufferyard
requirements as described in §
154.599, and shall be served by central or municipal sewerage systems.
                    Required
                    Lot Area
Number Of Minimum   per Family        Front Yard Least Side Side Yard Rear Yard
Stories   Lot Area  for Multi-  Width Depth      Yard Width Sum       Depth
          (sq. ft.) Family
                    Structures
                    (sq. ft.)
                    Required
                    Lot Area
Number Of Minimum   per Family          Front   Least Side Side Yard Rear Yard
Stories   Lot Area  for Multi- Width    Yard    Yard Width Sum       Depth
          (sq. ft.) Family              Depth
                    Structures
                    (sq. ft.)
1         N/A       2,000      50 feet  30 feet 6 feet     12 feet   30 feet
2         N/A       2,000      52 feet  33 feet 6 feet     12 feet   30 feet
3         N/A       2,000      55 feet  30 feet 8 feet     16 feet   35 feet
4         N/A       2,000      65 feet  30 feet 10 feet    22 feet   40 feet
5         N/A       2,000      75 feet  30 feet 12 feet    27 feet   45 feet
6         N/A       2,000      85 feet  30 feet 14 feet    33 feet   50 feet
7         N/A       2,000      95 feet  30 feet 18 feet    42 feet   55 feet
8         N/A       2,000      105 feet 30 feet 22 feet    51 feet   60 feet
9         N/A       2,000      115 feet 30 feet 26 feet    60 feet   65 feet
10        N/A       2,000      125 feet 30 feet 30 feet    69 feet   70 feet
11        N/A       2,000      135 feet 30 feet 34 feet    78 feet   75 feet
12        N/A       2,000      150 feet 30 feet 38 feet    87 feet   80 feet
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
R-7 MOBILE HOME AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT
§ 154.265 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted uses in the R-7 District:
   (A)   Foster family homes;
   (B)   Unrelated group family uses;
   (C)   Mobile home parks (see §§
151.01 through
151.06, and
151.99); and
   (D)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
U-1 UNIVERSITY AND COLLEGE DISTRICT
§ 154.280 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   This District is established to provide an area for colleges,
universities, seminaries, and other such institutions of higher education.
   (B)   The intent of the District is to establish an area in which
institutions of higher education may operate compatibly with surrounding
residential and business areas.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.281 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the U-1 District:
   (A)   Colleges, universities, seminaries, and other such institutions of
higher education consisting of any number of educational, residential
(apartment/dormitories), cultural and recreational buildings, and parking areas
with all associated buildings located not less than 30 feet from any
residentially-zoned private property or one- or two-family used lot;
   (B)   Community residence with appropriate permits and at least 1,000 feet
from any other community residence;
   (C)   Dwellings, one- and two-family;
   (D)   Essential services and municipal, administrative, or public services,
buildings or properties excluding warehouses, storage yards, and garages with
all associated buildings at least 20 feet from residentially-zoned private
property;
   (E)   Foster family homes;
   (F)   Parochial buildings such as schools, churches, and parish buildings,
public libraries and public safety and municipal government buildings located
not less that 20 feet from any residentially zoned private property;
   (G)   Unrelated group homes; and
   (H)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.282 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the U-1 District:
   (A)   Accessory uses permitted in an R-1 District;
   (B)   Solar, private; and
   (C)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.283 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the U-1 District when authorized:
   (A)   Boarding and lodging house;
   (B)   Fraternities and sororities;
   (C)   Hospitals, sanitariums, and nursing homes with any associated building
at least 50 feet from any residentially-zoned private property; and
   (D)   Any other similar use deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.284 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   All buildings affiliated with institutions of higher education shall
be not less than 30 feet from residentially zoned lots or existing one- and
two-family used lots;
   (B)   Private school buildings and public buildings shall be not less than
20 feet from the side lot line in an R District; and
   (C)   Small residential care homes shall be 1,000 feet from any other
community residence, shall be state or locally licensed, and shall have a
certificate of occupancy from the Building Inspector.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.285 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No structure shall exceed 35 feet for the principle structure and 15
feet for an accessory structure.
   (B)   To places of public assembly, such as churches, schools, and other
permitted public and semi-public buildings not to exceed six stories or 75
feet, provided that for each foot by which the height of such building exceeds
the maximum height otherwise permitted in the District, its side and rear yards
shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the side and
rear yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the
District.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.286 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed with both
principle and accessory buildings and along with bufferyard requirements as
described in §
154.599.
   (B)   No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Number of  Lot Area  Lot Width Front Yard Least Side Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
Stories    (sq. ft.)           Depth      Yard Width Width         Depth
1 to 1-/2  5,000     50 feet   25 feet    6 feet     15 feet       30 feet
2 to 2-1/2 5,000     50 feet   25 feet    8 feet     20 feet       30 feet
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
C-1 CONSERVATION DISTRICT
§ 154.300 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The C-1 District is intended for environmental protection and preservation.
Land parcels within this District will include wetland, marshes, swamps, scenic
areas, hillsides of excessive slopes, watercourses, aquifer recharge areas,
watershed protection areas, wildlife habitat, rough terrain, and areas subject
to siltation and erosion.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.301 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses in the C-1 District:
   (A)   Open space; and
   (B)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.302 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the C-1 District when authorized:
   (A)   Agriculture and commercial summer gardens including agricultural
buildings, but not permanent dwellings not to exceed 750 square feet and no
more than one building per five-acre tract but not the raising of livestock;
   (B)   Campgrounds, wilderness;
   (C)   Forestry activities and nurseries;
   (D)   Public parks, passive;
   (E)   Inns or other dining places on and within 500 feet of a highway or
primary thoroughfare and with any structure at least 400 feet from any
residentially-zoned private property, church, school, or human care
institution;
   (F)   Outdoor rifle, trap, or skeet shooting range at least 600 feet from
any residentially-zoned private property, church, school, or human care
institution subject to other state and federal guidelines;
   (G)   Parking areas, and equipment and materials storage yards, accessory to
principle uses in adjoining districts within 1,000 feet of a railroad, highway,
or primary thoroughfare, and at least 600 feet from any residentially zoned
private property, church, school, or human care institution;
   (H)   Recreation vehicle parks on and within 500 feet of a highway or
primary thoroughfare and with any structure at least 400 feet from
residentially-zoned private property, church, school, or human care
institution; and
   (I)   Any other use deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
C-2 CONSERVATION DISTRICT
§ 154.315 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The C-2 District is intended to provide for the conservation and
preservation of land, while allowing for development that will make use of its
natural beauty and allow for its enjoyment.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.316 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses in the C-2 District:
   (A)   All uses when reviewed by Zoning Board of Appeals in a C-1 District;
   (B)   Public parks, playgrounds; and
   (C)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.317 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the C-2 District: Accessory
uses incidental to a permitted principle use other than a permanent residence.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.318 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the C-2 District when authorized:
   (A)   Country clubs;
   (B)   Community centers, private or public;
   (C)   Recreational uses, public open air, such as swimming pools, tennis
courts, baseball and football fields, and golf ranges, with buildings and
outdoor storage when abutting a highway or primary thoroughfare;
   (D)   Church, school, or human care institution;
   (E)   Inns or other dining places on and within 500 feet of a highway or
primary thoroughfare and with any structure at least 400 feet from any
residentially-zoned private property, church, school, or human care
institution;
   (F)   Outdoor rifle, trap, or skeet shooting range at least 600 feet from
any residentially-zoned private property, church, school or human care
institution subject to other state and federal guidelines;
   (G)   Parking areas, and equipment and materials storage yards, accessory to
principle uses in adjoining districts within 1,000 feet of a railroad, highway,
or primary thoroughfare, and at least 600 feet from any residentially-zoned
private property, church, school, or human care institution;
   (H)   Recreation vehicle parks on and within 500 feet of a highway or
primary thoroughfare and with any structure at least 400 feet from
residentially-zoned private property, church, school, or human care
institution; and
   (I)   Any other use deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
O-1 OFFICE DISTRICT
§ 154.330 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The Office District set forth herein is established to promote public
welfare, convenience, comfort, and orderly growth of the community. These
objectives include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (A)   To provide means of transitional use of land between commercial and
residential uses;
   (B)   To promote, enhance, and conserve quality of the human-made
environment;
   (C)   To protect the worth of property;
   (D)   To promote the most desirable use of land;
   (E)   To provide an appropriate district for functions separate from those
dealing in sales, repair, recreation, storage, processing, assembly, lodging,
and eating;
   (F)   To separate those functions which are obtrusive, quiet, do not
generate large quantities of waste, noise, odor or traffic, use heavy
machinery, require docking facilities, or separate service entrances, and which
do not make use of large illuminated displays or signs, from those which do;
   (G)   To provide a use district for offices for those who provide services
only including instruments of service;
   (H)   To provide a district of less intense use and to encourage lower
density use and retention of open space;
   (I)   To make use of areas which are not appropriate for other uses;
   (J)   To control the growth of other districts;
   (K)   Daycare home and center; and
   (L)   To make less valuable land available for use other than residential.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.331 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses in the O-1 District:
   (A)   Church;
   (B)   Community service offices;
   (C)   Consultant offices;
   (D)   Dwelling above the ground floor;
   (E)   Funeral home;
   (F)   Hospital and special care facilities;
   (G)   Nursing home;
   (H)   Offices providing clerical administration;
   (I)   Professional offices;
   (J)   Schools and facilities for academic instruction; and
   (K)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.332 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the O-1 District: Accessory
uses incidental to a permitted principle use other than a permanent residence.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.333 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the O-1 District when authorized:
   (A)   Dwellings; and
   (B)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.334 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   No principle structure shall exceed two stories or 30 feet in height, and no
accessory structure shall exceed one story or 15 feet in height, except as
provided in §
154.071.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.335 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and
accessory building along with bufferyard requirements as described in §
154.599. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Number of   Lot Area     Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
Stories     (sq. ft.)              Depth      Width     Width         Depth
            No more than
            50% building           15 feet or
            coverage               same as
All stories 5,000 -      None      adjacent R None      15 feet       15 feet
            single,                District
            6,000 -
            duplex
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 154.350 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   The Neighborhood Business District is intended to permit the
development of retail sales and personal services required to meet the day-to-
day needs of a fully developed neighborhood. Stores, businesses, and offices in
this zone should be useful to the majority of the neighborhood residents.
   (B)   The convenience nature of the various business uses located in this
District requires them to be in close proximity to residences and is intended
to include a narrow range of retail services and convenience goods.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.351 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses in the B-1 District:
   (A)   All uses within this zone must be confined to 2,500 internal square
feet of the principle structure;
   (B)   Antique or custom furniture shop with incidental upholstery;
   (C)   Bakery limited to goods for retail on the premises;
   (D)   Banks or similar financial enterprises;
   (E)   Barber or beauty shop;
   (F)   Bicycle sales and service;
   (G)   Business or professional office such as attorney, architect, engineer,
dentist, physicians, and the like;
   (H)   Camera or photographic supply store;
   (I)   Clinics, private, for human care;
   (J)   Costume rental;
   (K)   Daycare center or home;
   (L)   Delicatessen;
   (M)   Dry cleaning pick-up station;
   (N)   Dwelling, above ground floor;
   (O)   Health/recreational and physical training club;
   (P)   Hobby shop;
   (Q)   Interior decorating shop including upholstery and drapery making;
   (R)   Laundromat;
   (S)   Locksmith;
   (T)   Music studio;
   (U)   Restaurant, not drive-in or drive-thru;
   (V)   Retail uses such as drugstore, florist, grocery, ice cream shop, meat
market, appliance, shoe, variety, stationary, book, clothing, packaged liquor
sales, and candy stores with all activities, except for automobile off-street
parking and loading facilities as permitted or required in this District, shall
be conducted wholly within an enclosed building;
   (W)   Churches; and
   (X)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.352 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the B-1 District:
   (A)   Solar, private; and
   (B)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.353 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the B-1 District when authorized:
   (A)   Auto accessory store;
   (B)   Club or lodge;
   (C)   Bus transfer station;
   (D)   Convenience store;
   (E)   Nursing home; and
   (F)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.354 USES PROHIBITED.
   The following are prohibited uses in the B-1 District: Any commercial or
manufacturing use except that which is clearly necessary for the conduct of a
permitted retail business or service on the premises.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.355 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and
accessory building along with bufferyard requirements as described in §
154.599. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Height          Front Yard      Side Yard Width Rear Yard Depth Other
                Depth
35 feet or same 25 feet or same None except     10 feet or same In accordance
as adjacent R   as adjacent R   same as         as adjacent R   with
District        District        adjacent R      District        performance
                                District                        standards
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 154.370 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The Central Business District is intended to be a high density, compact,
pedestrian oriented shopping, office, service, and entertainment area. This
District is one of high traffic generation and is thus located where there can
be a concentration of a variety of commercial activities.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.371 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses in the B-2 District:
   (A)   Any use permitted in a B-1 District and allowing for retail
establishments with greater than 2,500 square feet;
   (B)   Art galleries and studios;
   (C)   Auction house;
   (D)   Bar, dance hall, cocktail lounge or night club, private clubs, lodges,
union halls, tavern, microbrewery when enclosed and with building(s) and
outside storage at least 100 feet from any residentially-zoned private
property;
   (E)   Bicycle sales and repair;
   (F)   Blueprinting, photostating, print shop, and duplicating
establishments;
   (G)   Bus terminal, railroad station, freight terminal, or other public
transportation terminal;
   (H)   Business or trade school;
   (I)   Catering within a building;
   (J)   Ceramic products manufacture for sale on premises;
   (K)   Church;
   (L)   Conservatory for retail sale on premises only;
   (M)   Commercial parking lot;
   (N)   Custom rental;
   (O)   Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, or shoe repair for retail
sales on premises only;
   (P)   Drapery and mattress manufacture for sale on premises;
   (Q)   Department stores;
   (R)   Employment agency;
   (S)   Engraving or lithographing;
   (T)   Funeral home;
   (U)   Garage, public;
   (V)   Hardware or paint supply store without outdoor sales or storage;
   (W)   Hotel/motel;
   (X)   Laboratories, medical, and dental;
   (Y)   Laundry or dry cleaning shop when enclosed and with building(s) and
outside storage at least 100 feet from any residentially-zoned private
property;
   (Z)   Meeting halls, clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodges;
   (AA)   Mirror and glazing shop, glass cutting;
   (BB)   Pawn shop;
   (CC)   Pet shops, but not animal hospitals;
   (DD)   Picture framing;
   (EE)   Plumbing, electrical, heating, and air conditioning supply stores or
show rooms without outdoor sales or storage, and without repairs or
fabrication;
   (FF)   Public utility collection office;
   (GG)   Public, customer, or accessory parking lot;
   (HH)   Radio, television, and CATV stations, not transmitting towers;
   (II)   Second-hand stores and rummage shops;
   (JJ)   Taxidermist;
   (KK)   Theater, indoor;
   (LL)   Travel bureau and ticket office;
   (MM)   Upholstering shop for furniture;
   (NN)   Any other similar type use not specifically permitted herein which
would have economic compatibility with the established uses on adjoining
properties; and
   (OO)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.372 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the B-2 District:
   (A)   Permitted accessory uses in a B-1 District;
   (B)   Assembly of small electrical appliances, instruments, small computers,
and other electronic devices; and
   (C)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.373 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the B-2 District when authorized:
   (A)   Any use permitted on review in a B-1 District;
   (B)   Auto accessory store;
   (C)   Auto repair, minor;
   (D)   Transmission and receiving equipment for radio, television, cable, and
telephone; and
   (E)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.374 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed with both principle and
primary buildings along with bufferyard requirements as described in §
154.599. No accessory buildings shall be located in a front yard.
 
Height Front Yard Depth Side Yard Width  Rear Yard Depth     Other
                        None except same None except same as In accordance with
None   None             as adjacent R    adjacent R District performance
                        District                             standards
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
B-3 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 154.385 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   The Community Commercial District is intended to provide for major
businesses which serve a significant segment of the population. The District
may provide for a variety of retail goods and services, along with large
traffic generators requiring access from major thoroughfares and a reliance on
motor vehicle-oriented trade.
   (B)   The District is dominated by uses with indoor operations, although
some may have limited outdoor activities. Development in the District is
encouraged in a manner which minimizes traffic hazards and interference with
other uses in the vicinity.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.386 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses in the B-3 District:
   (A)   Any uses permitted in a B-2 District, except dwellings and daycare
homes;
   (B)   Amusement centers, indoor, including bowling alleys, pool halls,
billiard parlors, skating rinks, arcades, and other similar uses;
   (C)   Auto/pickup sales of a two ton capacity or less and service enclosed,
and with building(s) and outside storage at least 100 feet from residentially-
zoned private property;
   (D)   Car wash, enclosed and with building(s) and outside storage at least
100 feet from residentially-zoned private property. Designed for passenger
vehicles and pickups, excluding commercial vehicles;
   (E)   Drive-in or fast food restaurant;
   (F)   Exterminating shop;
   (G)   Fabric or floor covering sales;
   (H)   Hospital or clinic for small animals with no long term kennel use and
at least 100 feet from residentially-zoned private property;
   (I)   Any other similar type use not specifically listed herein, and which
has economic compatibility with the established uses on adjoining properties;
and
   (J)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.387 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the B-3 District:
   (A)   Permitted accessory uses in a B-2 District; and
   (B)   Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.388 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the B-3 District when authorized:
   (A)   Any use permitted on review in a B-2 District;
   (B)   Car wash, multiple bays;
   (C)   Recreational uses, public open air, such as swimming pools, tennis
courts, baseball fields, and golf ranges, with building(s) and outdoor storage
at least 100 feet from residentially-zoned private property; and
   (D)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.389 USES PROHIBITED.
   The following are prohibited uses in the B-3 District: Dwellings.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.390 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and
accessory building along with bufferyard requirements as described in §
154.599. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Height  Front Yard Depth Side Yard Width  Rear Yard Depth    Other
        20 feet or same  None except same 10 feet or same as In accordance with
45 feet as adjacent R    as adjacent R    adjacent R         performance
        District         District         District           standards
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
B-4 HIGHWAY AND INTENSIVE BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 154.405 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The Highway Commercial District is intended to permit development of service
uses relating to expressways or along other major arterial thoroughfares. This
District permits uses that, by their nature, tend to generate heavy traffic
usage. This District also provides for functions and businesses which may be
characterized by outdoor display, storage, and/or sale of merchandise, by
repair of motor vehicles, and by outdoor commercial amusement and recreational
activities not completely enclosed.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.406 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses in the B-4 District:
   (A)   Any use permitted in a B-4 District;
   (B)   Auto repair, major, with building(s) and outdoor storage at least 100
feet from residentially-zoned private property;
   (C)   Agricultural implement sales and services with building(s) and outdoor
storage at least 100 feet from residentially-zoned private property;
   (D)   Air conditioning and heating sales, and service with outdoor
fabrication and repairs;
   (E)   Bath house or boat house with building(s) and outdoor storage at least
100 feet from residentially-zoned private property;
   (F)   Boat sales with building(s) and outdoor storage at least 100 feet from
residentially-zoned private property;
   (G)   Building material sales yard, and wholesale business with warehouses
as specified in this chapter, at least 100 feet from residentially-zoned
private property;
   (H)   Carpenter and cabinet shop with building(s) and outdoor storage at
least 100 feet from residentially-zoned private property;
   (I)   Semi, tractor trailer, and large commercial truck wash;
   (J)   Contractors offices and shops within building;
   (K)   Feed and seed store, wholesale;
   (L)   Greenhouse with outside storage permitted;
   (M)   Kennels with building(s) and outdoor storage at least 100 feet from
residentially-zoned private property;
   (N)   Motor vehicle dealerships with building(s) and outdoor storage at
least 100 feet from residentially-zoned private property;
   (O)   Recreational uses, public open air, such as swimming pools, tennis
courts, baseball fields, and golf ranges with building(s) and outdoor storage
at least 100 feet from residentially-zoned private property;
   (P)   Sign painting shop and similar establishment with building(s) and
outdoor storage at least 100 feet residentially-zoned private property;
   (Q)   Travel trailer sales and service with building(s) and outdoor storage
at least 100 feet from residentially-zoned private property; and
   (R)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.407 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the B-4 District:
   (A)   Permitted accessory uses in the B-3 District; and
   (B)   Other uses incidental to a permitted principle use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.408 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the B-4 District when authorized:
   (A)   Any uses permitted on review in the B-3 District;
   (B)   Auditorium; and
   (C)   Mini-warehousing with structures at least 100 feet from residentially-
zoned private property.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.409 PROHIBITED USES.
   The following are prohibited uses in the B-4 District: Dwellings.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.410 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and
accessory building along with bufferyard requirements as described in §
154.599. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Height  Front Yard      Side Yard Width  Rear Yard Width    Other
        20 feet or same None except same 10 feet or same as In accordance with
45 feet as adjacent R   as adjacent R    adjacent R         performance
        District        District         District           standards
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
ORT OFFICE AND RESEARCH PARK AND TECHNOLOGY DISTRICT
§ 154.425 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   To provide for large attractively landscaped low-density sites primarily
along an interstate or expressway corridor. The area is appropriate for
regional and/or national businesses and offices, including research activities
and some specialized unobjectionable ultra-light industrial activities which
take advantage of the transportation corridor, but are low intensity and
sufficiently restricted to be compatible with adjacent residential and
commercial development. This may include manufacturing, processing, packaging,
assembly, or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously
prepared materials. This District is intended to have a green/open space
atmosphere conducive to quality development with the preservation of
significant natural features. No outdoor storage is allowed in this District
and all operations must be in an enclosed building.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.426 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses in the ORT District:
   (A)   Offices for the following occupations: executive, administrative,
professional, accounting, writing, clerical, drafting, sales, and engineering,
excluding medical and dental offices;
   (B)   Computer manufacture, electronic assembly;
   (C)   Custom cabinet shop;
   (D)   Custom drapery manufacture;
   (E)   Data processing and computer centers, including computer programming
and software development, training, and service and maintenance of electronic
data processing equipment;
   (F)   Research and development, technical training, and related activities
for industrial, scientific, and business enterprises, and design of pilot or
experimental products;
   (G)   Mattress manufacture with retail activities;
   (H)   Printing, publishing, duplicating, and photographic processing;
   (I)   Processing and assembly of engineering, laboratory, scientific, and
research instruments and associated equipment;
   (J)   Prosthetic manufacture;
   (K)   Laboratories for research, development, and testing of medical,
optical, dental, and pharmaceutical products;
   (L)   Hotel/motel;
   (M)   Trade or industrial schools, and personnel training center; and
   (N)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.427 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the ORT District:
   (A)   Bar/cocktail lounge incidental to hotel/motel and/or restaurant;
   (B)   Child care center when accessory to permitted principle use;
   (C)   Convention center, assembly hall, display hall, or similar use when
accessory of hotel/motel;
   (D)   Retail business intended to serve the permitted uses within the
District and not dependent upon direct visits of retail customers;
   (E)   Residence of caretaker or security personnel; and
   (F)   Other uses incidental to permitted principle use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.428 USES ON REVIEW BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses on review in the ORT District:
   (A)   Bank;
   (B)   Restaurant, excluding drive-in or drive-thru;
   (C)   Medical clinic;
   (D)   Essential public services;
   (E)   Hospital;
   (F)   Museum;
   (G)   Post office;
   (H)   Parking lots, public or private;
   (I)   Daycare center;
   (J)   Convention center, assembly hall, display hall, or similar use;
   (K)   Manufacturing when accessory to permitted principle use;
   (L)   Radio/television station; and
   (M)   Any other uses deemed to be consistent by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.429 PROHIBITED USES.
   The following are prohibited uses in the ORT District:
   (A)   Adult uses;
   (B)   Auto service station;
   (C)   Mini-warehousing;
   (D)   Restaurant, drive-in;
   (E)   Retail except as noted;
   (F)   Residential except as noted;
   (G)   Freight terminal;
   (H)   Auto salvage yard;
   (I)   Disposal or storage of toxic waste; and
   (J)   Outdoor advertising, off premises.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.430 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and
accessory building along with bufferyard requirements as described in §
154.599. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Minimum Lot   Height  Front Yard Side Yard Width Rear Yard Width Other
Area
                                                                 In accordance
20,000 square 45 feet 50 feet    15 feet         20 feet         with
feet                                                             performance
                                                                 standards
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.445 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The Light Industrial District is intended to provide for the development of
most types of industry with regulations designed to protect adjacent
properties.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.446 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses in the I-1 District:
   (A)   Agricultural farming, and cultivation but no farm animals or
livestock;
   (B)   Apparel and other products manufactured from textiles;
   (C)   Assembly of products from finished materials and parts;
   (D)   Automobile repair, major;
   (E)   Bottling and canning of soft drinks;
   (F)   Bus terminal, railroad station, freight terminal, or other public
transportation terminal;
   (G)   Cabinet making;
   (H)   Contractor’s offices and shops;
   (I)   Essential services;
   (J)   Exterior communication devices;
   (K)   Fleet vehicle storage;
   (L)   Food processing;
   (M)   Fur repair and storage;
   (N)   Laboratories;
   (O)   Laundry, dry cleaning, or dyeing except walk-in/drive-up;
   (P)   Motor freight terminal;
   (Q)   Pawnshop with no exterior display or storage;
   (R)   Photo processing involving photo engraving;
   (S)   Printing and binding;
   (T)   Recreational facilities (recreation, outdoor (passive), or public);
   (U)   Refuse equipment operation;
   (V)   Semi, tractor trailer, and large commercial truck wash;
   (W)   Wholesaling, warehousing, and storage, except mini-warehousing; and
   (X)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.447 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the I-1 District:
   (A)   Company provided daycare;
   (B)   Company provided cafeteria;
   (C)   Company provided on-site recreation;
   (D)   Indoor sales incident to light industrial uses;
   (E)   Offices;
   (F)   Small wind energy systems;
   (G)   Solar, private;
   (H)   Truck parking area or yard; and
   (I)   Other accessory uses incidental to a permitted use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.448 PROHIBITED USES.
   The following are prohibited uses in the I-1 District:
   (A)   Uses prohibited in an Office/Research Park and Technology District;
   (B)   Disposal or storage of toxic waste; and
   (C)   Dwellings.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.449 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the I-1 District when authorized:
   (A)   Adult regulated uses subject to §
154.053;
   (B)   Airstrips/runways and heliports;
   (C)   Aircraft hangars/tie downs;
   (D)   Battery energy storage system (BESS);
   (E)   Commercial excavation of natural materials and improvements of a
stream, lake, or river channel and removal of dirt and or topsoil, quarry, or
borrow pits;
   (F)   Commercial solar energy facility;
   (G)   Commercial wind energy facility;
   (H)   Concrete batch plants;
   (I)   Landscape contractors, and tree and yard waste services;
   (J)   Large wind energy system; and
   (K)   Storage, personal.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.450 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and
accessory building along with bufferyard requirements as described in §
154.599. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Height  Front Yard           Side Yard Width Rear Yard Width Other
        20 feet for 1 - 3                                    In accordance with
45 feet stories; if > 3      15 feet         20 feet         performance
        stories, then 40% of                                 standards
        building height
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.465 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   The General Industrial District is intended to provide for large scale
manufacturing facilities not otherwise permitted which have potential
significant external impacts to adjacent properties.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.466 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses in the I-2 District:
   (A)   Any use permitted in an I-1 District;
   (B)   Any other use which, in the opinion of the Zoning Board of Appeals, is
of similar character to those specified above;
   (C)   Any of the following uses, when at least 200 feet from any
residentially-zoned private property and at least 100 feet from any other
district, except an I-1 District or when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Appeals;
   (D)   Acetylene manufacturing in excess of 15 pounds per square inch;
   (E)   Acid manufacture;
   (F)   Aircraft assembly and testing;
   (G)   Ammonia, chlorine, or bleach powder manufacture;
   (H)   Animal black, lamp black, bone black, or graphite manufacture;
   (I)   Asbestos and asbestos products manufacture;
   (J)   Automobile, tractor trailer, farm implement assembly, or manufacture;
   (K)   Blast furnaces, steel works, or rolling mills;
   (L)   Bleaching, cleaning, and dyeing plant;
   (M)   Boiler shops, machine shops, structural steel fabricating shops,
railway car, or locomotive shops, including repair and metal working shops;
   (N)   Box and crate manufacture;
   (O)   Brewing or distilling of liquors;
   (P)   Brick manufacture;
   (Q)   Bulk station;
   (R)   Candle or sperm oil manufacture;
   (S)   Cans and other types of containers manufacture;
   (T)   Celluloid or pyroxyline manufacture, or explosive or inflammable
cellulose or manufacture or storage;
   (U)   Cement, lime, gypsum, plaster, or plaster of paris manufacture;
   (V)   Chalk manufacture;
   (W)   Charcoal manufacture;
   (X)   Chemicals, the manufacture or use of, except those which may be
inflammable or explosive;
   (Y)   Coffin manufacture;
   (Z)   Cooperage works;
   (AA)   Cotton ginning and cotton wadding;
   (BB)   Cottonseed oil manufacture;
   (CC)   Creosote manufacture or treatment;
   (DD)   Dextrin, starch, or glucose manufacture;
   (EE)   Disinfectant, insecticide, or poison manufacture;
   (FF)   Distillation of coal, petroleum, refuse, grain, wood, or bones,
except in the manufacture of gas;
   (GG)   Dyes, aniline, ink pigments, and others manufacture;
   (HH)   Emery cloth or sandpaper manufacture;
   (II)   Enameling, lacquering, or japanning;
   (JJ)   Explosive manufacture or storage, except for small arms ammunition;
   (KK)   Fertilizer, compost (manufacture or storage);
   (LL)   Fish curing, smoking or packing, fish oil manufacture, or refining;
   (MM)   Flammable liquids storage not to exceed a total of 25,000 gallons;
   (NN)   Flour, grain, or feed milling or processing;
   (OO)   Foundry works;
   (PP)   Gas-generation or storage for illumination or heating;
   (QQ)   Gelatin, vegetable, and animal manufacture;
   (RR)   Glass blowing and manufacture;
   (SS)   Grain elevators;
   (TT)   Hair or hair products manufacture;
   (UU)   Hemp products manufacture;
   (VV)    Linoleum, oil cloth, or oiled goods manufacture;
   (WW)   Lumber, preserving treatment, processing, sawmills, and planing mills
manufacture;
   (XX)   Machinery, heavy manufacture, and repair;
   (YY)   Match manufacture;
   (ZZ)   Meat, packing and processing, except slaughtering and glue and size
manufacture, but not stockyards or slaughterhouses;
   (AAA)   Metal stamping and extrusion of metal products manufacture and
plating;
   (BBB)   Motor testing or internal combustion motors manufacture;
   (CCC)   Oil, shellac, turpentine, varnish, or enamel manufacture;
   (DDD)   Paper and pulp manufacture;
   (EEE)   Perfume manufacture;
   (FFF)   Petroleum or flammable liquids production and refining;
   (GGG)   Pickle, sauerkraut, and sausage manufacture;
   (HHH)   Porcelain products manufacture;
   (III)   Poultry slaughterhouse, including packing and storage for wholesale;
   (JJJ)   Railroad equipment manufacture;
   (KKK)   Rock crushing;
   (LLL)   Rubber products, including tires and tubes and tire recapping;
   (MMM)   Rubber manufacture and processing;
   (NNN)   Sandblasting or cutting;
   (OOO)   Sewage disposal plant or incinerator, sanitary landfill, or
recycling or composting operation, except by the municipality;
   (PPP)   Shoe blacking or polish, or stove polish manufacture;
   (QQQ)   Soap manufacture;
   (RRR)   Steam power plant, except where accessory to a permitted principle
use;
   (SSS)   Stone and monument works employing power driven tools;
   (TTT)   Storage, curing, or tanning of raw, green, or salted hides or skins
when refrigerated storage is provided;
   (UUU)   Storage of flammable liquids when facilities are located at least
600 feet from any R District and at least 300 feet from any other district
except I Districts, and are enclosed by a fence at least eight feet in height;
   (VVV)   Sugar refining;
   (WWW)   Tar distillation or asphalt roofing or waterproofing manufacture;
   (XXX)   Vinegar manufacture;
   (YYY)   Wax products manufacture;
   (ZZZ)   Wire or rod drawing, nut, screw, or bolt manufacture;
   (AAAA)   Wool scouring and pulling;
   (BBBB)   Yeast manufacture; and
   (CCCC)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.467 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following are permitted accessory uses in the I-2 District:
   (A)   Permitted accessory uses in an I-1 District;
   (B)   Other uses incidental to a principle use;
   (C)   Small wind energy systems; and
   (D)   Solar, private.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.468 WHEN AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE.
   The following are special uses in the I-2 District when authorized:
   (A)   An establishment which has the potential to be dangerous or extremely
obnoxious. Included are those which explosives are stored, petroleum is
refined, natural and liquid gas and other petroleum derivatives are stored and/
or distributed in bulk, radioactive material are compounded, pesticides and
certain acids are manufactured, and hazardous waste is treated or stored as the
establishment’s principle activity;
   (B)   Automobile salvage and wrecking operations, and industrial metal and
waste salvage operations and junkyards not less than 100 feet from any non-
I District and 1,000 feet from any state or federal highway enclosed on all
sides with natural objects, plantings, fences, or other appropriate means, a
minimum of eight feet high from grade for the entire border of the operation.
In addition, operations within 1,000 feet of a federal or state highway system,
screening by natural objects, plantings, fences, or other appropriate means so
as not to be visible from the main traveled way of the system is required where
feasible. No pile of scrap, salvage, or other material shall be higher than the
fence or screening measured from grade to the fence or the screening’s lowest
point, and measured from grade to the scrap or salvaged materials highest
point;
   (C)   Asphalt plant;
   (D)   Aviation facilities, private and public;
   (E)   Battery energy storage system (BESS);
   (F)   Commercial solar energy facility;
   (G)   Commercial wind energy facility;
   (H)   Landfill, construction debris, rubble, or sanitary;
   (I)   Large wind energy system;
   (J)   Recycling centers and stations;
   (K)   Resource extraction;
   (L)   Scrap and salvage services;
   (M)   Shooting range;
   (N)   Transfer station for waste;
   (O)   Disposal or storage of toxic waste;
   (P)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent; and
   (Q)   Adult regulated uses subject to §
154.053.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.469 PROHIBITED USES.
   The following are prohibited uses in the I-2 District: Any prohibited use in
an I-1 District, except auto salvage yard.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.470 LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and
accessory building along with bufferyard requirements as described in §
154.599. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Height  Front Yard        Side Yard Width Rear Yard Width    Other
        < 50 feet then 20                 < 50 feet then 20  In accordance with
75 feet feet> 50 feet     15 feet         feet> 50 feet then performance
        then 40% of                       30 feet            standards
        building height
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 154.485 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is to
promote to the extent possible:
      (1)   A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the
public by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict
application of the other sections of this chapter;
      (2)   A permanent preservation of common open space and recreation areas
and facilities;
      (3)   A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation,
topographic, and geologic features;
      (4)   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
facilities that results in better development, design, and the construction of
aesthetic amenities;
      (5)   An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of
utilities, streets, and other facilities; and
      (6)   A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort,
morals, and welfare.
   (B)   The PUD District is intended to provide for a development
incorporating a single type or a variety of related uses which are planned and
developed as a unit but departs from the normal standards and requirements of
other sections of this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   The planned unit development may provide amenities not otherwise
required by law and may establish facilities and open space greater than the
minimums required by law.
      (2)   Such development may consist of conventionally subdivided lots or
provide for development by a land use and zoning plan which establishes the
location and extent of the features of the planned unit development in keeping
with the purpose of the plan.
   (D)   The foregoing purposes and principles shall not be interpreted to
permit the reduction of standards set forth in this section.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.486 PROCEDURE.
   The owner, owners, or bona fide buyer of any tract of land may petition the
Zoning Board of Appeals for a change to the PUD Zoning District in accordance
with §§
154.020 through
154.023. A planned unit development shall be authorized in accordance with the
following procedures:
   (A)   Application procedure.
      (1)   The application for a rezoning to the PUD Zoning District shall be
accompanied by an application plan meeting the requirements of §
154.487(A) and show evidence that the proposed development will conform to the
official county plan and to the purpose of the PUD District set forth in §
154.485. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant or deny said application
pursuant to the provisions contained in §§
154.020 through
154.023. Approval of the PUD Zoning District shall constitute an expression of
approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals of the application plan as a guide to
the preparation of the preliminary PUD plan. The applications shall be
accompanied by a filing fee in an amount equal to that prescribed by §§
154.020 through
154.023.
      (2)   To reduce the number of steps involved in the approval of a planned
unit development, a preliminary PUD plan meeting the requirements of division
(A)(1) above and §
154.487(B)(2) may be submitted in lieu of an application plan required in
division (A)(1) above. This type of application shall be accompanied by a
filing fee in an amount equal of $100 plus an amount equal to that prescribed
by 1.2(a)(2) of this section.
   (B)   Approval of the preliminary plan.
      (1)   (a)   Supporting data in accordance with §
154.487(B)(2).
         (b)   Copies of the preliminary PUD plan and supporting data shall be
submitted to the Administrative Officer for certification as to conformity with
these regulations, recommendations, and suggestions regarding the overall
design, if any.
         (c)   Copies of the preliminary PUD plan shall be submitted to the
Zoning Board of Appeals who shall hold public hearings on the application for a
preliminary PUD plan giving notice of the times and places as required by state
law by publishing a notice thereof at least once in a publication having
general circulation within the county. Following the public hearings, a
recommendation of approval or denial of the preliminary PUD plan shall be made
by the Zoning Board of Appeals to the County Board. If needed, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall review the preliminary PUD plan and grant or deny any
exceptions or variances needed.
      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall set forth the reasons for the
recommendation, and said recommendation shall set forth how the proposal would
be in the public interest, including, but not limited to, findings of facts on
the following:
         (a)   In what respects the proposed plan is consistent with the stated
purpose of the planned unit development requirements;
         (b)   The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements and
standards of the Planned Unit Development District;
         (c)   The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including, but not limited to, the density, dimension, area, bulk and use, and
the reasons why such departures are deemed to be in the public interest;
         (d)   The physical design of the proposed plan and the manner in which
said design makes adequate provision for public services, provides adequate
control over vehicular traffic, provides for and protects designated common
open space, and furthers the amenities of light, air, recreation, and visual
enjoyment;
         (e)   The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the
adjacent properties and neighborhood;
         (f)   The desirability of the proposed plan to physical development,
tax base, and economic well-being of the entire community;
         (g)   The conformity with the intent and spirit of the comprehensive
plan; and
         (h)   Specific points noted on the plan that have impact on its
design, function, and visibility in the community.
      (3)   (a)   Following the receipt of the recommendation by the Zoning
Board of Appeals and approval by the County Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall, within 60 days, recommend approval, modification within limits of a
minor change, or disapproval of the planned unit development plan.
         (b)   As a condition to the approval of the preliminary PUD plan, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall set forth findings of fact in accord with §
154.487(A) on which they base their approval and describing how the proposal
meets the standards of §
154.487(C).
      (4)   All conditions, documents, and plans required by the Zoning Board
of Appeals must be delineated on the plat or agreed to in writing prior to
Zoning Board of Appeals approval.
      (5)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may require such special conditions as
they may deem necessary to ensure conformance with the intent of all
comprehensive plan elements, the stated purpose of the planned development
district, and established county policies.
      (6)   Approval of a preliminary planned unit development plan shall not
constitute approval of the final plan. Rather it shall be deemed an expression
of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the
preparation of the final plan which will be submitted for approval of the
county. The final plan shall be approved as the final land use and zoning plan
if it conforms substantially with the preliminary land use and zoning plan.
(The final plan may be considered as a preliminary and final plan and may be
submitted for preliminary and final approval, if all of the land is to be
developed at one time, and if all requirements hereof are met.)
      (7)   The provisions of §§
154.020 through
154.023 shall be applicable to the preliminary PUD plan.
   (C)   Approval of final plan. The final planned unit development plan shall
be submitted to the Administrative Officer who shall refer same to the Zoning
Board of Appeals. The final PUD plan shall conform to the preliminary PUD plan
as approved or subject to minor changes, and may be submitted in stages with
each stage reflecting the approved preliminary plan; provided, however, that
such stage conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The required
procedure for approval of a final plan shall be:
      (1)   A final planned unit development plan and other supporting data
required for approval shall be in accord with the provisions of §
154.487(B). Final plans must be submitted for approval in accordance with
agreed-to scheduling, but not later than five years from the approval of the
preliminary plan by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals
may grant an extension in time or the developer may resubmit an application; in
the event that same is not done, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall initiate
such zoning changes as it deems necessary to preserve the public interest. If
construction falls more than two years behind the schedule filed with the final
plan, the plan becomes subject to revocation. The Administrative Officer shall
monitor all pending PUD projects and inform the Zoning Board of Appeals of
those six months or more behind schedule;
      (2)   The final plan and supporting data shall be submitted to the Zoning
Board of Appeals for certification that the final plan is in conformity with
these regulations and in agreement with the approved preliminary plan;
      (3)   After review of the final plan, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
submit the planned unit development plan to the County Board with a
recommendation for approval, disapproval, or approval with minor modifications
as reviewed at the public hearing. Any changes or modifications which arise
subsequent to the public hearing shall be specifically noted and referred to
the Administrative Officer who shall determine whether the change constitutes a
major or minor change and whether another public hearing is required;
      (4)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, within 60 days, approve,
disapprove, or extend the time period for another 60 days in taking action on
the final plan; and
      (5)   All conditions, documents, and plans required by the Board must be
delineated on the plan or agreed to in writing prior to Board approval.
   (D)   Recording the final planned unit development plan. The construction of
any public improvement in the planned unit development shall be initiated only
after recording of the final PUD plan has been recorded with the County
Recorder, and shall be issued in full conformance with this chapter.
   (E)   Changes in the planned unit development. The planned unit development
shall be developed according to the approved and recorded final plan, recorded
approved plan, and supporting data together with all recorded amendments shall
be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees, and assigns, and
shall limit and control the use of premises and location of structures in the
planned unit development project as set forth therein.
      (1)   Major changes.
         (a)   A change in the approved preliminary PUD plan or final PUD plan
which alters the concept or intent of the planned unit development including a
change in usage, the configuration, increase in floor area or the height of
buildings, an increase in intensity, a reduction of proposed open space, a
change in road locations or standards, a change in the final governing
agreement, provisions, or covenants, or other major changes, shall be approved
only by submission of a new preliminary PUD plan in accordance with the
procedures as previously set forth for the approval of preliminary and final
PUD plans.
         (b)   All approved major changes in the final PUD plan shall be
recorded with the County Recorder as amendments to the final PUD plan.
      (2)   Minor changes. The Administrative Officer may approve minor changes
in the planned unit development which do not change the concept or intent of
the development, without going through the preliminary approval steps. Minor
changes shall be any change not defined as a major change.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.487 SPECIFIC CONTENT.
   The planned unit development plans and supporting data shall include at
least the following information:
   (A)   Application stage.
      (1)   General site information. Data regarding site conditions and
characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, existing
covenants, and other related information; and
      (2)   Sketch plan. A drawing in simple sketch form showing the proposed
location and extent of the land uses, streets, lots, and other features.
   (B)   Preliminary plan stage.
      (1)   Design plan. A drawing of the planned unit development shall be
prepared at a scale of either one inch equals 100 feet or one inch equals 50
feet, or such other scale that may be recommended by the Administrative
Officer. Any change in scale between the preliminary and final plan shall be
accompanied by a signed statement from the developer attesting that there have
been no modifications. All plans shall show the general location of proposed
streets (public and private), all buildings and their use, common open space,
recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas, and other facilities to
indicate the character of the proposed development. The submission may be
composed of one or more sheets and drawings, and shall include:
         (a)   Boundary lines. Bearing and distances;
         (b)   Easements. General location, width, and purpose;
         (c)   Public and private streets on and adjacent to the tract. Street
names, right-of-way widths, existing or proposed centerline elevations,
pavement type, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, distance to nearest
intersection, and the like;
         (d)   Utilities (public or private) on and adjacent to the tract.
Location, size, and invert elevations of sanitary, storm, and combined sewers;
location and size of water mains; and location of gas lines, fire hydrants,
electric and telephone lines, and street lights on the tract. The direction and
distance to the nearest usable water mains and sewers anticipated to be
utilized by the development and elevations of sewers. Drainage district
boundaries and appropriate design criteria necessary for storm drainage plans;
         (e)   Existing ground elevations on the tract. For land that slopes
less than 0.5%, show one-foot contours; show spot elevations at all breaks in
grades along all drainage channels or swales and at selected points not more
than 100 feet apart in all directions; and for land that slopes more than 0.5%
show two-foot contours;
         (f)   Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Location and results of tests made to generally ascertain
subsurface soil, rock, and groundwater conditions; depth to groundwater unless
test pits are dry at a depth of five feet; the location and results of soil
percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed;
         (g)   Other conditions are on the tract. Watercourses, floodplains,
marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or
more in diameter, houses, barns, accessory buildings, and other significant
features;
         (h)   Other conditions on adjacent land. Approximate direction and
gradient of ground slopes, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and general location of buildings, including a notation on the front
setback, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nearby non-residential land
uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplanted land; for adjacent
platted land, refer to subdivision plan by name and show approximate percent
built up; and typical lot size and dwelling type;
         (i)   Zoning. Zoning on and adjacent to the tract;
         (j)   Proposed public improvements. Highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract;
         (k)   Open space. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for
public use of all property owners with the purpose indicated;
         (l)   Location. General location, purpose, and height, in feet or
stories of each building other than single-family residences on individually-
platted lots;
         (m)   Map data. Name of development, north point and scale, date of
preparation, acreage of site, and name and address of developer, designer, and
engineer; and
         (n)   Miscellaneous. Such additional information as may be required by
the Zoning Board of Appeals or found in Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Character. Explanation of the character of the planned unit
development and the reasons why it has been planned to take advantage of the
flexibility of these regulations;
      (3)   Ownership. Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land
within the project, including present tract designation according to official
records in offices of the County Recorder;
      (4)   Schedule. Development schedule indicating:
         (a)   Stages in which the project will be built with emphasis on area,
density, use and public facilities such as open space to be developed with each
stage shall be shown on the plan and through supporting graphic material;
         (b)   Completion date or dates of new construction for above and below
ground facilities, utilities, and buffer planting. See also 13(a) of this
section; and
         (c)   If different land use types are to be included within the
planned unit development, the schedule must normally include the mix of uses to
be built in each stage.
      (5)   Covenants. Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants which will
govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned
development and any of its common open space;
      (6)   Density. Provide information on the density of residential uses and
the number of dwelling units by type;
      (7)   Use. Provide a list of uses planned for the ancillary and non-
residential uses;
      (8)   Service facilities. Provide information on all service facilities
and off-street parking facilities;
      (9)   Architectural plans. Preliminary architectural plans for all
primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an
understanding of the style of the development, the design of the building and
the number, size, and type of dwelling units; and
      (10)   Facilities plans (public and/or private). Preliminary plans for:
         (a)   Roads, including classification, width of right-of-way, width of
pavement, typical construction details, and plan and profile drawings;
         (b)   Sanitary sewers;
         (c)   Storm drainage and erosion;
         (d)   Water supply system, if required by the Zoning Board of Appeals;
         (e)   Lighting program, if required by the Zoning Board of Appeals;
and
         (f)   Grading.
   (C)   Final plan stage.
      (1)   Final detailed plan. A final land use and zoning plan shall be
prepared. The purpose of the land use and zoning plan is to designate the land
subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other land, not so
treated, into common open areas and building areas. The final land use and
zoning plan shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   An accurate legal metes and bounds description of the entire
area under immediate development within the planned development;
         (b)   A subdivision plan of all subdivided lands in the same form and
meeting all the requirements of a normal subdivision final plan;
         (c)   An accurate legal metes and bounds description of each separate
unsubdivided use area, including common open space;
         (d)   Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be
constructed in unsubdivided areas;
         (e)   Tabulations on separate subdivided use area, including land
area, number of buildings, number of dwelling units, and dwelling units per
acre; and
         (f)   Architectural plans unless waived by the Zoning Board of Appeals
during the preliminary stage.
      (2)   Common open space documents. All common open space shall be either
conveyed to a municipal or public corporation, conveyed to a non-profit
corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefitting the owners and
residents of the planned unit development, or retained by the developer with
legally binding guarantees, in a form approved by the County Attorney, that the
common open space will be permanently preserved and maintained as open area.
All land conveyed to a non-profit corporation or like entity shall be subject
to the right of said corporation to impose a legally enforceable lien for
maintenance and improvement of the common open space;
      (3)   Engineering data. All public utilities or improvements required by
the county in the development of a planned unit development shall be
constructed only after the approval of the final plan. Supporting data to be
submitted with the final plans shall include final engineering drawings
(construction plans), as required by the Zoning Board of Appeals;
      (4)   Guarantee deposit. Prior to the acceptance by the Zoning Board of
Appeals of public utilities and improvements, the contractor(s) for the owner
of the land shall furnish to the county a good and sufficient bond with surety
to secure to the county the actual construction and installation of such public
utilities or improvements according to the county specifications within two
years from the date of approval by the County Board of the final plan or a
petition to the Zoning Board of Appeals to provide the required public
facilities or improvements, and to assess the cost thereof against the
subdivided property in accordance with the local requirements regarding special
assessments; provided, however, that the subdivider or property owners shall be
responsible for any differences between the cost of the public utilities or
improvements and the amount that can be legally assessed by the county against
the subdivided property, and shall furnish the necessary waivers to permit the
assessment of the entire costs of the public utilities or improvements. A
maintenance bond shall be provided for the repairs necessitated by defects in
material or workmanship not to exceed four years from the date of completion as
certified by the County Board;
      (5)   Certificated, seals, signatures. Certificates, seals, and
signatures required for the dedication of lands and recording document, as set
forth in the subdivision regulations; and
      (6)   Covenants. Final agreements, provisions, or covenants which will
provide for the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned unit
development, if applicable.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.488 STANDARDS.
   The planned unit development must meet the following standards:
   (A)   Comprehensive plan. A planned unit development must conform with the
intent and spirit of the comprehensive plan;
   (B)   Size. The site of the total planned unit development must be under
single ownership and/or unified control and be not less than 60,000 square feet
in area;
   (C)   Compatibility. The uses permitted in a planned unit development must
be of a type and so located so as to exercise no undue detrimental influence
upon surrounding properties;
   (D)   Space. Space between buildings shall be subject to approval during the
review process;
   (E)   Yards.
      (1)   The required yards along the periphery of the project should be at
least equal in width or depth to that of the adjacent zoning district; and
      (2)   All other yards shall be subject to approval during the review
process.
   (F)   Parking requirements. Adequate, adjacent parking shall be provided
based on design and use;
   (G)   Traffic. Adequate provisions be made to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets. The Zoning
Board of Appeals or Board may require a professional traffic engineer to
investigate and submit a traffic study; and
   (H)   Other standards. The planned unit development may depart from strict
conformance with the required density, dimension, area, height, bulk, use, and
other regulations for the standard zoning districts and other provisions of
this chapter to the extent specified in the preliminary land use and zoning
plan and documents authorizing the planned unit development so long as the
planned unit development project will not be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare. All new
construction shall conform to Board specifications and regulations.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.489 CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES.
   Prior to the granting of any planned unit development, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
location, design, layout, height, density, construction, maintenance,
aesthetics, operation, and other elements of planned unit development as deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest, improvement of the
development, protection of the adjacent area, and to secure compliance with the
standards specified in §
154.488. In all cases in which planned unit developments are granted, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may
deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith
are being and will be complied with.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
RCO RIVERFRONT CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 154.500 GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   The intent of the Riverfront Corridor Overlay District (RCO) is:
      (1)   To recognize, preserve, maintain, and promote economically viable
uses that are a benefit to the county;
      (2)   To maximize public benefit for further development of the
riverfront area;
      (3)   To provide for improved scenic and aesthetic controls;
      (4)   To recognize the riverfront area as a visual, environmental, and
recreational resource that affects and benefits the county as a whole;
      (5)   To protect adjacent properties from the negative effects of
incompatible development; and
      (6)   To establish a physically attractive pattern of development for the
general welfare of the county.
   (B)   The RCO extends along the Mississippi River and Rock River in the
corporate limits of the county. The exact boundary of the RCO is delineated on
the official county zoning map. The Riverfront Corridor Overlay District
regulations, supplement, and control (where inconsistent) the regulations of
underlying district(s). All other applicable provisions and standards of this
chapter and other pertinent ordinances shall remain in effect.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.501 PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   The following are permitted principal uses in the RCO District: All uses
permitted by right in the underlying zoning district(s).
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.502 OTHER USES.
   The following are other uses in the RCO District: Uses authorized by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.503 APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   The following are applicable regulations in the RCO District: All
requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) concerning site planning,
building height, lot area, and yard depths shall remain applicable except where
modified by the following sections.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.504 PUBLIC PEDESTRIAN, BIKE EASEMENT.
   For the benefit of the public, access to or along the riverfront is
encouraged. This will serve to provide open areas and vehicle-free areas for
use by the general public. The desired design standards for such access are as
follows:
   (A)   (1)   A public pedestrian/bike easement of at least 20 feet in width
running in continuous length through the property for properties ordering the
river.
      (2)   The easement shall be adjacent to the riverfront by an alternative
location may be proposed if the riverfront location is not possible;
   (B)   The easement should connect to any adjacent public pedestrian/bike
easement in a physically logical and efficient manner; and
   (C)   Such pedestrian/bike easements should be located in a safe and logical
fashion, and be usable by pedestrians and bicyclists.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.505 DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.
   (A)   If a public pedestrian/bike easement of a least 20 feet in width
running continuously through the property is provided by the owner, the maximum
building height allowable may be increased up to four stories, not to exceed 50
feet. The granting of this increase shall also be dependent upon design and
topographical considerations.
   (B)   If a public pedestrian/bike easement of at least 20 feet in width
running continuously through the property is provided by the owner, the
required setbacks from public right-of-way may be varied as long as design,
floodplain, safety, topographic, and view considerations are satisfactorily
addressed; provided, however, the setback may not be reduced to less than ten
feet.
   (C)   For every 400 square feet of dedicated public pedestrian easement
which is at least 20 feet wide that is provided by the owner, one parking space
may be deducted from the required parking total. This provision shall not apply
to residential use within the RCO. Regardless of waivers or exemptions
hereinabove granted or the requirements set forth in the off-street parking
regulations of the county, required parking spaces shall never be reduced to
less than 50% of the normal required total number of spaces.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.506 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   All applicants for proposed uses in the RCO shall be required to
submit a site plan for review and recommendation by the Zoning Board of Appeals
and approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to, or in conjunction with, a
zoning change, special use permit, or building permit. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall review site plans for proposed uses requiring approval.
   (B)   The site plan shall include the following information: A drawing(s) at
a scale of 100 feet or less to the inch indicating:
      (1)   The legal description of the property;
      (2)   Existing topography and the proposed finished grade of the site,
shown with contour intervals of two feet;
      (3)   Location and description of existing and proposed utility services
on and adjacent to the development, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
water mains, fire hydrants, and other utilities;
      (4)   All existing and proposed easements;
      (5)   The location and size of each existing and proposed structure or
use on the site;
      (6)   The location and width of streets adjacent to or on the property;
      (8)   The dimensions and capacities of parking areas and loading areas,
including the location and type of illumination and landscaping;
      (9)   The types of surfacing, such as paving, turf, or gravel to be used
on the site;
      (10)   A drainage plan for the site; and
      (11)   The location and height of all existing proposed walls, fences,
and screen plantings, landscaping, and buffer areas.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.507 TRAFFIC ANALYSIS.
   A traffic study shall be required for developments that are expected to
generate large volumes of traffic to and from a site. The appropriate official
shall determine if a traffic study is required for a site. The analysis shall
be performed by a registered professional engineer. The analysis shall include
the anticipated or projected trip generation per day (ADT) and peak hourly
traffic resulting from the proposed use; access points and driveways to and
from the site; parking areas and number of parking spaces; stacking areas, and
sight distances from the access points; distance from proposed access points to
existing intersections and driveways within 500 feet; and other information
necessary for proper review by the county.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.508 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Commercial, industrial, office, and multi-family developments shall be
required to provide landscaping or screening adequate to achieve the following
objectives:
      (1)   To screen incompatible land uses and protect residential areas from
negative effects such as noise, glare, and litter;
      (2)   To provide a visually attractive site design;
      (3)   To encourage the creative use of landscaping to frame or enhance
views and vistas and discourage the obstruction of existing views; and
      (4)   To be sensitive to the environmental nature of the riverbank by
limiting its alteration except as necessary.
   (B)   Exterior lighting on buildings or in yard and parking areas shall not
produce any hazards, nuisances, or unsightly glare for adjacent land uses,
pedestrians, and motorists.
   (C)   Refer to §§
154.035 through
154.054, 154.454 through
154.555,
154.570 through
154.575, and
154.590 through 154.154.599 for specific development.
   (D)   Signs shall be freestanding.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.509 SUBMISSION OF SITE PLAN.
   A site plan shall be submitted at the time of application for a rezoning, an
authorized use, and if applicable, for a variance. If only a building, the site
plan shall be submitted at the time of application for the permit. The site
plan shall be submitted to the appropriate official. A processing fee of $25
dollars shall be paid to the county at the time the site plan is submitted.
This fee shall not be required if the site plan is submitted at the same time
as an application for a zoning change or authorized use.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.510 REVIEW PROCESS.
   Upon receiving a site plan, the appropriate official shall schedule a public
hearing for review by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall review and make a recommendation to the Zoning Board of Appeals for site
plans requiring a zoning change, or only a building or sign permit. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall review and take final action on site plans requiring a
zoning change, or only a building or sign permit. The Administrative Officer
shall review and approve site plans for uses requiring the Zoning Board of
Appeals authorization or variances, if applicable. A site plan approved by the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall not require other authority review before the
issuance of a building permit.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.511 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   If a site plan is submitted as part of an application for a zoning change,
authorized use, or variance, the appropriate notification procedure established
in this chapter shall be followed. If only a building or sign permit is
required, at least 15 days before the public hearing, a notice stating the time
and place of the hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation
in the county. The notice shall also be delivered personally or by mail at
least five days before the hearing to the applicant, respective owners of
record or property adjoining or adjacent to the subject parcel, and the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.512 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   Site plans reviewed by the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall be approved,
approved with conditions, or disapproved.
   (B)   In any case, the reviewing body shall make the following specific
findings of fact concerning the site plan:
      (1)   Whether the proposed development conforms to the standards and
requirements of the Riverfront Corridor Overlay District;
      (2)   Whether the proposed development is consistent with the land use
recommendations and development policies;
      (3)   Whether the proposed development is designed to prevent traffic
congestion and access problems along adjacent streets;
      (4)   Whether the proposed development is an attractive design and an
efficient use of land;
      (5)   Whether the proposed development is compatible with adjacent land
uses and is designed to protect adjacent properties from adverse effects such
as noise, glare, litter, and unattractive features;
      (6)   Whether the proposed development will be adequately served by
public facilities; and
      (7)   Whether the proposed development will have any negative
environmental or physical impacts on the site or on adjacent properties.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.513 EXEMPTIONS FROM SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   One- and two-family residences are exempt from the site plan requirements of
the RCO. In addition, a site plan shall not be required for the renovation or
expansion of an existing structure or use unless access points would be changed
or a substantial increase in traffic to the site would be generated.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.514 AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED SITE PLANS.
   (A)   Any amendment or change to an approved site plan must be submitted to
the appropriate official for review.
   (B)   The appropriate official shall determine if the proposed amendment is
a major change requiring review and approval by the appropriate public body.
Minor changes can be approved by the appropriate official.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.515 SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS OUTSIDE OF DISTRICT.
   Riverfront Corridor Overlay District site plan review requirements that also
apply county-wide for site plans requiring a zoning change, authorized use and/
or variances. The same notification and public hearing process shall also be
followed.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTIONS, AND MODIFICATIONS
§ 154.530 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTIONS, AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The requirements and regulations specified herein before this chapter
shall be subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, modifications, and
interpretations in division (B) below.
   (B)   Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this chapter shall not
apply:
      (1)   To barns, silos, or other farm buildings, provided these are not
less than 50 feet from every lot line; to church spires, belfries, cupolas, and
domes; monuments; water towers; fire and hose towers; on private but not
commercial communication towers and facilities to parapet walls extending not
more than four feet above the limiting height of the building. However if, in
the opinion of the appropriate official, such structures would adversely affect
adjoining or adjacent properties, such greater height shall not be authorized
except by the Zoning Board of Appeals;
      (2)   To places of public assembly such as churches, schools, and other
permitted public and semi-public buildings not to exceed six stories or 75
feet, provided that for each foot by which the height of such building exceeds
the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards
shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the side and
rear yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the
district;
      (3)   To bulkheads, conveyors, derricks, elevators, penthouses, water
tanks, monitors, and scenery lofts; and to monuments, fire towers, hose towers,
cooling towers, grain elevators, gas holders, or other structures where the
manufacturing process requires a greater height. Where a permitted use requires
greater heights than specified, it may be authorized by the Zoning Board of
Appeals; and
      (4)   To hospitals, provided that for each foot by which the height of
such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district,
its side and rear yards shall be increased in width and depth by an additional
one-half foot over the side and rear yards required for the highest building
otherwise permitted in the district.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 154.545 COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS.
   (A)   New uses. Any use established in the business or industrial zones
after the effective date hereof shall comply with the minimum performance
standards contained in this subchapter.
   (B)   Existing uses.
      (1)   Existing business and industrial uses which are not in compliance
with the performance standards contained in this subchapter are exempt, except
where a use did not comply with performance standards in effect prior to the
effective date hereof.
      (2)   (a)   Conditions which do not comply shall not be increased in
scope or magnitude.
         (b)   Such uses shall be permitted to be enlarged or altered, provided
the addition or change conforms with the applicable performance standards.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.546 CERTIFICATION MAY BE REQUIRED.
   When necessary, the appropriate official may require of the applicant
certification by a registered professional engineer or other qualified person,
at the expense of the applicant, that the performance standards for a proposed
use can be met.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.547 SMOKE EMISSIONS.
   The emission of smoke from any operation or activity shall not exceed a
density or equivalent opacity permitted by the State EPA.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.548 PARTICULATE MATTER.
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any process which emits
particulate air contaminants exceeding the air quality standards of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) or its successor.
   (A)   Prior to the county issuing a certificate of occupancy, an applicant
must submit to the appropriate official documentation of the IEPA approval of
the applicant’s application and permit to install or alter equipment, or
control equipment if such a permit is required under the applicable IEPA
standards.
   (B)   (1)   In the event the IEPA lowers its air quality standards, the IEPA
standards in effect on the adoption date of this subchapter shall remain
applicable.
      (2)   Under these circumstances, prior to the county issuing a building
permit, an applicant must submit to the appropriate official documentation from
a licensed engineer demonstrating that the use complies with the IEPA standards
(on the adoption date of this subchapter).
   (C)   In the event the IEPA raises its air quality standards, the new IEPA
standards shall apply, and the applicant must comply with the requirements of
division (B) above.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.549 TOXIC MATTERS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The release of airborne toxic matter from any operation or activity
shall not exceed the fractional quantities permitted below of the threshold
limit values adopted by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists.
      (2)   If a toxic substance is not listed, verification that the proposed
level of toxic matter will be safe and not detrimental to the public health or
injurious to plant and animal life will be required. The measurement of toxic
matter shall be on the average of any 24-hour sampling period.
   (A)   All B Zones and the I-UL Zone. In all B Zones and in the I-UL Zone,
the release beyond lot lines of airborne toxic matter shall not exceed one-
eighth of the threshold limit values.
   (B)   I-1 and I-2 Zones. In the I-1 and I-2 Zones, the release of airborne
toxic matter shall not exceed one-eighth of the threshold limit values beyond
zone boundary lines.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.550 VIBRATION.
   (A)   (1)   Earth borne vibrations from any operation or activity shall not
exceed the displacement values below.
      (2)   Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument
capable of simultaneously measuring in three mutually perpendicular directions.
      (3)   The maximum vector resultant shall be less than the vibration
displacement permitted.
   (B)   The maximum displacements shall be determined by the following
formula:
      (1)   D = Kf, where:
         (a)   D is displacement in inches;
         (b)   K is a constant given in the table in division (B)(2) below; and
         (c)   f is the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the
ground in cycles per second.
      (2)   Below are the regulations concerning vibrations in the B, I-UL, I-
1, and I-2 Districts:
 
                                  Impulsive (at least 1
Zone and Place of                 second rest between   Less Than 8 Pulses Per
Measurement            Continuous pulses which do not   24 Hour Period
                                  exceed 1 second
                                  duration)
B Zones and I-UL Zone: 0.003      0.006                 0.015
at lot line
I-1 Zone and I-2 Zone:
1. At zone boundary    0.030      0.060                 0.150
line
2. At R Zone,
recreational area, or  0.003      0.006                 0.015
school boundary line
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.551 GLARE ILLUMINATION.
   See illumination provisions, §§
154.570 through
154.575.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.552 SEWAGE WASTE.
   Sewers and sewage discharge shall meet the appropriate county code and all
IEPA requirements.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.553 STORAGE.
   (A)   The open storage of materials and equipment shall, except for sales
display, be subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Storage of materials and equipment shall be completely screened
from view. An eight-foot solid wall fence with a level A bufferyard as
described in §§
154.590 through
154.599 will be required; and
      (2)   All combustible material shall be stored in such a way as to
include, where necessary, access drives to permit free access of firefighting
equipment.
   (B)   (1)   The bulk storage of flammable liquids and chemicals, when stored
in aboveground tanks, shall occur no closer than the lot line or any principle
building than the distance indicated by the following table:
Capacity per Container (Gallons) Minimum Separation Distances Aboveground
                                 Containers
Capacity per Container (Gallons) Minimum Separation Distances Aboveground
                                 Containers
Less than 125                    None
125 to 250                       10 feet
251 to 500                       10 feet
501 to 2,000                     25 feet
2,001 to 30,000                  50 feet
30,001 to 70,000                 75 feet
70,001 to 90,000                 100 feet
 
      (2)   The distance may be reduced to not less than ten feet for a single
container of 1,200 gallons capacity or less, provided such a container is at
least 25 feet from any other container or more than 125 gallons capacity.
   (C)   The underground bulk storage of flammable liquids shall be located in
accordance with the Uniform Fire Code regarding tank storage underground,
except the minimum distance between such underground tanks and any R Zone
boundary shall be at least ten feet.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.554 SCREENING.
   See bufferyard requirements as described in §§
154.590 through
154.599.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.555 NOISE.
   The following requirements shall apply in all Districts:
   (A)   The sound pressure level, to be measured as described below, shall not
exceed the following decibel levels in the designated octave bands when
adjacent to the designated types of use districts:
Octave Band, Cycles per Second Districts     Sound Level in Decibels
                               B-1, B-2, B-3 All Residential
Octave Band, Cycles per Second Districts     Sound Level in Decibels
                               B-1, B-2, B-3 All Residential
0 to 75                        73            58
76 to 150                      69            54
151 to 300                     65            50
301 to 600                     61            46
601 to 1,200                   55            40
1,201 to 2,400                 48            33
2,400 to 4,800                 41            26
Over 4,800                     35            20
 
   (B)   Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature which are not easily
measured shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
   (C)   (1)   Measurement is to be made at the nearest boundary of the nearest
residential area or at any other point along the boundary where the level is
higher.
      (2)   The sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter as prescribed by the American Standards
Association.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
ILLUMINATIONS PROVISIONS
§ 154.570 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to establish lighting requirements for
personal safety and crime prevention while regulating any spill-over of light
and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses near a
light source to promote personal and traffic safety, and to prevent the
creation of public nuisances.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.571 LIGHTING PLAN.
   (A)   Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, plans for required
parking lot and security lighting shall be approved by appropriate officials
and the Police Department prior to approval and issuance of permits. Plans, at
appropriate scale, shall be based on accurate, approved final site plans and
shall depict all exterior lighting as to its location, orientation, and
configuration.
   (B)   This must include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Luminaire height;
      (2)   Luminaire and standard technical specifications;
      (3)   Intensity of illumination measured at the least point of
illumination and the greatest point of illumination when measured from ground
level;
      (4)   Type of light source (metal halide, high pressure sodium, and the
like);
      (5)   Hours of illumination; and
      (6)   Photometric plan superimposed on the site plan for each
classification of lighting with points no greater than 30 feet apart.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.572 ILLUMINATION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Lighting standards in all zoning districts except those containing
single-family and two-family dwellings:
      (1)   Wall or roof lighting may be used to illuminate the pedestrian
walkways, entrance areas, and yard areas within 30 feet of the building. No
wall or roof lighting shall be used to illuminate areas for motor vehicle
parking or access unless the Police Department and the appropriate officials
find the following:
         (a)   The proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose
in this section;
         (b)   The proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict
public health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance; and
         (c)   The proposed luminaire has a cutoff angle of less than or equal
to 66 degrees.
      (2)   Any open area used for motor vehicle parking, storage, or access
shall be illuminated with freestanding luminaries. Freestanding luminaries are
permitted to be a maximum of 30 feet in height with a three-foot support, for a
maximum height from the ground of 33 feet. When a luminaire is located within
500 feet of a protected residential property, the maximum permitted luminaire
height shall be 25 feet. All measurements shall be taken from the average
elevation of the finished grade within ten feet of the structure or fixture to
the highest point of the luminaire. All luminaries must have a total cutoff
angle equal to or less than 90 degrees. The use of exterior lighting with a
cutoff angle greater than 90 degrees shall be permitted only when the Police
Department and appropriate official find the following:
         (a)   The lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose in this
section;
         (b)   The proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict
public health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance; and
         (c)   The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of vision
creating a hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
      (3)   In no instance shall low pressure sodium fixtures be used to
illuminate non-protected residential property unless the Police Department find
the following:
         (a)   The proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose
in this section;
         (b)   The proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict
public health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance; and
         (c)   The color distortion effect of low pressure sodium lighting will
not create a hindrance to crime prevention and investigation.
   (B)   Intensity of lighting in all zoning districts except those containing
single-family and two-family dwellings:
      (1)   The amount of illumination attributable to exterior lighting from a
property shall not exceed one foot-candle when measured at any boundary line
with an adjoining property. This provision may be waived by the issuing
authority when:
         (a)   The proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose
of this section;
         (b)   The proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict
public health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance; and
         (c)   The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of vision
creating a hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
      (2)   All parking lot and parking structure lighting located within 300
feet of a protected residential property line may be illuminated not more than
one hour before the start of business and shall be extinguished within one hour
after the end of business except as approved by the Police Department after
finding the following:
         (a)   The property has been identified as an area where the incidence
or potential for crime warrant additional lighting;
         (b)   Additional lighting is required to increase visibility of a
property which is not readily accessible for police during routine patrol; and
         (c)   The use of timers, sensors, or other devices that produce a
reduced lighting level that does not conflict with the stated purpose in this
section.
   (C)   (1)   In all zoning districts, any lighting shall be arranged to
reflect the light away from adjoining property.
      (2)   A person shall not conduct a use that has a source of illumination
that produces glare clearly visible beyond a property line or creates a
sensation of brightness within a visual field so as to cause annoyance,
discomfort, or impairment of vision.
      (3)   The use of lenses, deflectors, shields, louvers, or prismatic
control devices shall be used to eliminate nuisance and hazardous lighting to
facilitate compliance with this requirement.
   (D)   Luminaries used for illumination of designated pedestrian walkways in
parking structures shall be of a significantly different color value than
luminaries used for illuminating vehicle parking and drive aisles.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.573 COMPLIANCE.
   Any new lighting installed after the effective date of this chapter shall be
in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Any lighting in existence
before the effective date of this chapter that does not comply with its
requirements shall be considered legally non-complying and may remain, subject
to the following provisions:
   (A)   Alterations to existing lighting.
      (1)   When policies and support structures are removed and replaced for
reasons other than acts of God or accidents, they must be replaced with
luminaries, policies, and supports that comply with this section; and
      (2)   When luminaries are replaced, they must be replaced with luminaries
that comply with all provisions of this section.
   (B)   Removal and replacement of parking lot surface.
      (1)   When less than 50% of the gross area of the parking lot surface on
a particular site is removed and replaced, only the parking area replaced must
be provided with lighting in compliance with this section. If greater than 50%
of the parking area on a particular site is removed and replaced at one time,
the entire parking lot on the site where the construction activity occurs must
be in full compliance with this section.
      (2)   A parking lot or portion thereof is removed and replaced when any
portion of the existing parking surface material is removed and a new surface
is installed.
   (C)   New parking lots or parking lot additions. When a new parking lot or
addition to an existing parking lot is constructed, the new lot or lot addition
must be provided with lighting in compliance with this section.
   (D)   New structures, additions, or replacements. When a site is improved
with new structures, or additions to, or replacements of, existing structures,
the lighting for the new structure, addition, or replacement on the site must
be upgraded with complying lighting. The parking lot lighting must be upgraded
with complying lighting over a portion of the parking area that is equivalent
to the amount of parking that would be required for the new structure,
addition, or replacement. In the event that the new structure, addition, or
replacement is accompanied by new or replaced parking area, the amount of
upgraded lighting area shall be that required under this section.
   (E)   Change of type of occupancy. When the type of occupancy of a site is
changed, the lighting for the site shall be upgraded, to comply with this
section for the structure and the parking lot be upgraded for the required
parking for the occupancy as established in this code. For purpose of
determining the type of occupancy of a site, the occupancy classifications of
the county code shall be utilized.
   (F)   Unoccupied sites. When a site has been unoccupied for a period of one
year, the lighting shall be upgraded to fully comply with this section prior to
any reoccupation of the site.
   (G)   Development application. When a development application is made for a
site, the County Board may, as a condition of approval, require compliance with
any or all of the performance standards of this section and the extent of
compliance required in such cases may be greater than that otherwise required
in this section, if deemed reasonably necessary to protect the public health,
safety, or welfare and to achieve the proposes of this section.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.574 POINT OF MEASUREMENTS.
   Any light intensity measurement taken at the property line shall be measured
at the greatest point of illumination of said property line. Any measurements
to determine the minimum and maximum lighting levels internal to a site will be
measured by positioning the meter horizontally at ground level at the greatest
and least points of artificial illumination.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.575 APPLICABILITY.
   Modifications to the requirements of this section may be approved as part of
a final development plan for a Planned Development Overlay District, pursuant
to the provisions provided:
   (A)   Any deviations from lighting standards established by this section are
clearly delineated in the plan submission reviewed by the Planning Commission
and approved by the County Board;
   (B)   Any deviations are consistent with the purposes of this section;
   (C)   The minimum light level proposed provides a minimum of 75% of the
illumination required in this section;
   (D)   The height of support poles above grade does not exceed the maximum
permitted by this section by more than 25%, except that no development shall be
allowed for increased support pole height within 500 feet of a protected
residential property; and
   (E)   No increase in glare occurs as a result of deviation from the adopted
standards.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
LANDSCAPE AND BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.590 SITE PLANS.
   If a building or parking lot permit is applied for and no zoning action is
required, an administrative site plan approval will be required.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.591 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   An application for a building or parking lot permit shall promptly be
forwarded to the appropriate officials.
   (B)   Review must be completed within 15 days of the receipt by the county
of a complete site plan review application. If, in the judgment of the
appropriate officials, the site plan review application does not contain
sufficient information to enable the appropriate county officials to properly
carry out its responsibilities, the appropriate officials may request
additional information from the applicant. In that event, the 15-day period
previously referred to shall be suspended, pending the receipt of all
information requested by the appropriate officials.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.592 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   If the appropriate officials approve a site plan, a building or
parking permit may then be issued. If the appropriate officials do not approve
a site plan, the applicant may appeal the appropriate officials’ decision to
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (B)   A notice of appeal must be filed with the appropriate official no
later than 15 days after receipt by the applicant of the decision of the
appropriate officials.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.593 EXEMPTION FROM SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   One- and two-family residences are exempt from county-wide site plan
review requirements.
   (B)   In addition, site plans shall not be required for renovation or
expansion of an existing structure or use unless access points would be changed
or a substantial increase in traffic to the site would be generated.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.594 PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Permits for off-street parking lots. No person shall expand an
existing parking lot or construct a new parking lot of five spaces or more
without having first obtained a written permit, issued by the appropriate
official, or his or her designee representative. Prior to obtaining a permit
for such expansion or new construction, the applicant shall submit to the
appropriate official, or his or her designated representative, a landscape/site
plan as required in this chapter, and plans showing the construction
specifications for all off-street parking lots, and he or she shall provide for
proper inspection of construction.
   (B)   Construction. All off-street parking lots required to obtain a permit
as identified in the above section shall be laid to the line and grade of, and
shall conform to surface thickness and other specifications of the appropriate
county official, or his or her designated representative.
   (C)   Landscaping and screening requirements for off-street parking lots.
The provisions of this section for the installation and maintenance of
landscaping and screening requirements are intended to protect the character
and stability of residential, commercial, industrial, and conservation areas,
and to enhance the aesthetic and visual image of the county.
      (1)   (a)   Parking lots of five or more spaces shall be set back ten
feet from the front property line(s). Landscaping requirements with the front
yard(s) include that the yard be seeded or sodded with lawn. Rock cover may be
used, but may not exceed 20% of the landscaped front yard setback. In addition,
one canopy tree for every five parking spaces and a minimum of 5% ground cover
landscape coverage of shrubs and evergreens/conifers shall be required.
         (b)   The ten-foot front yard setback may be reduced to five feet if
there is a continuous 26-inch solid wall/fence or shrubbery hedge provided.
Sodding, rock ground cover, canopy tree, and ground cover landscape coverage
requirements will still be applied if a solid wall/fence is provided. Sodding
and/or rock ground requirements will still be applied if a shrubbery fence is
provided.
      (2)   (a)   Parking lots of five or more spaces shall be set back five
feet from side and rear property lines. Landscaping requirements within the
side and rear yards include that the yard be seeded or sodded with lawn. Rock
ground cover may be used, but may not exceed 20% of the landscaped side and
rear yard setback. In addition, one canopy tree for every five parking spaces
and a minimum of 5% ground landscape coverage of shrubs and evergreens/conifers
shall be required.
         (b)   1.   When a side and/or rear yard is adjacent to a residential
use, a continuous four foot solid wall/fence or shrubbery hedge shall also be
provided with the five-foot setback yard.
            2.   If a four-foot shrubbery hedge is provided, canopy tree and
ground landscape coverage shall not be required.
      (3)   Wherever landscaping and screening requirements may interfere with
traffic vision, the height and placement shall be determined by the County
Engineer.
      (4)   Trees and other landscaping shall be of a species which are hardy
to the area and have measured diameters of such identified in the minimum
standards for plantings of §
154.595. Prohibited trees are identified in the section so identified in §
154.597.
      (5)   Subject to the approval of the appropriate official, alternate
landscaping plans may be substituted for consideration.
      (6)   A landscape/site plan will be required to be submitted for staff
review prior to issuing a parking lot development permit for parking lots of
five spaces or more. The following basic standards should be set:
         (a)   Drawn to scale;
         (b)   Identify location of landscaping or other features;
         (c)   Specify nature of materials (for example, species, variety, and
the like); and
         (d)   Specify number of plants, shrubs, trees, and the like, by
species.
      (7)   Landscaping and screening must be maintained in good condition,
free of refuse and debris, and provide a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance
at least equal to the original installation. It shall be the owner’s
responsibility to see that the landscaping is maintained.
   (D)   Appeal process. If the appropriate officials approve a site plan, a
parking lot permit may then be issued. If the appropriate officials do not
approve a site plan, the applicant may appeal the appropriate officials’
decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals. A notice of appeal must be filed with
the appropriate official no later than 15 days after receipt by the applicant
of the decision of the appropriate officials.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.595 BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Intent. The provisions of this section are to provide specific
landscape screening and bufferyard requirements to reduce the incompatibility
between zoning districts of different intensity and type. These bufferyards
will lessen the adverse impact of more intense land uses upon residential areas
and/or other areas of less intense use by reducing noise, visual, and other
environmental impacts.
   (B)   Requirements.
      (1)   In addition to landscaping and screening requirements for off-
street parking areas, bufferyard standards will also apply for site plans
requiring a zoning change, special use permit, and non-exempt site plan review
requirements.
      (2)   The bufferyard requirement is determined by the difference between
the zoning district of the subject property and the zoning district of adjacent
properties. The specific requirements are identified in the following sections
and the accompanying table in §
154.599. Landscaping and screening requirements for off-street parking areas
apply to the side of the property abutting a public street right-of-way. A list
of prohibited trees is provided in §
154.597.
   (C)   Description of bufferyards A through D.
      (1)   Type A buffer.
         (a)   The standard buffer within Type A is eight feet wide and
contains the following number of required plants per 100 feet:
            1.   One canopy tree;
            2.   One understory tree;
            3.   Six shrubs; and
            4.   One evergreen/conifer.
         (b)   Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one
of several alternative buffer widths to provide a Type A buffer, each with a
different amount of required plantings reflected as a multiplier of the
required plant units per 100 feet. The alternatives include the following:
            1.   Twenty-foot wide buffer with 50% of the required plant units
per 100 feet;
            2.   Sixteen-foot wide buffer with 60% of the required plant units
per 100 feet;
            3.   Twelve-foot wide buffer with 80% of the required plan units
per 100 feet; and
            4.   Four-foot wide buffer with 90% of the required plant units and
a continuous hedge setback three feet from the property line or fence.
      (2)   Type B buffer.
         (a)   The standard buffer within Type B is ten feet wide and contains
the following number of required plant per 100 feet:
            1.   Two canopy trees;
            2.   Two understory trees;
            3.   Six shrubs; and
            4.   Two evergreens/conifers.
         (b)   Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one
of several alternative buffer widths to provide a Type B buffer, each with a
different amount of required plantings. Type B buffer alternatives range from a
25-foot wide buffer with 50% of the required plantings to a five-foot wide
buffer with 90% of the required plantings and a continuous hedge or fence.
      (3)   Type C buffer.
         (a)   The standard buffer within Type C is 15 feet wide and contains
the following number of required plantings per 100 feet:
            1.   Three canopy trees;
            2.   Two understory trees;
            3.   Nine shrubs; and
            4.   Three evergreens/conifers.
         (b)   1.   Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose
one of several alternative buffer widths to provide a Type C buffer, each with
a different amount of required plantings.
            2.   Type C buffer alternatives range from a 25-foot wide buffer
with 60% of the required plantings to a six-foot wide buffer with 90% of the
required plantings and a continuous fence.
      (4)   Type D buffer.
         (a)   The standard buffer within Type D is 15 feet wide and contains
the following number of required plants per 100 feet:
            1.   Three canopy trees;
            2.   Two understory trees;
            3.   Fifteen shrubs; and
            4.   Five evergreens/conifers.
         (b)   Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one
of several alternative buffer widths to provide a Type D buffer, each with a
different amount of required plantings. Type D buffer alternatives range from a
25-foot wide buffer with 60% of the required plantings to an eight-foot wide
buffer with 90% of the required plantings and a continuous fence.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.596 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PLANTINGS.
   (A)   Canopy trees. Two inches diameter, six inches above ground level, and
ten feet in height when planted.
   (B)   Understory tree. One inch diameter, six inches above ground level, and
six feet in height when planted.
   (C)   Shrubs. Twenty-four inches in height when planted; 40% or more must
reach a mature height of six feet or more.
   (D)   Evergreens/conifers. Two inches in diameter, six inches above ground
level, and six feet in height when planted. Twenty feet minimum height at
maturity.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.597 PROHIBITED TREES.
   The following weak-wooded trees and generally undesirable trees for urban
conditions shall be prohibited for use in meeting any of the landscaping/
screening requirements for off-street parking areas and/or bufferyard
requirements:
   (A)   Ailanthus (tree of heaven);
   (B)   Box elder;
   (C)   European mountain ash;
   (D)   European white birch;
   (E)   Poplar;
   (F)   Siberian elm;
   (G)   Silver maple;
   (H)   Willow;
   (I)   Cottonwood;
   (J)   All fruit bearing including crab apple, Bradford pear, purple-leaf
plum, mulberry, and Russian olive;
   (K)   Sweet gum;
   (L)   Hawthorne;
   (M)   Pin oak; and
   (N)   Gingko.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.598 MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING.
   (A)   Bufferyard landscaping and screening must be maintained in good
condition, free of refuse and debris, and provide a healthy, neat, and orderly
appearance at least equal to the original installation.
   (B)   It shall be the owner’s responsibility to see that the landscaping is
maintained.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.599 SCHEDULE OF BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS.
Zoning of Adjacent Property
Subject   R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6 O-1 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 U-1 ORT C-1 C-2 I-1 I-2
Property
Zoning of Adjacent Property
             R-1 R-2 R- R-4 R-5 R-6 O-1 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 U-1 ORT C-1 C-2 I-1 I-2
             3
         R-1
         R-2 N          N           N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N
         R-3
         R-4
         R-5 A          N           N   N   N   N   N   N   N   B   B   N   N
         R-6
Subject  O-1 A          A           N   N   N   N   N   N   N   B   B   N   N
Property B-1 B          A           N   N   N   N   N   N   N   B   B   N   N
         B-2 C          B           N   N   N   N   N   N   N   B   B   N   N
         B-3 C          B           C   N   N   N   N   N   C   B   B   N   N
         B-4 C          C           C   N   N   N   N   A   C   B   B   N   N
         U-1 C          C           N   N   N   N   N   N   N   B   B   N   N
         ORT D          D           N   N   N   N   N   N   N   B   B   N   N
         C-1 N          N           N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N
         C-2 A          N           N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N
         I-1 C          C           D   B   A   N   N   B   C   C   C   N   N
         I-2 D          D           D   B   A   A   A   C   C   D   D   N   N
 
   (A)   Approximate bufferyard requirement found in the table above is as
follows:
      (1)   A, which is eight feet in width;
      (2)   B, which is ten feet in width;
      (3)   C, which is 15 feet in width;
      (4)   D, which is 15 feet in width; and
      (5)   N, which is no buffer required.
   (B)   Position of property abutting a public right-of-way is governed by
landscaping for parking lot requirements.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
DEVELOPMENT IN A SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
§ 154.610 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted by the county
by the County Statutory Authority in 55 ILCS 5/5-1041 and 55 ILCS 5/5-1063 in
order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits, and enhance
community and economic development.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.611 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE(S). A structure that is on the same parcel of property
as a principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure; an ACCESSORY STRUCTURE specifically excludes structures
used for human habitation.
   AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE(S). A structure that is used exclusively in
connection with the production, harvesting, storage, raising, or drying of
agricultural commodities and livestock; AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE specifically
excludes any structure used for human habitation.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The BASE
FLOOD elevation at any location is as defined in §
154.612.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more
than 180 days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, or hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
         (a)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
         (b)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
         (c)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
180 days per year;
         (d)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
culverts, or similar projects;
         (e)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
         (f)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating,
paving, or other alterations of the ground surface; and
         (g)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A FEMA form used to record the elevations of a
building. Completing the form requires that a survey be conducted by a
registered professional engineer or land surveyor. The ELEVATION CERTIFICATE is
used to determine insurance rates for post-FIRM structures and can be used to
support a letter of map amendment (LOMA) application.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHS) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation, and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOOD-RESISTANT MATERIAL. Any building material capable of withstanding
direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining significant
damage. Examples given in FEMA TB 2, 4, and 7, FEMA 348, ASCE 24, and the like.
   FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). These two terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the county that are subject
to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the Rock River, North
Channel Rock River, Coal Creek, Coal Creek Tributary, Eckhart Creek, Kyte
Creek, Meridosia Ditch Creek, Mississippi River, Mill Creek, Shaffer Creek,
Sylvan Slough, and un-named creek and tributary to un-named creek numbers 1, 2,
and 3 are generally identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated April 5, 2010.
FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the
county.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property, and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus two
feet of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODWAY. The portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Rock River, North Channel
Rock River, Coal Creek, Coal Creek Tributary, Eckhart Creek, Kyte Creek,
Meridosia Ditch Creek, Mississippi River, Mill Creek, Shaffer Creek, Sylvan
Slough, and un-named creek and tributary to un-named creek numbers 1 and 2, and
shall be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map prepared by
FEMA and dated April 5, 2010. The FLOODWAYS for each of the remaining
floodplains of the county shall be according to the best data available from
the federal, state, or other sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions, and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the State Historic Preservation Agency; and
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the State Historic Preservation Agency, or a historic
landmark designated by the city under its authority as a certified local
government.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR. Provided that
such enclosure is not built or altered so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of §
154.616.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities and is registered
with the state as a MANUFACTURED HOME.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale designed for the placement
of manufactured homes.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, NEW. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   NON-CONVERSION AGREEMENT. A form provided by the Floodplain Administrator to
be signed by the owner and recorded in the public records stating the owner
agrees to not convert or modify the following in any manner that is
inconsistent with the terms of the building permit and this chapter:
      (1)   An enclosure below an elevated building;
      (2)   Crawl/underfloor spaces that are more than five feet in height
(measured from the lowest interior grade or floor to the bottom of the floor
system above); and
      (3)   A detached structure that is not elevated and is larger than 70
square feet in area.
   PROLONGED CONTACT. At least 72 hours.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size; and
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE. A structure having flood related damages on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SFHA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   SIGNIFICANT DAMAGE. Any damage requiring more than low-cost cosmetic repair
(such as painting).
   START OF CONSTRUCTION.
      (1)   Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement, was
within 180 days of the permit date.
      (2)   The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. See BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage during a ten-year period ending on the date
of the last damage event equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work
performed. The term includes REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURES (see definition).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a
structure taking place during the life of the structure in which the cumulative
percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or increases the floor
area by more than 20%.
      (2)   (a)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure.
         (b)   This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
      (3)   The term does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as
the documentation is provided.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.612 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (A)   This subchapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best
available base flood data are listed below.
   (B)   Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party
shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace the existing
data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for approval prior
to any development of the site.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Rock River, North
Channel Rock River, Coal Creek, Coal Creek Tributary, Eckhart Creek, Kyte
Creek, Meridosia Ditch Creek, Mississippi River, Mill Creek, Shaffer Creek,
Sylvan Slough, and un-named creek and tributary to un-named creek numbers 1, 2,
and 3 shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide
“Flood Insurance Study of Rock Island County, Illinois” prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated April 5, 2010.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an AH Zone
or AO Zone shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the countywide
flood insurance rate map of the county.
   (E)   (1)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an A Zone on the countywide flood insurance rate map shall be
according to the best data available from federal, state, or other sources.
      (2)   Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed
by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.613 DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF THE COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF ZONING AND
BUILDING SAFETY.
   The Director of the County Department of Zoning and Building Safety shall be
responsible for the general administration of this chapter and ensure that all
development activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the
county meet the requirements of this subchapter. Specifically, the Director of
the County Department of Zoning and Building Safety shall:
   (A)   Cause development permits to be processed in accordance with §
154.614;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets
the damage prevention requirements of §
154.615;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to §
154.616 are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement), elevation certificate, or floodproofing
certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
§
154.617;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of §
154.618;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
154.619 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in §
154.619 as a necessary to ensure compliance with this subchapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this
subchapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this subchapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this subchapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification
of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to
the floodplain map.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.614 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Director of the County Department of Zoning and
Building Safety.
   (B)   The Director of the County Department of Zoning and Building Safety
shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet
the requirements of this subchapter.
   (C)   The application for a development permit shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
154.616; and
      (5)   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a registered contractor may also meet this
requirement.
   (D)   (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the
Director of the County Department of Zoning and Building Safety shall compare
the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development located
on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than the current base
flood elevation and which has not been filled after the date of the site’s
first flood insurance rate map is not in the floodplain, and therefore not
subject to the requirements of this subchapter. Conversely, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected, but not shown on the current flood insurance rate map, is subject to
the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   The Director of the County Department of Zoning and Building Safety
shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to
the date of the site’s first flood insurance rate map identification.
      (3)   (a)   The Director of the County Department of Zoning and Building
Safety shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all
other federal, state, and local permits, approvals, or permit-not-required
letters that may be required for this type of activity.
         (b)   The Director of the County Department of Zoning and Building
Safety shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained.
   (E)   (1)   A signed non-conversion agreement shall be recorded in the
public records prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy or certificate
of completion for the following:
         (a)   An enclosure below an elevated building;
         (b)   A crawl/underfloor space that are more than four feet in height
(measured from the lowest interior grade or floor to the bottom of the floor
system above); and
         (c)   A detached structure that is not elevated and is larger than 70
square feet in area.
      (2)   (a)   This agreement shall state that the enclosed area below FPE
shall not be converted for use other than for parking, building access or for
allowable storage as detailed in this subchapter and verified with annual
inspections.
         (b)   The applicant agrees to notify prospective purchasers of the
existence of the non-conversion agreement.
   (F)   Established procedures for administering and documenting
determinations, as outlined below, of substantial improvement and substantial
damage.
      (1)   Determine the market value or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser of
the building before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case
of repair, the market value of the building shall be the market value before
the damage occurred and before any repairs are made.
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building.
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or substantial damage.
      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of this subchapter.
      (5)   A form shall be used to document the actual calculations for
projects and may be required to be recorded in the County Recorder office if
the improvements exceed 20%.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.615 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map,
and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, no development shall be
allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development
will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities, or threat to public
health and safety. The following specific development activities shall be
considered as meeting this requirement:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
         (a)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one foot;
         (b)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half foot at a point 1,000 feet upstream of
the proposed structure;
         (c)   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile;
         (d)   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel;
         (e)   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the state and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/OWR permit;
and
         (f)   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 3: The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier
cells, or other similar anchorage devices that have been permitted by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers;
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 4:
         (a)   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge;
         (b)   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge;
         (c)   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake,
or stream;
         (d)   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris;
         (e)   All disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction grades
and re-vegetated; and
         (f)   All State Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety Code,
and federal requirements must be met.
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5:
         (a)   The boat dock must not extend more than 50 feet into a waterway
and no more than one-fourth of the width of the waterway and shall not extend
beyond the navigational limited established by the IDNR and Corps of Engineers;
         (b)   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet;
         (c)   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed 50% of the landowner’s shoreline
frontage, nor 50 feet;
         (d)   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet of the projected
property line;
         (e)   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices;
         (f)   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water;
         (g)   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with floatation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible;
         (h)   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill;
         (i)   Non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow; and
         (j)   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corp of Engineers.
      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6: The following activities (not involving
fill or positive change in grade) are covered by this permit:
         (a)   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or septic
tanks not crossing a lake or stream;
         (b)   The construction of light poles, sign posts, and similar
structures;
         (c)   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures;
         (d)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures
such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports;
         (e)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70
square feet in size, nor ten square feet in any dimension. Only one such
building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit and this
subchapter; and
         (f)   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are made
to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7:
         (a)   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection;
         (b)   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the
use of riprap or other design measures;
         (c)   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation; and
         (d)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8:
         (a)   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of
the river, lake, or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet of cover shall be provided. The
river, lake, or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition;
         (b)   1.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a
minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation.
            2.   All disturbed floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be
restored to their original contours and seeded, or otherwise stabilized upon
completion of construction;
         (c)   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5), shall
be provided with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed; and
         (d)   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten days prior to
the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9:
         (a)   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric-formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation, and treated timber. URBAN
AREAS are defined as areas of the state where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten year (the Department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban);
         (b)   In addition to the materials listed in division (A)(8)(a) above,
other materials (for example, tire revetments) may be utilized in rural areas,
provided all other conditions of this permit are met;
         (c)   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage of debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the Environmental Protections Act (415 ILCS 5);
         (d)   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, 1,000 feet;
         (e)   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action;
         (f)   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project;
         (g)   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of
the bank;
         (h)   1.   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full-
width and cross-sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
            2.   For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along
the bank, toe of the bank, or other similar applications, in no case shall the
cross-sectional area of the natural channel be reduced by more than 10% nor the
volume of material placed exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot of the stream
bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and to
lessen the quantity of material required.
         (i)   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area and pieces of said concrete shall have no
dimension wider than 12 inches;
         (j)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction;
         (k)   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            a.   It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s); and
            b.   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot.
         (l)   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10:
         (a)   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with
the requirements of the local floodplain ordinance;
         (b)   The principle structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988);
         (c)   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed 500 square
feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another property;
         (d)   Must not involve the placement of any fill material;
         (e)   No construction shall be undertaken in, or within, 50 feet of
the bank of the stream channel;
         (f)   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions;
         (g)   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition
must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review; and
         (h)   1.   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation.
            2.   All disturbed floodway areas shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11:
         (a)   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed 1,000 feet;
         (b)   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel;
         (c)   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site;
         (d)   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            1.   Removed from the floodway;
            2.   Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials would
be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross-sectional
area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than 10%, nor the
volume of material placed exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot of streambank;
            3.   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area
such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            4.   Used to stabilize and existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            5.   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
Department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            6.   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         (e)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 12:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            1.   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the backwater
induced by the existing structure; and
            2.   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         (b)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects, the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge;
         (c)   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads (this condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR);
         (d)   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement, or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the Department’s Statewide Permit Number 9 (minor shoreline, channel, and
streambank protection activities) or Statewide Permit Number 11 (minor
maintenance dredging activities); and
         (e)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 13:
         (a)   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required federal, state, and local
authorizations;
         (b)   1.   The term TEMPORARY shall mean not more than one
construction season.
            2.   All temporary construction materials must be removed from the
stream and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to
the conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR;
         (c)   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases due to the temporary project are contained within the
channel banks;
         (d)   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway;
         (e)   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or
stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents
that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of Special Condition
Number 3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a
minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the
backwater induced by the temporary structure;
         (f)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition;
         (g)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction; and
         (h)   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution
as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5).
      (13)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in division (A) above may be
permitted only if:
      (1)   A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.616 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of §
154.615, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet;
      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively over
the life of the structure. If substantially improved, the entire structure must
meet the flood protection standards of this section;
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively over a ten-year period ending on the date of the
last damage event. If substantially damaged, the entire structure must meet the
flood protection standards of this section;
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site;
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year;
      (6)   Damage to a repetitive loss structures as defined in §
154.611;
      (7)   An exception would be an existing post-FIRM structure may be
rebuilt with the first finished floor at greater than one foot above the base
flood elevation, provided all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The structure is 100% compliant with all other flood damage
prevention provisions of this subchapter prior to the damage event;
         (b)   The first finished floor is shown to be one foot or more above
the base flood elevation by a fully executed elevation certificate;
         (c)   Said damage is caused by a non-flood event; and
         (d)   The first finished floor structural members including sheathing
and the foundation will require no repairs during reconstruction.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material; and
         (e)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      (2)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters;
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation. All structural and non-structural
materials at or below the flood protection elevation must be flood resistant
materials consistent with FEMA standards;
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot above grade with a minimum of two openings. The
openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation. If engineered openings are used, a copy of the International Code
Council evaluation report is required. This report shall reference the model
number of the vents used, specifies the number of vents required for a specific
area size located below the BFE, and lists installation requirements; and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            1.   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation, provided they are waterproofed.
            3.   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space.
            4.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
         (e)   Enclosed areas below elevated buildings and structures shall
comply with the requirements of county codes, shall be limited to parking of
vehicles, storage, and building access, and shall comply with the following:
            1.   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for:
               a.   Parking of vehicles (garage doors);
               b.   Limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection
with the premises (one double door set); and
               c.   Main entrance to the structure.
            2.   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
temperature-controlled by a permanently mounted air-conditioner or connected
the HVAC system;
            3.   No areas are shall be partitioned within the enclosed area,
only structural walls are allowed;
            4.   All construction below the lowest floor shall be built with
flood damage-resistant materials consistent with ASCE 24 Flood Resistant Design
and Construction;
            5.   Section
154.614(C) regarding a non-conversion agreement; and
            6.   The area enclosed below the base flood elevation shall not be
used for human habitation. Bathrooms are not allowed.
      (3)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation, provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   1.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation
shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
            2.   A minimum of one opening on each wall having a total net area
of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed area. The
openings shall be no more than one foot above grade. If engineered openings are
used, a copy of the International Code Council evaluation report is required.
This report shall reference the model number of the vents used, specifies the
number of vents required for a specific area size located below the BFE, and
lists installation requirements;
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade;
         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four feet
at any point;
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event;
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
      (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood;
      (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice;
      (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity; and
      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls, and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this division (C).
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with division (B) above; and
      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the State
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180
days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of division (D) above
unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck;
      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      (4)   The vehicle must be designed and used solely for recreation,
camping, travel, or seasonal use, and not as a permanent dwelling;
      (5)   The vehicle with all area expansions extended must be no larger
than 400 square feet;
      (6)   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
      (7)   Air conditioning units must be permanently attached so as to be
safe for movement out of the floodplain;
      (8)   Propane tanks and electrical and sewage connections must be quick-
disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation;
      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model; and
      (10)   The vehicle must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks; or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by used of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds, or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted, provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The garage or shed must be non-habitable;
      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use;
      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits;
      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principle structure on the same lot;
      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage;
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation;
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for
every one square foot of floor area. If engineered openings are used, a copy of
the International Code Council evaluation report is required. This report shall
reference the model number of the vents used, specifies the number of vents
required for a specific area size located below the BFE, and lists installation
requirements;
      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than $15,000 in market value or
replacement cost whichever is greater or less than 576 square feet;
      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning;
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, and the like) shall be stored above the flood protection
elevation; and
      (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.617 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The County Board shall take into account hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   (B)   (1)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation
agreements, planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of §§
154.615 and
154.616.
      (2)   Any proposal for such development shall include the following data:
      (1)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain; where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      (2)   The boundary of the floodway, when applicable; and
      (3)   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
Streets, blocks lots, parks, and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.618 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development, in
addition to the requirements of §§
154.615 and
154.616.
   (B)   The following standards apply:
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank, and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of §
154.616;
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight;
      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the
level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation, whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities; and
      (6)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.619 CARRYING CAPACITY, NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
   (B)   In addition, the county shall notify adjacent communities in writing
30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of
the watercourse.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.620 VARIANCES.
   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the County Zoning Board of
Appeals for a variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be the final decision
making entity, subject to the appeals process outlined in §
154.021. The Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting
of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, or
creation of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      (6)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      (7)   All other state and federal permits must be obtained.
   (B)   The County Zoning Board of Appeals shall cause to notify an applicant
in writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protections
standards of §
154.616 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Variances to the building protection requirements of §
154.616 which are requested in connection with reconstruction, repair, or
alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined herein may be
granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of §§
154.615 and
154.616, subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
   (D)   Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall be decided
individually based on a case-by-case analysis of the building’s unique
circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as
those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter. In order to minimize
flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public health and
safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for
agricultural structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed.
(See also FEMA Policy #104-008-03.)
      (1)   (a)   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from
the floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that
the varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no
other alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for
the agricultural structure.
         (b)   Residential structures or animal confinement facilities, such as
farmhouses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      (2)   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in Zone A only as identified on the community’s flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
      (3)   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (for example,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, and the
like) below the base flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant
materials in accordance with §
154.615.
      (4)   (a)   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in
accordance with §
154.616.
         (b)   All of the building’s structural components must be capable of
resisting specific flood-related forces, including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and
hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      (5)   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with §
154.616.
      (6)   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to
the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters in accordance with §
154.616(B)(2)(c).
      (7)   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of §
154.615. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures within any
designated floodway.
      (8)   Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.621 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this subchapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This
subchapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the
floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This subchapter does not
create liability on the part of the county or any officer or employee thereof
for any flood damage that results from proper reliance on this subchapter or
any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
SIGNS
§ 154.635 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This subchapter is hereby enacted by the county to assure compatibility of
signs with surrounding land usage, to conserve property value in all districts,
to protect the public investment in streets and highways, to promote the safety
and recreational value of public travel, and to strengthen the economy of the
county. All signs hereinafter erected or maintained, except official traffic
and street signs, shall conform to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.636 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ATTACHED SIGNS. A sign which is bolted, nailed, painted, or in any way
affixed to an outside building wall.
   ATTACHED PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign which is attached to a building or other
structure and extends beyond the surface of that portion of building or
structure to which it is attached.
   ATTACHED WALL SIGN. All flat signs of solid face construction which are
placed against a building or other structure and attached to the exterior
front, rear, or side wall of any building or other structure.
   ERECT. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix signs.
   FACIA SIGN. A single-faced, attached sign which is attached flat against and
parallel to its supporting wall.
   FACING. The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message
is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
   FLASHING SIGN. A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in
intensity at all times when in use. Illuminated signs which indicate the time,
temperature, weather, or similar public service information shall not be
considered FLASHING SIGNS.
   FREESTANDING ELEVATED SIGN. Any sign supported by a metal pole or poles,
placed into the ground with the base line of the sign not less than ten feet
above the ground over which it is erected.
   FREESTANDING GROUND SIGN. Any sign supported by uprights or braces placed
into or upon the ground with the base line of that sign not more than ten feet
above the ground over which it is erected, and not attached to any building.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. As regulated by this subchapter, any sign supported by
uprights or braces placed into the ground and not attached to any building or
structure other than said braces or uprights.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs,
or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign
proper.
   INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Any material which will not ignite at or below a
temperature of 1,200F and will not continue to burn or glow at that
temperature.
   INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any illuminated, non-flashing sign whose
illumination is derived from an external, artificial lighting source.
   MARQUEE SIGN.
      (1)   Any sign attached to, or an integral part of a hood or canopy of
permanent construction projecting from the wall or a building over the entrance
to that building.
      (2)   For the purpose of this subchapter, MARQUEE SIGNS shall be
considered as attached signs when determining the allowable square foot area
and total square foot area of all permitted signs, and shall be of the facia
type. No MARQUEE SIGN shall extend more than two feet above the marquee
structure.
   OBSOLETE SIGN. Any on-premises sign or facing which no longer advertises a
bona fide business conducted or product sold on the premises.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign identifying the occupant of the property upon
which it is located and/or advertising goods or services available thereon.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN (BILLBOARD or POSTER PANEL). A sign which directs
attention to a business, product, service, or activity not necessarily
conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
   PERSON. Any human being, firm, legal entity, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign which is of a movable nature, which advertises
products, places, services, or things not commonly advertised on permanent
structures.
   ROOF SIGN. As regulated by this subchapter, any sign erected, constructed,
and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with the principle
means of support on the roof structure.
   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, or illumination which is
affixed to, painted, or represented directly or indirectly, upon a building
structure or piece of land which advertises or directs attention to an object,
product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or a business.
   SIGN AREA. The extreme points or edges of the sign, excluding molding and
the supporting structure which does not form a part of the sign proper. The
area of a sign composed of characters or words attached directly to a building
or wall surface shall be the smallest triangles or parallelograms which enclose
a related group of words, symbols, characters, or figures. All faces of a
multiple-faced sign shall be included in computing SIGN AREA, except back-to-
back outdoor advertising and double-face on premises signs, the area of which
shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or
as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area (see
Appendix).
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.637 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions. The provisions and regulations of this subchapter shall
not apply to the following signs:
      (1)   Hours and business numbers identifying the address of a parcel of
land;
      (2)   Announcement or professional signs and name plates in residential
zoning districts identifying the occupant of a parcel of land and not exceeding
one square foot in area;
      (3)   Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal;
      (4)   Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality,
educational institution, or non-profit organization;
      (5)   Traffic or other municipal signs, such as legal notices, railroad
crossings, danger, and other emergency signs as may be approved by the County
Board;
      (6)   Community special event signs approved by the County Board;
      (7)   Bulletin boards not over 12 square feet in area for public,
charitable, or religious institutions when the same are located on the premises
of said institutions set back ten feet from all property lines;
      (8)   Signs used exclusively for traffic direction, on private streets,
or in parking areas, not exceeding ten square feet in area and not illuminated.
Such signs shall be placed so as not to cause traffic or pedestrian hazards;
      (9)   Non-electric or electric signs which do not require approval of the
Economic Development Office, inside buildings which are visible from the
outside, and all other signs inside buildings which are not visible from the
outside;
      (10)   Community information signs advertising events or promotions not
conducted on the premises which are sponsored by religious, charitable,
business, or other associations and organizations; and
      (11)   Credit card signs or stickers affixed to windows.
   (B)   Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
structurally alter, or relocate within the county any sign as defined in this
subchapter, except temporary signs, without first obtaining an erection permit
from the Economic Development Office and making payment of the fee as required
by this section. All signs that have electrical provisions shall, in addition,
be subject to the provisions of the electrical code and the permit fees
required thereunder.
      (1)   Every applicant, before being granted an erection permit hereunder,
shall pay a permit fee for each such sign and sign structure regulated by this
subchapter. Unless otherwise specified in this subchapter, each sign shall be
considered a separate structure requiring its own permit.
         (a)   Permit fees shall be based on the market value of the sign at
the time when said permit is applied for.
         (b)   The permit fee shall be $5 for the first $200 of valuation and
$2 for each additional $200 of valuation or part thereof up to $1,000 of
valuation. Each additional $1,000 of valuation or part thereof shall be
assessed a permit fee of $5.
      (2)   (a)   The owner of any building to which a sign is to be attached,
said sign to encroach or hang over public right-of-way shall, before any permit
be granted for construction or installation of said sign, furnish the county
satisfactory evidence of liability insurance coverage in an amount of not less
than $100,000 liability coverage on account of any one accident, from an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state, with an endorsement
thereon holding the county harmless from any claims or causes of action arising
out of the installation or maintenance of said sign.
         (b)   The owner of any building to which a sign has been attached
prior to the passage of this subchapter, which said sign encroaches or hangs
over the public right-of-way, shall comply with the insurance requirements of
this section within 30 days after enactment of this subchapter.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the Economic Development Office, upon
filing of an application for an erection permit, to examine such plans,
specifications, and other data relating to the proposed sign and sign
structure. If it appears that the proposed sign and sign structure is in
compliance with all the requirements of the building code, this subchapter, and
all other laws and ordinances of the county, the Economic Development Office
shall then issue an erection permit. If the work authorized under an erection
permit has not been completed within six months after date of issuance, said
permit shall become null and void, except that if good cause is shown, the
Economic Development Office may extend the permit for not more than one
consecutive six-month period.
      (4)   (a)   The application for an erection permit of a sign in which
electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the
Economic Development Office.
         (b)   The Economic Development Office shall examine the plans and
specifications respecting all wiring and connections to determine if the same
complies with the electrical code of the county and then shall issue an
electrical permit if the said plans and specifications comply with said code.
   (C)   Application for erection permit. An application for erection permits
shall be made upon applications provided by the Economic Development Office and
shall contain or have attached thereto the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of the person erecting the
sign;
      (2)   Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the
sign is to be attached or erected;
      (3)   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
      (4)   Written consent of the owner or authorized representative of the
building, structure, or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected;
      (5)   When requested by the Economic Development Office, blueprints or
drawings of the plans and/or specifications, and method of construction,
attachment to the building or in the ground, and the position of the sign in
relation to nearby buildings, structures, or other signs;
      (6)   When requested by the Economic Development Office, a copy of stress
sheets and calculations showing that the sign and sign structure are designed
for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this
and other laws and ordinances of the county;
      (7)   Location and size of the proposed sign;
      (8)   Proof of insurance policy of bond; and
      (9)   Such other information as the Economic Development Office may
require to show full compliance with this and all other ordinances of the
county.
   (D)   Revocation of permit. The Economic Development Office is hereby
authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him or her upon failure
of the holder thereof to comply with any provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   Structural and fabrication regulations. All signs shall be built,
constructed, and erected in accordance with the building code, other ordinances
of the county, and the Maintenance and Improvement Manual published by the
Outdoor Advertising Association of America, Inc.
      (1)   Design of signs. Every freestanding elevated sign, including the
frames and poles or supports and footings, and every attached projecting sign,
including frames, braces, and supports thereof, shall be designed by a
structural or manufacturer’s engineer in conformance with wind pressure and
dead load requirements established in this subchapter and in accordance with
the building code and other ordinances of the county.
      (2)   Erection of signs. Every elevated freestanding sign shall be
erected under the supervision of an experienced construction superintendent or
manufacturer’s representative capable of interpreting the construction and
erection drawings required in order to assure conformance with all provisions
of this subchapter.
      (3)   Markings on signs. In addition to sign markings as required in the
electrical code, every sign hereafter erected shall have permanently affixed on
the exterior of the sign the date of erection and the permit number, which
shall not be covered in any future reconditioning or painting of said sign.
      (4)   Treating required. The owner of any sign (existing or proposed)
shall be required to have it properly painted, galvanized, or otherwise treated
to prevent rust and deterioration of all parts and supports of the said sign.
      (5)   Wind pressure and dead load requirements. All signs shall be
designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure and to receive dead loads
as required in the building code or any other ordinance of the county.
      (6)   No glass permitted. No glass shall be permitted except in the
lighting mechanism.
      (7)   Lights. Lights shall be permitted on signs, providing they are made
of corrosion-resistant materials. The lights shall be provided with proper
lenses concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign and preventing
glare upon the street or adjacent property. All lighted signs in residential
zoning districts, or on property which adjoins or abuts a residentially used
property along the front or side lot lines shall be of the illuminated type.
      (8)   Electrical connections. All electrical connections shall be
weather-tight.
      (9)   Movable parts to be secure. Any movable part of any sign, such as
the cover of a service opening, shall be securely fastened.
      (10)   Face of sign shall be smooth. All signs or other advertising
structures which are constructed at the property line, or within five feet
thereof, and are less than ten feet above the ground over which they are
located, shall not have a surface with nails, tacks, or wires that protrude
therefrom, except electrical reflectors and devices which may extend over the
top and in front of the advertising structures.
      (11)   Letters to be secure. All letters, figures, characters, or
representatives in cutout or irregular form maintained in conjunction with,
attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built
or attached to the sign structure and shall comply with the building code
requirements.
      (12)   Materials required.
         (a)   The support structures of all freestanding elevated and roof
signs for which a permit is required under this subchapter shall be constructed
of incombustible material, excluding trim.
         (b)   The facings of freestanding elevated and roof signs and facings,
and supports of freestanding ground, attached projecting, attached wall, and
outdoor advertising signs are allowed to be constructed of combustible
materials if it is determined that they do not increase the fire hazard of the
structure.
      (13)   Supplementary signs. No supplementary sign or other appendage may
be hung from or supported by an approved sign or its support if it will
adversely affect the structure of the approved sign or make the approved sign
non-conforming.
   (F)   Signs not to constitute a traffic hazard. No sign as regulated by this
subchapter shall be erected at the intersection of any street, alley, or
driveway in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any
location where, by reason of the position, shape, or color, it may interfere
with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal, or device; or which makes use of the words “STOP,” “LOOK,” “DANGER,” or
any other word, phrase, or symbol or character in such manner as to interfere
with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.638 ATTACHED SIGNS.
   (A)   Attached signs are permitted in all B-1 Neighborhood Commercial, B-
2 Central Commercial, B-3 Community Commercial, B-4 Highway Business District,
I-1 Light Industrial, and I-2 General Industrial Zoning Districts. At no time
shall any sign project more than eight and one-half feet from the building
surface, nor more than 18 inches into the public right-of-way, whichever is
more restrictive. Every attached sign, excluding fascia signs, shall be placed
at least ten feet above the ground over which it is erected. These limits
include the space necessary to allow for installation hardware. Signs located
on canopies and/or awnings will be considered attached signs for the purpose of
calculating the area. Requirements in the uniform building code will be used to
determine the distance of allowable projection into the public right-of-way.
   (B)   (1)   Attached on-premises signs may have an aggregate area of two
square feet for each linear foot of building frontage facing a street, but the
maximum total area of all permitted on-premises attached signs shall not exceed
500 square feet per establishment per street facing.
      (2)   Permitted signs may be placed on any facade of the building. The
printed copy of graphics portion of a fascia sign shall not exceed 80% of any
linear frontage of the building.
   (C)   (1)   Outdoor advertising signs shall not exceed 300 square feet per
face. On streets and highways within the jurisdiction of this subchapter, no
outdoor advertising sign may be established within 1,500 feet of any other
outdoor advertising sign facing the same direction measured on either side of
the street.
      (2)   Such spacing between structures does not apply to structures
separated by buildings or other structures in such a manner that only one sign
located within the above mentioned spacing distance is visible from the highway
at any one time.
   (D)   No attached sign shall extend more than four feet above the facade of
the building to which it is attached. A sign which is attached parallel to any
building or structure shall not project beyond the ends of the wall to which it
is attached.
   (E)   In the case of a lot or building facade with frontage on more than one
street, attached signs may be permitted on each street in accordance with the
regulations of this subchapter. In no case shall allowable sign area be
transferred from one street-facing facade to another street-facing facade.
   (F)   Attached signs identifying churches, fraternities, or other similar
uses in residential zoning districts shall be of the fascia type, shall not
exceed 30 square feet in area, and shall be limited to one sign (attached or
freestanding) on the premises of said use.
   (G)   Attached signs for special use permits granted by the County Board
shall be allowed only when authorized by said Board, and shall conform to the
requirements of 36.6.d.
   (H)   If the projecting attached sign is illuminated, the reflectors shall
be provided with the proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon
the area of the sign and preventing glare upon the street or adjacent property.
   (I)   The distance measured between the principle faces of any attached
projecting sign shall not exceed 18 inches.
   (J)   No attached projecting sign shall be secured with wire, strips of wood
or nails, nor shall any projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign.
   (K)   All attached wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the
building wall by means of metal anchors, bolts, or expansion screws of not less
than three-eighths inch in diameter, embedded in said wall at least five
inches; provided, however, that such signs may rest in, or be bolted to strong,
heavy metal brackets, or saddles set not over six feet apart, each of which
shall be securely fixed to the wall as herein before provided. In no case shall
any attached wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood, or nails.
   (L)   Attached signs identifying uses affiliated with a college, university,
or seminary, subject to the use meeting the 30-foot separation requirement from
any residentially zoned or one- or two-family used lot (as specified in the U-
1 University/College district) shall be of a fascia type and shall not exceed
30 square feet in area.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.639 FREESTANDING SIGNS.
   (A)   Freestanding signs are permitted in B-1 Neighborhood Business
District, B-2 Central Business District, and B-3 Community Business District.
   (B)   Freestanding signs shall conform to the height regulations of this
chapter with a maximum height of 25 feet. However, within 660 feet of the
interstate highway, exit ramps excluded, one sign on a standard per premises
may be erected to exceed the 40-foot limitation providing it does not exceed a
height of five feet above the centerline of the nearest pavement, ramps
excluded, of the interstate road and can be seen from said point.
   (C)   Freestanding on-premises signs and their supporting structures are
permitted within one foot of the front property line when the area of such sign
is not greater than 100 square feet. For each additional ten square feet in
area, such sign shall be set back an additional one foot.
   (D)   No freestanding sign shall be nearer than two feet to any other sign,
building, or structure, providing, however, that a sign of continuous panels
shall be considered as one sign for this provision.
   (E)   In the B-1, B-2, and B-3 Districts all freestanding signs must be on-
premises, with a total area of signage not exceeding one square foot per linear
foot of lot frontage, with total signage not exceeding 500 square feet total
per lot and shall not exceed 12 feet in height from grade to the top of the
sign and supporting structure (250 square feet per side total). Freestanding
on-premises signs in the B-4, I-1, and I-2 Districts may have two square feet
of area per linear foot of lot frontage, and total signage not exceeding 900
square feet per lot (450 square feet per side total).
   (F)   Outdoor advertising signs shall not exceed 300 square feet per face.
On streets and highways within the jurisdiction of this subchapter, no outdoor
advertising sign may be established within 1,500 feet of another outdoor
advertising sign facing the same direction measured on either side of the same
street. Such spacing between signs does not apply to signs separated by
buildings or other structures in such a manner that only one sign located
within the above mentioned spacing distance is visible from the highway at any
one time.
      (1)   Outdoor advertising signs shall be no nearer the street than the
building line established by this subchapter.
      (2)   Outdoor advertising signs shall not be located within 50 feet of
any R-1 Residential Dwelling or SE Suburban Estates Zoning District.
      (3)   Outdoor advertising signs shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
   (G)   In the case of a lot with frontage on more than one street,
freestanding signs in accordance with divisions (D), (E), and (F) above may be
permitted on each street. In no case shall allowable sign area be transferred
from one street frontage to another street frontage.
   (H)   Freestanding signs identifying churches, fraternities, or other
similar uses in residential zoning districts shall not exceed 30 square feet in
area nor six feet in height from the top of the sign to the ground, shall be
limited to one sign (attached or freestanding) on the premises of said use, and
shall be set back at least ten feet from all lot lines.
   (I)   Freestanding signs for special use permits granted by the County Board
shall be allowed only when authorized by said Board, and shall conform to the
requirements of §
154.642(D).
   (J)   Freestanding signs shall have an open space not less than two feet
between the base line of said sign and the ground level. This open space may be
filled in with a platform or decorative lattice work which does not close off
more than one-half of any square foot of such open space.
   (K)   No part of a freestanding sign shall be located over the public right-
of-way.
   (L)   The area around pole, or between poles or similar supports of
freestanding elevated signs shall be kept open for maximum visibility to
conform in all respects to provisions in this subchapter.
   (M)   Freestanding signs identifying uses affiliated with a college,
university, or seminary, subject to use meeting the 30-foot separation
requirement from any residentially zoned or one- or two-family used lot (as
specified in the U-1 University/College district) shall not exceed 30 square
feet in area, nor six feet in height from the top of the sign to the ground and
shall be setback at least ten feet from all lot lines.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.640 ROOF SIGNS.
   (A)   Location and size.
      (1)   Roof signs are permitted only in B-3 Community Commercial, B-
4 Highway/Intensive Commercial, I-1 Light Industrial, and I-2 General
Industrial Zoning Districts.
      (2)   For the purposes of this subchapter, roof signs shall be considered
as attached signs when determining the allowable square foot area and total
square foot area of all permitted signs.
   (B)   Erection.
      (1)   No roof sign shall be erected or maintained with the face thereof
nearer than five feet to the outside wall toward which the sign faces; however,
if the sign is under 20 square feet, it shall not be erected with the face
thereof nearer than one foot to the outside wall toward which the sign faces.
      (2)   All roof signs shall have a space at least five feet in height
between the base of the sign and roof level, and have at least five feet
clearance between the vertical supports thereof.
      (3)   (a)   Every roof sign shall be thoroughly secured to the building
by iron or other metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods, or braces.
         (b)   When erected upon buildings which are not constructed of
entirely fireproof material, the bearing plates of said sign shall bear
directly upon masonry walls and intermediate steel columns in the building.
         (c)   No roof sign shall be supported or anchored to the wooden
framework of a building.
   (C)   Inspection of roof. No sign shall be placed upon a roof unless said
roof has been determined by an architectural or structural engineer to have
sufficient strength to safely carry the proposed sign, together with the
signature and seal of the architectural or structural engineer making said
inspection shall be placed upon or attached to all plans for proposed roof
signs before a permit will be issued.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.641 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   Location and size.
      (1)   Temporary signs which advertise real estate for sale, rent, or
lease, or advertise a subdivision being developed shall be restricted to six
square feet in area when located on residentially-zoned property of less than
two acres, and shall be removed upon completion of the sale, rent or lease of
the property or sale of all lots in the subdivision. Such signs shall be
located on the property and shall be located not less than ten feet from any
street right-of-way.
      (2)   Temporary signs which advertise real estate for sale, rent, or
lease, or advertise a subdivision being developed shall be restricted to 96
square feet in area when located on property of two or more acres. Said signs
shall be located on the property, shall be located not less than ten feet from
any street right-of-way lines, and shall be removed upon completion of the
sale, rent, lease, or the property or sale of all lots in the subdivision.
      (3)   Temporary signs which advertise contractors, engineers, developers,
architects, and the like, for a site being developed shall be restricted to a
total area of 96 square feet in area, not less than ten feet from any street
right-of-way line or in conformance with the setback regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located, whichever is least restrictive. Such signs
shall be removed upon completion of the development and issuance of an
occupancy permit by the Economic Development Office.
      (4)   Non-electric, temporary signs placed in windows of buildings with
commercial or industrial uses which advertise sales, specials, or close-outs
shall be restricted to illumination by normal lighting of the building. Such
signs shall be removed upon termination of the sale, special, or close-out.
      (5)   Temporary signs may be erected pertaining to the candidacy of
federal, state, and local elected officials or other voting issues, shall not
exceed six square feet per face in residential zoning districts, and 32 square
feet in other zoning districts. Said signs may be erected not more than 30 days
preceding the election and shall be removed within three days after the
election.
   (B)   Erection. Every temporary sign shall be attached to a wall or pole
with steel cables, bolts, or other suitable fastenings or firmly affixed into
the ground so as to prevent movement.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.642 PERMITTED SIGNS FOR NON-CONFORMING USES.
   A sign or signs pertaining to a non-conforming use on the premises may be
permitted upon approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals only after all of the
following conditions are satisfied, and only if a sign would be allowed on the
premises if said use were properly zoned.
   (A)   It is the intent of this section to allow non-conforming uses to have
one sign for the purpose of identification, but because of the nature of non-
conforming uses, they shall be more restrictive than those allowed for
permitted uses. All signs under this section shall comply with all other
applicable sections of this subchapter.
   (B)   Signs on non-conforming uses may be replaced only with signs of the
same size or smaller, at the same location on the building or premises (or in a
less conspicuous location) and of the same lighting (or less), but shall not be
in violation of any other section of this subchapter.
   (C)   Only one sign shall be permitted on the premises of a non-conforming
use except signs regulatory for parking areas.
   (D)   If no sign existed on the premises during the six months immediately
preceding application for a sign permit under this section, the following
regulations shall apply:
      (1)   A freestanding or attached sign shall not exceed 15 square feet in
area;
      (2)   A freestanding sign shall not exceed six feet in height from the
top of the sign to the ground, and shall be set back at least ten feet from all
lot lines;
      (3)   An attached sign shall be of the fascia type only;
      (4)   No flashing lights or rotating signs shall be allowed; and
      (5)   No roof signs shall be allowed.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.643 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs not permitted. The following signs shall not be permitted,
erected, or maintained in any
zoning district:
      (1)   Except for traffic warning devices and signs giving public service
information such as, but not limited to, time, date, temperature, weather, or
similar information, signs which incorporate in any manner moving,
scintillating, or revolving lights, or signs with flashing lights having a
change frequency of less than five seconds;
      (2)   Any revolving sign with a rotation frequency more than eight
revolutions per minute;
      (3)   String lights other than holiday decorations;
      (4)   Any sign which obstructs free passage from one part of a roof to
any other part and free ingress or egress from a required door, window, fire
escape, roof opening, or other required exit way;
      (5)   Portable signs; and
      (6)   Freestanding banners, or spinners, except as the County Board may
authorize temporarily for civic or non-profit organizations.
   (B)   Removal of signs. It is the intent of this section to recognize that
the eventual elimination, as expeditiously as it is reasonable, of existing
signs that are not in conformity with the provisions of this subchapter,
inasmuch as subject of health, safety, and welfare as is the prohibition of new
signs that would violate the provisions of this subchapter. It is also the
intent of this section that any elimination of non-conforming, obsolete,
unsafe, and unlawful signs shall be affected so as to avoid any unreasonable
invasion of established private rights.
      (1)   Prohibited signs. All signs prohibited by division (A) above,
except for division (A)(1) and (A)(2) above, shall be removed or made
conforming within 90 days of the adoption of this subchapter. Within 90 days
after adoption of this subchapter, existing, nonexempt signs shall be removed
by the owner. Newly erected, prohibited signs shall be removed within seven
days of the owner receiving notice from the county.
      (2)   Non-conforming signs. A non-conforming sign may be continued and
shall be maintained in good condition, but it shall not be:
         (a)   Changed to another non-conforming sign;
         (b)   Structurally altered, except for normal maintenance and copy
changes as long as maintenance does not exceed 25% of the replacement value of
the sign at one time;
         (c)   Expanded;
         (d)   Re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated
expense of reconstruction exceeds 50% of the appraised replacement cost as
determined by the Economic Development Office; and
         (e)   Moved to another location unless brought into conformance.
      (3)   Unsafe and unlawful signs. If the Economic Development Office finds
that any sign regulated herein is structurally unsafe; constitutes a hazard to
safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or
abandonment, defined as having no active copy on an outdoor advertising sign
within the past 90 days or the advertisement of a business, concern, or use
which has been closed for greater than 90 days; is not kept in good repair; is
capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with
it; or is unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained, the Economic
Development Office shall give written notice to the permittee and/or owner
thereof.
      (4)   Removal of signs (obsolete signs). All obsolete signs shall be
removed by the property owner within 90 days after adoption of this subchapter
and/or 90 days after termination of business, whichever comes first. Removal of
obsolete signs shall include the supporting structure, exclusive of any
building.
      (5)   Maintenance provision. The owner of any sign requiring a permit
shall be required to maintain an exterior which is properly painted,
galvanized, or otherwise treated to prevent rust and deterioration of all
parts, including lighting and supports. All signs shall be required to be
adequately maintained and shall not become tattered, torn, frayed, ragged,
shredded, unkempt, or the like. The sign shall be repaired within 60 days
following notice from the county of a violation.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.644 ADMINISTRATION AND APPEAL.
   (A)   Administration. This subchapter shall be administered by the Economic
Development Office according to his or her obvious responsibilities according
to the meaning of the language contained herein. Upon a presentation of proper
credentials, these persons or their duly authorized representatives may enter
at reasonable times any building, structure, or premises in the county to
perform any duty imposed upon them by this subchapter.
   (B)   Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by any ruling of any person
charged with the administration of the subchapter may take an appeal to the
appropriate appeal board: Building Board of Appeals or the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
   (C)   Jurisdiction.
      (1)   Appeals taken from requests relating to construction shall be filed
with the Economic Development Office and shall be subject to the procedures
established by those respective commissions, and are not subject to the
provisions of this section.
      (2)   In addition to the jurisdiction authorized in §
154.055, the Zoning Board of Appeals hereinafter referred to as “the Board,” is
hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority:
         (a)   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by any person charged with the
administration of this subchapter, except appeals relating to the construction
as identified under division (C)(1) above. The Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or may modify or amend the order, requirement, or decision
or determination appealed from to the extent and in the manner that the Board
may decide to be fitting and proper on the premises, and to that end, the Board
shall also have all the power of the officer from whom the appeals are taken;
         (b)   To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it
is required to pass under this subchapter;
         (c)   To hear and pass upon applications for variances from a strict
application of the terms of this subchapter, in the manner and subject to the
standards set out in division (F) below.
   (D)   Provision of regulation. The creation, membership, and meeting rules,
application process, and fee, and stay of proceedings provisions for the Board,
as established under §
154.055 shall apply to all appeals and variances from this subchapter.
   (E)   Hearing of appeals.
      (1)   An appeal of a decision shall be taken within 35 days after such
decision is made.
      (2)   (a)   All final administrative decisions of the Board under this
section shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the
Administrative Review Act of the state, approved May 8, 1945 and all amendments
and modifications thereto.
         (b)   The term “administrative decision” is defined as in the
Administrative Review Act.
   (F)   Variances.
      (1)   (a)   The Board may vary the application of this subchapter in
harmony with its general purpose and intent, in accordance with the procedure
set forth herein, where there are practical hardships in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of any provisions of this subchapter.
         (b)   Any such variance shall be granted only after a public hearing
before the Board.
      (2)   A variance may be granted only when special circumstances involving
size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings affect the property referred
to in the application, when denial of said application would cause unreasonable
or unnecessary hardship, and when said sign will not cause substantial injury
to the value of other property in the vicinity nor be detrimental to the public
safety or welfare and the neighborhood in which it is located.
      (3)   All decisions and findings of the Board, on appeal or upon
application for a variance, after a hearing, shall in all instances be final
administrative determinations, and shall be subject to review by court as may
be provided by law.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 154.655 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by 55 ILCS 5/5-12
Zoning and 55 ILCS 5/5-1063 Building Construction, Alteration, Maintenance.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.656 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to preserve and protect public health and
safety without significantly increasing the cost or decreasing the efficiency
of energy systems and to allow for the orderly development of land, protect
property values, and esthetic conditions within the county.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.657 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter applies to all unincorporated lands within the boundaries of
the county.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.658 WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General provisions. It is the purpose of this section to regulate the
siting and installation of wind energy equipment. The promotion of safe,
effective, and efficient use of wind energy equipment will be balanced against
the need to preserve and protect public health and safety.
   (B)   Types of wind energy systems.
      (1)   Small wind energy system. Small wind energy systems are permitted
as an accessory use in AG-1, AG-2, SE-1, I-1, and I-2 Zoning Districts.
      (2)   Large wind energy system. Large wind energy systems are allowed as
a special use permit in AG-1, AG-2, SE-1, I-1, and I-2 Zoning Districts.
      (3)   Commercial wind energy facility. A commercial wind energy facility
is permitted as a special use in the Agricultural, SE-1, and Industrial Zoning
Districts and shall meet the requirements set forth in division (D) below.
   (C)   Special use permit application requirements for a wind energy system.
      (1)   An approved site plan with existing and proposed conditions.
      (2)   A report that indicates that the project will operate in compliance
with sound limitations established by the State Pollution Control Board under
35 Ill. Adm. Code Parts 900, 901, and 910.
      (3)   An ECOCAT report from the State Department of Natural Resources
which includes the results and recommendations of their examination and a plan
for executing any and all recommendations, including a plan demonstrating the
avoidance of protected lands as identified by the State Department of Natural
Resources and the State Preserve Commission and compliance with recommend
setbacks from protected lands recommended by the State Department of Natural
Resources, including areas identified by the State Nature Preserve Commission.
      (4)   The results of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service’s
information for planning and consulting environmental review or a comparable
successor tool that is consistent with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s
Land-based Wind Energy Guidelines and any applicable United States Fish and
Wildlife Service wind wildlife guidelines that have been subject to public
review.
      (5)   An executed agricultural impact mitigation agreement (AIMA) with
the State Department of Agriculture. Exception: Not required for a small wind
energy system for on-site use.
      (6)   Evidence of consultation with the State Historic Preservation
Office and an assessment of potential impacts on state-registered historic
sites under the State Agency Historic Resource Preservation Act.
      (7)   (a)   A plan for the decommissioning of the facility when it
becomes obsolete shall accompany the application. This plan shall be in
compliance with the standards and requirements set forth in the State
Department of Agriculture’s standard wind farm agricultural impact mitigation
agreement (AIMA), version 8.18.18 or its successor and identical to the
facilities in the AIMA executed with the State Department of Agriculture.
         (b)   A bond in the amount identified in the decommissioning plan
minus the salvage value shall be filed with the County Zoning and Building
Safety Department showing the county as the beneficiary prior to the issuance
of a building permit for the project. This bond shall be updated at intervals
as prescribed in the AIMA.
      (8)   The results of an industry standard computer modeling program that
indicates that any occupied community building or non-participating residence
will not experience more than 30 hours per calendar year of shadow flicker
under planned operating conditions.
      (9)   Proof of compliance with all federal, state, and other applicable
requirements.
      (10)   (a)   All commercial wind energy facility applications shall be
accompanied by a preliminary map and plan showing the roads and rights-of-way
that will be utilized by the commercial wind energy facility.
         (b)   Prior to the issuance of the special use building permit, the
wind applicant shall submit an executed agreement between the commercial wind
energy facility owner/operator and all road district authorities with
infrastructure affected by the commercial wind energy facility to the county.
      (11)   It is the responsibility of the wind applicant to coordinate with
the local fire protection district. The wind applicant shall submit with the
application an approval letter from the local fire protection district.
   (D)   Development standards for a small wind energy system.
      (1)   Installation. All noncommercial wind energy systems shall be
installed per the manufacturer’s standards. The standards must include
compliance with all of the county’s officially adopted codes.
      (2)   Height. The maximum height must be compliant with FAA standards.
      (3)   Setbacks.
         (a)   A small wind energy system shall be located 1.1 times total
tower height or more from an occupied structure on adjoining property and 80%
total tower height or more from occupied structure on subject property measured
from wind tower base.
         (b)   A small wind system must be set back from all property lines of
the parcel on which it is located and from any right-of-way a distance 1.1
times total tower height measured from wind tower base.
      (4)   Lighting. Lighting for towers shall be constructed only in
accordance with the minimum requirements and standards allowed through the FAA
or other regulatory authority in an effort to minimize the visual impact of the
structures.
      (5)   Color. Towers and blades shall be painted a non-reflective,
unobtrusive color that blends into the surrounding landscape to the greatest
extent possible.
   (E)   Development standards for a commercial wind energy facility.
      (1)   Design safety certification. The safety of the design of all
commercial wind energy facilities shall be certified by a licensed professional
engineer. The standard for certification shall be good engineering practices
and shall conform to all the county’s officially adopted codes.
      (2)   Controls and brakes.
         (a)   All commercial wind energy facility projects shall be equipped
with Manual and Automatic Controls and mechanical brakes to limit rotation of
blades to a speed below the designed limits of a WECS.
         (b)   For purposes of this section, MANUAL AND AUTOMATIC CONTROLS mean
controls which give protection to power grids and limit rotation of a WECS’
blades to below the designed limits of the conversion system.
         (c)   The professional engineer or authorized factory representative
must certify that the rotor and overspeed control design and fabrication
conform to good engineering practices. No changes or alterations from certified
design shall be permitted unless accompanied by a professional engineer’s or
the authorized factory representative’s statement of certification.
      (3)   Height. The blade tip height for wind towers in commercial wind
energy facilities shall be determined by a “determination of no hazard to air
navigation” by the Federal Aviation Administration under 14 C.F.R. part 77.
      (4)   Minimum lot size. There is no minimum lot size for commercial wind
energy facilities, providing that all setbacks and other requirements of this
subchapter are met.
      (5)   Setbacks.
         (a)   All setback distances for commercial wind energy facilities
shall be measured from the center of the base of the wind tower. The following
setback requirements may be waived subject to the written consent of the owner
of each affected non-participating property.
            1.   Occupied community building. Minimum 2.1 times the maximum
blade tip height of the wind tower to the nearest point on the outside wall.
            2.   Participating residences. Minimum 1.1 times the maximum blade
tip height of the wind tower to the nearest point on the outside wall.
            3.   Non-participating residences. Minimum 2.1 times the maximum
blade tip height of the wind tower to the nearest point on the outside wall.
            4.   Boundary lines of participating property. None.
            5.   Boundary lines of non-participating property. Minimum 1.1
times the maximum blade tip height of the wind tower to the nearest point on
the property line of the non-participating property.
            6.   Public road rights-of-way. Minimum 1.1 times the maximum blade
tip height of the wind tower to the center point of the public road right-of-
way.
            7.   Overhead communication and electric transmission/distribution
facilities (not including overhead utility service lines to individual homes or
outbuildings). Minimum 1.1 times the maximum blade tip height of the wind tower
to the nearest edge of the property line, easement, or right-of-way containing
the overhead line.
            8.   Overhead utility service to individual homes out outbuildings.
None.
            9.   Fish and wildlife areas and state nature preserve protected
lands. There shall be 2.1 times the maximum blade tip height of the wind tower
to the nearest point on the property line of the fish and wildlife area or
protected area.
         (b)   This division (E)(5) does not exempt or excuse compliance with
electric facility clearances approved or required by the National Electrical
Code, the National Electrical Safety Code, State Commerce Commission, Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission, and their designees or successors.
      (6)   Vegetative screening and fencing. Vegetative screening and fencing
may be added, as a condition for the special use, around the perimeter of any
supporting facilities used for storage, maintenance, parking, or staging.
Fences shall be a minimum of six feet in height and shall be constructed of a
type suitable for security purposes. Vegetative screening may be added, as a
condition of the special use, along the outside perimeter of the fence at a
suitable height and density to minimize the view of the facility from non-
participating properties and public rights-of-way. Earthen berms or similar
structures shall not be required.
      (7)   Lighting. As required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
Required lighting must comply with FAA minimum requirements and, whenever
possible, be at the lowest intensity allowed using red lights at night. If more
than one lighting alternative is available, the alternative that causes the
least visual disturbance must be used.
      (8)   Stormwater management. The project shall meet all requirements of
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances. A grading and drainage permit shall be
obtained prior to any grading activities.
      (9)   Drainage systems. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a
facility owner with siting approval from a county to construct a commercial
wind energy facility is authorized by the state to cross or impact a drainage
system, including, but not limited to, drainage tiles, open drainage districts,
culverts, and water gathering vaults, owned or under the control of a drainage
district under the State Drainage Code without obtaining prior agreement or
approval from the drainage district. The facility owner shall repair or pay for
the repair of all damage to the drainage system caused by the construction of
the commercial wind energy facility within a reasonable time after construction
of the commercial wind energy facility is complete.
      (10)   Utility notification. Unless the wind applicant is a public
utility, no building permit to construct a wind farm shall be issued until
evidence has been provided to the office of Zoning and Building Safety that the
applicant has entered into an off take agreement or has registered with the
Regional Transmission Operator to sell power on a merchant basis.
      (11)   Materials handling, storage, and disposal.
         (a)   All solid wastes related to the construction, operation, and
maintenance of the wind energy system shall be removed from the site promptly
and disposed of in accordance with all federal, state, and local laws.
         (b)   All hazardous materials related to the construction, operation,
and maintenance of the wind energy system shall be handled, stored,
transported, and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state,
and federal laws.
      (12)   Points of contact. The commercial wind energy facility owner/
operator shall maintain with the County Office of Zoning and Building Safety
and Sheriff’s Department a primary and two secondary points of contact. Any
changes shall be reported immediately or as soon as possible.
      (13)   Liability insurance and indemnification.
         (a)   Commencing with the issuance of a WECS building permit, the wind
applicant shall maintain a current general comprehensive liability policy and
automobile liability coverage covering bodily injury, death, and illness, and
property damage with limits of at least $5,000,000 per occurrence and in the
aggregate; and shall further maintain the above-stated lines of insurance from
delivery of the notice to proceed by the wind applicant under the turbine
supply and/or balance of plant construction contract(s) for the WECS project,
in coverage amounts of at least $5,000,000 per occurrence and $20,000,000 in
the aggregate during the life of the WECS project. The wind applicant shall
file the original certificate of insurance upon commencement of project
construction prior to the issuance of a WECS building permit, corresponding
policies, and endorsements to be provided within 60 days of issuance, and at
each subsequent renewal, at least annually thereafter.
         (b)   The wind applicant (WECS permittee) shall defend, indemnify, and
hold harmless the county and its officers, appointed and elected officials,
employees, attorneys, engineers, and agents (collectively and individually, the
indemnified parties) from and against any and all claims, demands, losses,
suits, causes of action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses, and liabilities
whatsoever, including reasonable attorney’s fees relating to or arising out of
the issuance of the special use permit or the construction, operation,
maintenance, and removal of the WECS and affiliated equipment including,
without limitation, liability for property damage or personal injury (including
death or illness), whether said liability is premised on contract or on tort
(including, without limitation, strict liability or negligence) or any acts or
omissions of the wind applicant (WECS permitee), the owner or the operator
under this subchapter, or the special use permit, except to the extent any such
claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages, injuries, costs,
expenses, and liabilities arise from the negligence or intentional acts of such
indemnified parties. This general indemnification shall not be construed as
limiting or qualifying the county’s other indemnification rights available
under the law.
      (14)   Use of public roads.
         (a)   An wind applicant proposing to use any county, municipality,
township, or village road(s), for the purpose of transporting WECS or
substation parts and/or equipment for construction, operation, or maintenance
of the WECS(s) or substation(s), shall:
            1.   Identify all such public roads; and
            2.   Obtain applicable weight and size permits from relevant
government agencies prior to construction.
         (b)   To the extent an wind applicant must obtain a weight or size
permit from the county, municipality, township, or village, the wind applicant
shall:
            1.   Conduct a pre-construction baseline survey to determine
existing road conditions for assessing potential future damage;
            2.   Any proposed public roads that will be used for construction
purposes shall be identified and approved in writing by the respective Road
District Commissioner and the County Engineer prior to the granting of the
special use permit. Traffic for construction purposes shall be limited to these
roads. All overweight and/or oversized loads to be transported on public roads
may require a permit from the respective highway authority. Any road damage
caused by the transport of the facility’s equipment, the installation,
maintenance, or removal must be completely repaired to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Road District Commissioner and the County Engineer. The
Road District Commissioner and County Engineer may choose to require either
remediation of road repair upon completion of the WECS project or are
authorized to collect fees for overweight and/or oversized load permits.
Further, financial assurance in an amount to be fixed by the Road District
Commissioner to ensure the road district or the county that future repairs are
completed to their reasonable satisfaction shall be provided. The wind
applicant shall submit a draft form of said financial assurance with the
application for special use permit; and
            3.   Enter into a road use agreement with the county and each
affected road district that includes the following provisions, at a minimum:
               a.   Project layout map;
               b.   Transportation impact analysis;
               c.   Pre-construction plans;
               d.   Project traffic map;
               e.   Project scope of repairs;
               f.   Post-construction repairs;
               g.   Insurance; and
               h.   Financial security in forms and amounts acceptable to the
county. The road use agreement shall require the wind applicant to be
responsible for the reasonable cost of improving roads used to construct WECS
and the reasonable cost of repairing roads used by the facility owner during
construction of the WECS so that those roads are in a condition that is safe
for the driving public after the completion of the WECS construction. Roadways
improved in preparation for and during the construction of the WECS shall be
repaired and restored to the improved condition at the reasonable cost of the
developer if the roadways have degraded or were damaged as a result of
construction-related activities.
         (c)   All repairs and improvements to county public roads and roadway
appurtenances shall be subject to the prior approval of the county before being
made and shall also be subject to inspection and acceptance by the county after
such repairs and improvements are completed. The county’s road use agreement,
and any further agreements contemplated therein, regarding the maintenance and
repair of county public roads and highways, must be approved by the County
Board prior to the Board’s approval of any WECS building permit applications
related to the construction of the proposed WECS project
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.659 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   General provisions. It is the purpose of this section to regulate the
siting and installation of solar energy equipment. The promotion of safe,
effective, and efficient use of solar energy equipment will be balanced against
the need to preserve and protect public health and safety.
   (B)   Types of solar energy systems.
      (1)   Solar private. Solar private is a permitted accessory use in any
zoning district and must abide by the bulk regulations, density, and
dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district in which it is located.
See requirements set for in §
154.039.
      (2)   Commercial solar energy facility. A commercial solar energy
facility is permitted as a special use in the Agricultural, Suburban Estates,
and Industrial Zoning Districts and shall meet the requirements set forth in
division (D) below.
   (C)   Special use permit application requirements for a commercial solar
energy facility.
      (1)   An approved site plan with existing and proposed conditions.
      (2)   A report that indicates that the project will operate in compliance
with sound limitations established by the State Pollution Control Board under
35 Ill. Adm. Code Parts 900, 901, and 910.
      (3)   An ECOCAT report from the State Department of Natural Resources
which includes the results and recommendations of their examination and a plan
for executing any and all recommendations, including a plan demonstrating the
avoidance of protected lands as identified by the State Department of Natural
Resources and the State Preserve Commission and compliance with recommend
setbacks from protected lands recommended by the State Department of Natural
Resources, including areas identified by the State Nature Preserve Commission.
      (4)   The results of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service’s
information for planning and consulting environmental review or a comparable
successor tool that is consistent with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s
Land-based Wind Energy Guidelines and any applicable United States Fish and
Wildlife Service solar wildlife guidelines that have been subject to public
review.
      (5)   An executed agricultural impact mitigation agreement (AIMA) with
the State Department of Agriculture.
      (6)   Evidence of consultation with the State Historic Preservation
Office and an assessment of potential impacts on state-registered historic
sites under the State Agency Historic Resource Preservation Act.
      (7)   (a)   A plan for the decommissioning of the facility when it
becomes obsolete shall accompany the application. This plan shall be in
compliance with the standards and requirements set forth in the State
Department of Agriculture’s standard solar farm agricultural impact mitigation
agreement (AIMA), version 8.19.19 or its successor and identical to the
facilities in the AIMA executed with the State Department of Agriculture.
         (b)   A bond in the amount identified in the decommissioning plan
minus the salvage value shall be filed with the County Zoning and Building
Safety Department showing the county as the beneficiary prior to the issuance
of a building permit for the project. This bond shall be updated at intervals
as prescribed in the AIMA
      (8)   Proof of compliance with all federal, state, and other applicable
requirements.
      (9)   All commercial solar energy facility applications shall be
accompanied by a preliminary map and plan showing the roads and rights-of-way
that will be utilized by the commercial solar energy facility. Prior to the
issuance of the special use building permit, the solar applicant shall submit
an executed agreement between the commercial solar energy facility owner/
operator and all road district authorities with infrastructure affected by the
commercial solar energy facility to the county.
      (10)   It is the responsibility of the solar applicant to coordinate with
the local fire protection district. The solar applicant shall submit with the
application an approval letter from the local fire protection district.
   (D)   Development standards for a commercial solar energy facility.
      (1)   Height. No component of a solar panel may have a height of more
than 20 feet above ground when the solar energy facility’s array at full tilt.
These requirements may be waived subject to written consent of the owner of
each affected non-participating property.
      (2)   Setbacks. All setback distances for commercial solar energy
facility shall be measured from the nearest edge of any component of the
facility. The following setback requirements may be waived subject to the
written consent of the owner of each affected non-participating property.
Setbacks to not apply to fencing.
         (a)   Commercial solar energy facilities shall be setback a minimum
distance of 150 feet from the nearest point on the outside wall of the
structure of an occupied community building or a dwelling on non-participating
property.
         (b)   Commercial solar energy facilities shall have a zero setback
from the boundary line of participating property.
         (c)   Commercial solar energy facilities shall have a 50-foot setback
from the nearest edge of a public road right-of-way.
         (d)   A commercial solar energy facilities shall be setback a minimum
of 50 feet from the nearest point on the property line of any non-participating
property.
      (3)   Fencing. A commercial solar energy facilities entire perimeter
shall be enclosed by a fence constructed of a type suitable for security
purposes. The fence must be a minimum of six feet high but no more than 25 feet
in height.
      (4)   Screening. Vegetative screening provided along the outside
perimeter of the fence at a suitable height and density to minimize the view of
the facility from non-participating residential properties and public rights-
of-way may be added as a condition of the special use. Earthen berms or similar
structures shall not be required.
      (5)   Lighting. Lighting shall be installed for security and safety
purposes only. Except with respect to lighting required by the FCC or FAA, all
lighting shall be shielded so that no glare extends substantially beyond the
boundaries of the property upon which the solar farm is located and meets the
§§
154.570 through
154.575.
      (6)   Stormwater management. The project shall meet all requirements of
the Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances. A grading and drainage permit shall
be obtained prior to any grading activities.
      (7)   Ground cover. Vegetative ground cover must be established on all
commercial solar energy facilities. A plan that is consistent with the goals of
the Pollinator-Friendly Solar Site Act and a vegetation management plan shall
be required to accompany an application for a special use permit for the
establishment of a commercial solar energy facility. The vegetation management
plan must be consistent with the guidelines developed by the State Department
of Natural Resources for these types of plans which must include both short-
term and long-term property management practices that provide and maintain
native and non-native invasive naturalized perennial vegetation to protect the
health and wellbeing of pollinators. Alternative ground cover allowing for the
use of the land under or adjacent to the panels to be used for agriculture may
be permitted.
      (8)   Drainage systems. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a
facility owner with siting approval from a county to construct a commercial
solar energy facility is authorized by the state to cross or impact a drainage
system, including, but not limited to, drainage tiles, open drainage districts,
culverts, and water gathering vaults, owned or under the control of a drainage
district under the State Drainage Code without obtaining prior agreement or
approval from the drainage district. The facility owner shall repair or pay for
the repair of all damage to the drainage system caused by the construction of
the commercial solar energy facility within a reasonable time after
construction of the commercial solar energy facility is complete.
      (9)   Utility notification. Unless the solar applicant is a public
utility, no building permit to construct a solar farm shall be issued until
evidence has been provided to the Office of Zoning and Building Safety that the
solar applicant has entered into an off take agreement or has registered with
the regional transmission operator to sell power on a merchant basis.
      (10)   Materials handling, storage, and disposal.
         (a)   All solid wastes related to the construction, operation, and
maintenance of the solar farm shall be removed from the site promptly and
disposed of in accordance with all federal, state, and local laws.
         (b)   All hazardous materials related to the construction, operation,
and maintenance of the solar farm shall be handled, stored, transported, and
disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws.
      (11)   Points of contact. The commercial solar energy facility owner/
operator shall maintain with the County Office of Zoning and Building Safety
and Sheriff's Department a primary and two secondary points of contact. Any
changes shall be reported immediately or as soon as possible.
      (12)   Warnings.
         (a)   A reasonable visible warning sign concerning voltage must be
placed at the base of all padmounted transformers and substations.
         (b)   Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, plastic
sleeves, reflectors, or tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires
and along the guy wires up to a height of 15 feet from the ground.
      (13)   Compliance with additional regulations. Nothing in this subchapter
is intended to preempt other applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
      (14)   Liability insurance and indemnification.
         (a)   Commencing with the issuance of a commercial solar energy
facility building permit, the solar applicant shall maintain a current general
comprehensive liability policy and automobile liability coverage covering
bodily injury, death, and illness, and property damage with limits of at least
$5,000,000 per occurrence and in the aggregate; and, shall further maintain the
above-stated lines of insurance from delivery of the notice to proceed by the
solar applicant for the commercial solar energy facility, in coverage amounts
of at least $5,000,000 per occurrence and $20,000,000 in the aggregate during
the life of the commercial solar energy facility. The solar applicant shall
file the original certificate of insurance upon commencement of project
construction prior to the issuance of a commercial solar energy facility
building permit, corresponding policies, and endorsements to be provided within
60 days of issuance, and at each subsequent renewal, at least annually
thereafter.
         (b)   The solar applicant shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless
the county and its officers, appointed and elected officials, employees,
attorneys, engineers and agents (collectively and individually, the indemnified
parties) from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of
action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses and liabilities whatsoever,
including reasonable attorney’s fees relating to or arising out of the issuance
of the special use permit or the construction, operation, maintenance, and
removal of the commercial solar energy facility including, without limitation,
liability for property damage or personal injury (including death or illness),
whether said liability is premised on contract or on tort (including, without
limitation, strict liability or negligence) or any acts or omissions of the
solar applicant, the owner or the operator under this subchapter or the special
use permit, except to the extent any such claims, demands, losses, suits,
causes of action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses, and liabilities arise
from the negligence or intentional acts of such indemnified parties. This
general indemnification shall not be construed as limiting or qualifying the
county’s other indemnification rights available under the law.
      (15)   Remedies. The solar applicant’s failure to materially comply with
any of the provisions under the special use permit, any conditions imposed on
the project, and/or failure to comply with any law or regulation shall be a
default and shall be grounds for revocation of the special use permit by the
County Board.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.660 BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM (BESS).
   A BESS may be included with a special use permit for a commercial solar
energy facilities and wind energy facilities; or when stand-alone, it will
require an individual special use. All BESSs shall comply with the following
requirements.
   (A)   Development standards.
      (1)   Setbacks.
         (a)   A BESS shall be setback a minimum distance of 150 feet from the
nearest point on the outside wall of the structure of an occupied community
building or a dwelling on non-participating property.
         (b)   A BESS shall have a zero setback from the boundary line of
participating property.
         (c)   A BESS shall have a 50-foot setback from the nearest edge of a
public road right-of-way.
         (d)   BESSs shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet from the nearest
point on the property line of any non-participating property.
      (2)   Lighting. Any lights used to illuminate the facility shall be so
arranged as to direct the light away from the adjoining properties and the
public roads.
      (3)   Vegetative screening and fencing.
         (a)   Vegetative screening and fencing may be added, as a condition
for the special use, around the perimeter of the BESS. Fences shall be a
minimum of six feet in height and shall be constructed of a type suitable for
security purposes.
         (b)   Vegetative screening may be added, as a condition of the special
use, along the outside perimeter of the fence at a suitable height and density
to minimize the view of the facility from non-participating properties and
public rights-of-way.
      (4)   Decommissioning.
         (a)   If the BESS is included with or amended to a special use for a
commercial solar energy facility or commercial wind energy facility, the
decommissioning costs shall follow the decommissioning/bonding requirements for
those facilities.
         (b)   If the BESS is an independent special use, a decommissioning
plan and engineer’s estimate shall be provided.
         (c)   1.   The BESS owner/operator shall provide sufficient security
for decommissioning of the facility prior to issuance of the building permit.
            2.   The decommissioning cost shall be approved by the county,
considering the engineer’s estimate.
      (5)   Applicant.
         (a)   The battery energy applicant shall defend, indemnify, and hold
harmless the county and its officers, appointed and elected officials,
employees, attorneys, engineers, and agents (collectively and individually, the
indemnified parties) from and against any and all claims, demands, losses,
suits, causes of action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses, and liabilities
whatsoever, including reasonable attorney’s fees relating to or arising out of
the issuance of the special use permit or the construction, operation,
maintenance, and removal of the battery energy storage system (BESS) including,
without limitation, liability for property damage or personal injury (including
death or illness), whether said liability is premised on contract or on tort
(including, without limitation, strict liability or negligence) or any acts or
omissions of the battery energy applicant, the owner or the operator under this
subchapter or the special use permit, except to the extent any such claims,
demands, losses, suits, causes of action, damages, injuries, costs, expenses,
and liabilities arise from the negligence or intentional acts of such
indemnified parties.
         (b)   This general indemnification shall not be construed as limiting
or qualifying the county's other indemnification rights available under the law
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.661 VIOLATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain, modify, or
operate an energy system that is not in compliance with this subchapter or with
any condition contained in a special use or building permit issued pursuant to
this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.662 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be administered by the Code Administrator.
   (B)   The Code Administrator may enter any property for which a special use
or building permit has been issued under this subchapter to conduct an
inspection to determine whether the conditions stated in the permit have been
met as specified by statute, ordinance, and code.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
TABLES AND DIAGRAMS
§ 154.675 SAMPLE YARD SETBACKS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d53095237a00b1625eb993db652189a9fc2b0aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1753.png]
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.676 SITE DISTANCE TRIANGLE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d53095237a00b1625eb993db652189a9fc2b0aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1755.png]
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.677 BUILDING HEIGHT.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d53095237a00b1625eb993db652189a9fc2b0aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1757.png]
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.678 COUNTY RURAL LIVING CONTRACT.
ROCK ISLAND COUNTY
   RURAL LIVING CONTRACT
Introduction: Life in the rural areas of the County is different from life in the city. County
governments may not be able to provide the same level of service that city governments provide.
To that end, we are providing you with the following information to help you make an informed
decision before you purchase a parcel of land in rural Rock Island County.
1.   Agriculture: Some of the people who feed this nation (and the world) work right here in Rock
Island County. If you are going to move your family into their work area, it is important you
understand how their job, work environment, and hours of operation may affect you.
   -   Farmers often work around the clock, especially during planting and harvest time. It is
possible that adjoining agriculture uses from lighting and noise may disturb your peace and quiet
24 hours a day.
   -   Land preparation and other agricultural operations, as well as rural roads, cause dust,
especially during windy and dry weather.
   -   Farmers occasionally burn ditches and fields to keep them free of debris and weeds. This
is a normal part of a farming operation, and this may create objectionable smoke. During these
burns it may be necessary to stay inside or leave your residence for a short time if you have a
sensitivity to it.
   -   Chemicals (mainly fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides) are often used in agricultural
activities and may be applied via irrigation systems, ground vehicles or various aircraft. You
may be sensitive to these substances and some people may actually have allergic reactions. They
may “drift” causing damage to your landscaping. Make sure you leave enough of a buffer area from
YOUR property line to avoid damage. These are necessary tools for agricultural areas of our
County, and you must be aware of/prepared to deal with their application.
   -   Farm animals are raised in the country and they can generate odors that can be very strong
at times. They also make noise, draw insect populations, and sometimes get loose from their
pasture or holding areas. In the city, large numbers of animals near your residence would be a
nuisance, in the rural areas, your residence is the nuisance as large numbers of animals belong
here. If you build a home 15 ft. from your property line, the farmer has the right to place a
large number of cattle or hogs on his property. Please be aware that farmers are within their
rights, and you have accepted the consequences by choosing your proximity to the property line.
   -   Agriculture is an important part of the Rock Island County economy. If you choose to live
in the work area of farmers, you cannot expect County government to intervene in the normal day-
to-day operations of your agri-business neighbors. In fact, we are more likely to require you to
stay out of his or her way as this is their workplace and you have made the decision to build a
home in their work area.
   -   Farmers must move their equipment between fields. Every time you are running late, a large
piece of slow-moving farm equipment will be on the road in front of you. They may take up both
lanes so you cannot pass. Anticipate these delays and be patient, keeping their, your, and
other’s safety at the forefront.
   -   Farm animals can be dangerous and can attack humans. Children need to know that it may not
be safe to enter pens where farm animals are kept, even the little cute ones. It is your
responsibility to teach your children respect for livestock, property and property lines of your
neighboring farmer.
   -   Livestock animals being herded from one location to another have the right-of-way on
County roads and highways. You MUST yield to them even if it delays you.
   -   Insects may be more of a problem in the country than they are within city limits. Insects
feeding on actively growing crops or emerging from cropland can migrate to landscaping and
gardens adjacent to cropland. It will be your responsibility to control them if they become a
nuisance.
   -   Farm, hay, pasture and timber ground is not open for your use to hunt, ride ATV’s, etc.
unless you have requested and been given permission to do so by the owner or tenant. These areas
are also not to be used as dumping grounds.
2.   Access: The fact that you can drive to your property does not necessarily guarantee that you
have legal ingress/egress or that your guests and emergency service vehicles can achieve that
same level of access at all times. You cannot assume that you have an automatic easement across
someone else’s property to enter your property. Also consider:
   -   Emergency response times (sheriff, fire suppression, medical care, etc.) may be much
longer than in an incorporated city. Under some extreme conditions, you may find that emergency
response is extremely slow due to circumstances beyond their control. Some fire, ambulance and
search and rescue services in Rock Island County are volunteer and may provide limited services.
Check with the departments or organizations that provide these services if you are contemplating
residing in their jurisdictions.
   -   Rock Island County has its own road system to take care of, and there are also 18 Township
road districts totaling hundreds of miles of roads, ranging from paved to unimproved dirt roads.
There are also a number of roads that are Private Drives, and these may have a homeowners
association to whom you pay dues, which is responsible for the maintenance of roads, bridges,
plowing etc.
   -   Rock Island County can experience adverse weather conditions that may cause damage to
roads. It is wise to determine who is responsible for the maintenance of the roads providing
access to your property.
   -   Many large construction vehicles and some fire and rescue vehicles cannot navigate small,
narrow roads. If you plan to build, it is prudent to check out construction and emergency vehicle
access. Remember, it may be more expensive to build a rural residence due to delivery fees and
the time required for building materials to reach your site.
   -   School buses travel only on maintained public roads that have been designated as school
bus routes by the local school district (some subdivision roads are private). In order for your
child or children to get to school, you may be responsible to drive your children to the nearest
County road or designated school bus route. Please check with the appropriate school district for
school locations and routes.
   -   In extreme weather, even the best County maintained roads could become impassable. You may
miss work or appointments.
   -   Dust, again, is an unpleasant fact of life for most rural residents. If your road is
unpaved, it is unlikely that any one of the 19 highway districts will pave it in the foreseeable
future. Remember that unpaved roads are not always smooth and you may experience increased
vehicle maintenance costs when regularly traveling on rural County roads.
   -   Mail delivery may not always be available to some rural areas of the County. Ask the
postmaster to describe the system for your area. This may also apply to package delivery services
as well.
3.   Services: Water, sewer, electric, fire, telephone and other services may be unavailable or
have more frequent interruptions. Repairs may take longer due to their rural nature. Cellular
communications may be a problem in some areas of Rock Island County.
   -   Sewer service is not available to sites located outside city limits. You will need to use
an approved subsurface sewage (septic) system or other treatment process. The type of soil, depth
to groundwater or bedrock, slope, etc. will be very important in determining the cost and
function of your subsurface sewage system. Ask for assistance from the Rock Island County Health
Department (309-794-7061) for information on how to get a system approved or inspected.
   -   Most unincorporated areas do not have access to a water supply for domestic use, so you
will need to locate an alternate supply. The most common method is use of a well. The cost for
drilling and pumping may be considerable and the quality and quantity of water (also known as the
yield) can vary considerably from location to location and seasonally.
   -   It is important to determine the proximity of electric power because it can be expensive
to extend power lines to very remote areas. In addition, if you have special power requirements,
it is important to know what level of service can be provided to your property. Natural gas may
not be available and propane is more expensive.
   -   Power outages can occur in outlying areas with a greater frequency than in cities. A loss
of electrical power can also interrupt a private water supply from a well. Extended power outages
may also cause a loss of food in freezers or refrigerators and power outages may cause problems
with computers. It may be important to be able to survive temporarily in severe weather with no
utilities if you live in the country.
   -   Trash removal may be more expensive in rural areas. It is illegal to create your own trash
dump, even on your own property. Know the cost for trash removal prior to making the decision to
move into the country. In some cases, the only option may be to haul your trash to a local
landfill (state and County law prohibits burning of domestic trash in a burn barrel). Recycling
services may not be available in rural areas.
4.   Your property: There are many issues that can affect your property. It is important to
research them before purchasing land in rural areas of the County. Easements may require you to
allow the construction of roads, power lines, water lines, sewer lines, etc. across your land.
There may be easements that have not been recorded by the County or as part of the original
property. Check these issues carefully.
   -   You may be provided with a map of your property, but unless the land has been surveyed and
pins placed by a licensed surveyor, you should not assume that the map is accurate.
   -   Fences that separate properties are sometimes misaligned with the actual property lines. A
survey of the land by a licensed surveyor is the only way to confirm the location of property
lines. Illinois law can require you to pay for half of your agricultural neighbors fence if it
needs repaired or replaced. (Illinois law says you may be responsible for the right half of the
fence line as you are facing it from your property.)
   -   Before you purchase that home with the beautifully manicured 5 acre yard, (or 10 acres or
2 acres) you should consider the effort required to maintain it. A large yard requires a lot of
time and work, and if you decide to split your acreage to make the yard smaller, the County may
not allow it. (There are areas where 40 acres is the smallest lot size allowed, and parcels of
five acres or less cannot have grass higher than 12 inches.)
   -   The surrounding properties may not remain as they are indefinitely. If you are moving to
the country on a small piece of ground, anticipate that others will do the same thing, even right
next to your property. Also, be aware that vacant ground or crop ground may have cattle or hogs
on it next year.
   -   Flowing water can be a hazard, especially to young children. Before you decide to locate
your home near an active ditch, canal or other water conveyance, consider the possible danger to
your family and your responsibility to take safety measures.
   -   If you are purchasing a parcel close to a city or within a city area of impact (1.5 miles
from the city border), annexation in the future is a possibility. If you live near a school,
future development is likely, and will be encouraged by the County.
5.   Mother Nature: Residents of the County may experience more problems when the elements and
earth turn unfriendly. Here are some thoughts for you to consider:
   -   Black ice or icy conditions on rural roadways is always a probability.
   -   The topography of the land can give you an indication of where the water will flow during
large precipitation events. When property owners fill in natural drainages, they may cause the
water that once drained naturally to drain through unwanted areas potentially causing property
damage to you or your neighbor’s property.
   -   Floodplains have been designated by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS) within the
County. Portions of the County require special building considerations if located within the
floodplains. It is advisable to consult Rock Island County Zoning & Building Office before buying
or building.
   -   Nature can provide you with some wonderful neighbors. However, even harmless wildlife can
cross the road unexpectedly and cause traffic accidents. Rural development encroaches on the
traditional habitat of animals that may be dangerous. In general, it is best to enjoy wildlife
from a distance. It is important that you handle your pets and trash properly so that they will
not create problems for you and/or the wildlife.
In Conclusion: Rock Island County is a wonderful place to live, work, and raise a family. This
contract is designed to provide information that will help enhance the quality of life here.
Respect your agri-neighbor’s livelihood and property, and be aware that your actions may impact
your neighbors, human and otherwise. While the information presented here is intended as a
guideline and an introduction into some of the realities of rural living, you may discover other
issues that have not been covered by this document. We encourage you to research and examine all
aspects of country living prior to moving to a rural setting so you will enjoy the country and
not have any unpleasant surprises.
Rock Island County elected officials, administration and staff pride themselves on their
accessibility. By participating in the publication of the Rural Living Contract, Rock Island
County is in no way divesting itself of its responsibility to its constituents, rather, is
attempting to make clear to constituents what those responsibilities are. We offer this
publication in the sincere hope that it will help you better understand how things work in Rock
Island County.
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
I/we have read the above and not only understand the items mentions, but understand the more
general concept of rural living, and I/we hereby agree to live according to these concepts,
whether specifically mentioned or implied.
______________________________         Parcel ____________________________
______________________________         Township _________________________
______________________________         Address _________________________
______________________________          Date ____________________________
 
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation, agent, employee, or contractor of
such who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or who
resists enforcement of any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
forfeit not less than $25 nor more than $200 for each offense, together with
the costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and
costs of prosecution shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until said
forfeiture and costs are paid, for a period not exceed 30 days for each
violation. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (B)   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or
failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed
to be a violation of §§
154.610 through
154.621. Upon due investigation, the County Department of Zoning and Building
Safety may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of §§
154.610 through
154.621 exists. The County Department of Zoning and Building Safety shall
notify the owner in writing of such violation.
      (1)   If such owner fails after ten days’ notice to correct the
violation:
         (a)   The County Department of Zoning and Building Safety shall
either:
            1.   Make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction
requiring conformance with §§
154.610 through
154.621 or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure
compliance with §§
154.610 through
154.621; or
            2.   Make application to the Municipal Code Enforcement System for
remedies that may include requirements for performance or fines as allowed by
law.
         (b)   Any person who violates §§
154.610 through
154.621 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50 or more than
$500 for each offense.
         (c)   Each week a violation is present or allowed to continue
constitutes a separate violation.
         (d)   The County Department of Zoning and Building Safety shall record
a notice of the violation on the title of the property.
      (2)   (a)   The Director of the County Department of Zoning and Building
Safety shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful
act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard
flood insurance policy to be suspended.
         (b)   The Director of the County Department of Zoning and Building
Safety is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject
development. The stopwork order shall be in writing, indicate the reason for
the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the
circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a
suspension of the permit.
         (c)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the County Zoning Board of Appeals. Written
notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
            1.   The grounds for the complaint, and reasons for suspension or
revocation; and
            2.   The time and place of the hearing.
         (d)   At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the County
Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended
or revoked.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the county from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
154.635 through
154.644 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
   (D)   (1)   Maximum $500 fine with each week a violation of §§
154.655 through
154.662 continues uncorrected constituting a separate offense.
      (2)   Nothing in this division (D) shall be construed to prevent the
county from using any other lawful means to enforce §§
154.655 through
154.662.
(Ord. passed 5-16-2023)
CHAPTER 155: RESERVED
CHAPTER 156: POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES
Section
   
156.01   Definitions
   
156.02   Application
   
156.03   County review
   
156.04   Pre-hearing filings
   
156.05   Public hearing
   
156.06   Public comment
   
156.07   Record
   
156.08   Site approval design
   
156.09   Ex-parte communications prohibited
   
156.10   Administration of fees and cost; filing deposit
 
   
156.99   Penalty
§ 156.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      ACTUAL COST OF REPRODUCTION. The actual cost incurred or paid by the
county to reproduce any part of the record, including the cost paid by the
county to a professional copy service, or in the case of a transcript, the cost
paid for copies by the county to the court reporting firm.
      AGENCY. The State Environmental Protection Agency.
      APPLICANT. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, local government, joint action agency, entity, or organization of any
kind who files a request for site approval pursuant to this chapter.
      APPLICATION FEE. The fee filed with the request for site approval
pursuant to §
156.02(C)(12) of this code. The APPLICATION FEE for a request for site approval
for a landfill shall be $150,000. The APPLICATION FEE for a request for site
approval for all other new pollution control facilities shall be $75,000. A
supplemental APPLICATION FEE in the amount of $10,000 shall be paid at the time
of filing of an amended request for site approval pursuant to §
156.02(E).
      COUNTY. Rock Island County, Illinois, a body politic and corporate,
having a mailing address at 1504 3rd Avenue, Rock Island, Illinois 61201.
      COUNTY BOARD. The County Board.
      COUNTY CLERK. The Clerk of Rock Island County, Illinois, having offices
at 1504 3rd Avenue, Rock Island, Illinois 61201.
      COUNTY SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN. The Bi-State Regional Comprehensive
Solid Waste Management Plan, dated February 19, 1991, the Rock Island County
Five Year Update of the Bi-State Regional Comprehensive Solid Waste Management
Plan, dated January 1996, and such amendments thereto approved from time to
time thereafter.
      IPCB. The Illinois Pollution Control Board.
      NEW POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY.
         (a)   A pollution control facility initially permitted for development
or construction after July 1, 1981;
         (b)   The area of expansion beyond the boundary of a currently
permitted pollution control facility; or
         (c)   A permitted pollution control facility requesting approval to
store, dispose of, transfer, or incinerate, for the first time, any special or
hazardous waste.
      PCF COMMITTEE. The committee appointed by the County Board Chairperson
pursuant to §
156.03(A).
      POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY. Any waste storage site, sanitary landfill,
waste disposal site, waste transfer station, waste treatment facility, or waste
incinerator, consistent with the definition supplied in 415 ILCS 5/3.330.
      RICWMA. The Rock Island County Waste Management Agency.
      STATE'S ATTORNEY. The state's attorney of the county.
   (B)   In addition, all other words used in this chapter and defined in the
Illinois Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq., shall have the
same definitions and meanings as found in the Illinois Environmental Protection
Act.
(Ord. 2024-10-A, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.02 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A minimum of 15 complete copies of requests for site approval,
including copies of all site plans, exhibits, and maps, shall be filed with the
County Clerk. However, only three copies of large-scale engineering drawings
are required to be filed with each request, provided the applicant files 15
copies of the engineering drawings that have been reduced onto 11-inch by 17-
inch paper. Upon receipt of any such request for site approval, the application
shall be date stamped. Copies of the request for site approval shall be
distributed by the County Clerk to the Chairperson of the County Board, the
Chairperson of the Solid Waste Committee of the County Board, the Chairperson
of the Health and Welfare Committee of the County Board, the Administrator of
the County Health Department, the state's attorney, the RICWMA, and members of
the PCF Committee. Upon selection of a hearing officer and technical
consultant, if any, as set forth below, a copy of the request for site approval
shall be provided by the County Clerk to them.
   (B)   (1)   One copy of the request for site approval shall be made
available by the County Clerk for public inspection at the office of the County
Clerk. Members of the public shall be allowed to obtain a copy of the request
for site approval or any part thereof from the County Clerk upon payment of the
actual cost of reproduction.
      (2)   All copying requests shall be fulfilled by the County Clerk within
a reasonable time from the time of the request.
   (C)   Requests for site approval shall contain and be of the form as
follows:
      (1)   A written petition on eight and one-half inch by 11 inch paper that
sets forth:
         (a)   The identification of the applicant and owner, and if the
proposed site is owned in a land trust, each beneficiary of such land trust by
name, and address and his or her defined interest therein;
         (b)   The legal description of the proposed site and a street address,
or some other reasonable description of where the proposed site is located;
         (c)   A description of the proposed facility, its operation, and the
expected longevity thereof;
         (d)   The area to be served by the proposed facility and a statement
of the need for such a facility in the area;
         (e)   A list of the existing pollution control facilities located
within or serving or reasonably capable of serving the area proposed to be
served and, with respect to each such facility, the following information shall
be provided: location; size; owner and/or operator; type of pollution control
facility; remaining capacity; probable life of the proposed facility; and types
of wastes received;
         (f)   The expected types, amounts, and methods of treatment or storage
of all wastes proposed for the site and the general origins of these wastes;
         (g)   A description of the landfill design, including the liner, the
leachate collection system, the gas collection system, and the final cover; and
         (h)   Reasons supporting approval of the application;
      (2)   All documents, if any, submitted as of the date of the request for
site approval to the Agency pertaining to the proposed facility, except trade
secrets determined to be such pursuant to 415 ILCS 5/7.1. Note that the
applicant need only provide one copy of such documents; at the applicant's
option, said copy may be provided in electronic “.pdf” format on a CD-ROM;
      (3)   A site plan showing details of the proposed facility, including,
but not limited to:
         (a)   Cross-sections;
         (b)   Fences, buildings, and other structures; and
         (c)   Roads, entrances, and driveways;
      (4)   A topographic survey of the subject site and the surrounding area
within 500 feet which indicates land use and, if applicable, the boundary of
the 100-year floodplain;
      (5)   A statement of the plan of operation for the proposed facility,
including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Methods of storage, treatment, consolidation, or transfer of
waste or other processes;
         (b)   Hours of operation;
         (c)   Personnel;
         (d)   Litter, vector, dust, and odor control;
         (e)   Surface drainage;
         (f)   Landfill gas control;
         (g)   Leachate control;
         (h)   Fire control; and
         (i)   Corrective actions for spills and other operational accidents;
      (6)   A statement or report of traffic information regarding the proposed
site including the anticipated number of vehicles and their size, weight, and
direction of movement;
      (7)   All pertinent documentary support for the application or request
including, but not limited to, studies, maps, reports, permits, or exhibits
that the applicant desires the County Board to consider at the public hearing.
It is intended that the applicant provide a full and complete disclosure of his
or her case to facilitate early review and analysis by all parties, provided
that the applicant shall not be required to include in the request all of the
detailed information required by the agency to be included in an application
for a landfill development permit. However, the applicant shall not be
precluded from introducing at the public hearing documentary support for the
request that was not included in the application for site location approval,
provided said documents were not reasonably available at the time the
application was filed;
      (8)   A statement describing the past operating experience of the
applicant (and any subsidiary and parent corporation) in the field of solid
waste management in the state within the preceding ten years;
      (9)   A statement citing the past record of all convictions or admissions
of violations of the applicant (and any subsidiary and parent corporation) in
the field of solid waste management in the state within the preceding ten
years;
      (10)   All pre-filing notices required by 415 ILCS 5/39.2;
      (11)   Any host agreement entered into between the county and the
applicant; and
      (12)   The applicable application fee.
   (D)   An application for site approval may not be filed that is
substantially the same as a request that was disapproved pursuant to a finding
against an applicant by the county under any of the criteria of (i) through
(ix) of 415 ILCS 5/39.2(a), as amended, within the preceding two years.
   (E)   At any time prior to the completion by the applicant of the
presentation of the applicant's factual evidence and an opportunity for cross-
questioning by the county and any participants, the applicant may file not more
than one amended application upon payment of additional fees to cover the
reasonable and necessary costs incurred by the county in the siting review
process; in which case, time limitations for final action by the governing body
of the county shall be extended for an additional period of 90 days.
(Ord. 2024-10-A, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.03 COUNTY REVIEW.
   (A)   Within 35 days after receiving a copy of the request for site approval
from the County Clerk pursuant to §
156.02(A), the County Board Chairperson shall appoint six members of the County
Board to the PCF Committee. The Chairperson of the County Board shall serve as
the Chairperson of the PCF Committee (“PCF Chairperson”) and shall be the
seventh member of the PCF Committee. In the event of the absence of the PCF
Chairperson at a meeting or hearing of the PCF Committee, the members shall
designate one of said members as Acting Chairperson during the absence of the
PCF Chairperson.
   (B)   Within a reasonable time after receipt of a request for site approval,
the County Board Chairperson shall appoint a hearing officer to preside over
the public hearing and may retain a technical consultant to advise the County
Board and the PCF Committee with respect to the application or request for site
approval, evidence adduced at the public hearing, and comments received by the
County Board.
   (C)   The technical consultant(s) retained by the county, if any, is
authorized to present testimony at the public hearing as hereinafter described,
and to prepare reports and recommendations in response to the request for site
approval and to any written comments filed with the County Clerk. Such reports
and recommendations shall be filed with the County Clerk at least ten days
before the public hearing commences, as hereinafter described in §
156.04.
(Ord. 2024-10-A, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.04 PRE-HEARING FILINGS.
   (A)   Public participation.
      (1)   All reports, studies, exhibits, or other evidence, other than
testimony, which any person other than the county and the applicant desires to
submit for the record, along with a list identifying the witnesses to be called
to testify at the public hearing, must be filed with the County Clerk at least
ten days before the public hearing commences and shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the County Clerk. Three copies of each report,
study, exhibit, and witness list must be filed. In the event that the tenth day
prior to the date set for public hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or
holiday, the next working day shall be considered the day that reports,
studies, and exhibits must be filed. The County Clerk shall date stamp any such
reports, studies, exhibits, or other evidence upon receipt. Members of the
public shall be allowed to obtain copies of said documents and witness list
from the County Clerk upon payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
      (2)   Any person wishing to participate at the public hearing shall have
the rights, obligations, or opportunities as set forth below in §
156.05(F) and (G) consistent with 415 ILCS 5/39.2 and fundamental fairness.
   (B)   Applicant and county participation.
      (1)   All reports and recommendations prepared by the county's technical
consultant(s), if any, and by any county department(s), if any, pursuant to §
156.03(C), and all other reports, studies, exhibits, or other evidence, other
than testimony, which the county desires to submit for the record, along with a
list identifying the county's witnesses to be called at the public hearing,
must be filed at least ten days before the public hearing commences and shall
be available for public inspection in the office of the County Clerk. Three
copies of each report, study, exhibit, and witness list shall be filed. Members
of the public shall be allowed to obtain copies of said documents and witness
list from the County Clerk upon payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
      (2)   The applicant shall file three copies of a list identifying the
applicant's witnesses to be called to testify at the public hearing with the
County Clerk at least ten days before the public hearing commences. The
applicant's witness list shall be available for public inspection in the office
of the County Clerk. Members of the public shall be allowed to obtain copies of
said witness list from the County Clerk upon payment of the actual cost of
reproduction. The request for site approval previously filed, and all reports
or studies contained therein, shall be deemed evidence for admission as an
exhibit at the public hearing.
   (C)   RICWMA participation. RICWMA shall file with the County Clerk any
recommendations pursuant to the “Rock Island County Five Year Update of the Bi-
State Regional Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan” at least ten days
before the public hearing commences, which recommendation shall be available
for public inspection in the office of the County Clerk. Members of the public
shall be allowed to obtain copies from the County Clerk of the recommendation
upon payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
(Ord. 2024-10-A, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.05 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   The PCF Committee shall hold a public hearing on the request for site
approval no sooner than 90 days but no longer than 120 days from the date of
filing of the request for site approval. A transcript shall be made and
retained of all portions of the public hearing.
   (B)   Within 30 working days after a request for site approval is filed, the
County Board Chairperson shall determine the date, time, and location of such
public hearing, but in any event the initial public hearing must be scheduled
no sooner than 90 days but no later than 120 days from the date the request for
site approval was filed with the County Clerk.
   (C)   The County Board Chairperson shall notify the applicant of the date,
time, and location of such hearing. The applicant shall cause notice of such
hearing to be made as follows:
      (1)   Publish legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation
published in the county no later than 14 days prior to the date of such
hearing;
      (2)   Such notice shall consist of the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The owner of the site, and in case ownership is in a land trust,
the names of the beneficiaries of said trust;
         (c)   The legal description of the subject site;
         (d)   The street address of the property, and if there is no street
address applicable to the property, a description of the site with reference to
location, ownership, or occupancy, or in some other manner that will reasonably
identify the property to residents of the neighborhood;
         (e)   The nature and size of the proposed development;
         (f)   The nature of the activity proposed;
         (g)   The probable life of the proposed activity;
         (h)   The time and date of the public hearing;
         (i)   The location of the public hearing;
         (j)   A statement that all documentary evidence other than testimony
to be submitted at the public hearing and a list identifying witnesses must be
filed with the County Clerk at least ten days before the public hearing
commences;
         (k)   A statement that all parties, including members of the public,
intending to testify or cross-examine must submit notice of said intent to the
County Clerk or sign in with the hearing officer on or before the first day of
public hearing; and
         (l)   A statement that written comment must be received by the County
Clerk or postmarked not later than 30 days after the date of the last public
hearing; and
      (3)   No later than 14 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be
delivered by certified mail to all members of the General Assembly from the
district in which the proposed site is located, to the State Environmental
Protection Agency, and to the governing authority of all municipalities
contiguous to the proposed facility.
   (D)   The hearing officer appointed by the County Board Chairperson shall
preside over the public hearing and shall make any decisions concerning the
admission of evidence and the manner in which the hearing is conducted subject
to this chapter. The hearing officer shall make all decisions and rulings in
accordance with fundamental fairness. The hearing officer may exclude
irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent, or unduly repetitious testimony or other
evidence. No ruling of the hearing officer shall be appealable to the PCF
Committee or the County Board.
   (E)   The applicant for site location approval shall have the burden of
going forward with evidence of the suitability of the site location for the
proposed use. The request for site location approval previously filed, and all
reports, maps, or studies contained therein shall be deemed evidence and
admitted as an exhibit at the public hearing.
   (F)   Any person appearing at such public hearing shall have the right to
give testimony and comment on the suitability of the site location for the
proposed use. All persons intending to participate in the hearing, including
members of the public, must submit written notification of said intent to the
County Clerk before the first day of public hearing or register in person with
the hearing officer prior to the close or adjournment of the first day of
hearing. Any person who has submitted a timely notification of intent to
participate at such public hearing shall have the right to present testimony
and witnesses and orally comment on the suitability of the site location for
the proposed use. Any such person shall have the right to be represented by an
attorney at said public hearing. Participants represented by attorneys shall
have the right of reasonable cross-examination, subject to the hearing officers
judgment and consistent with fundamental fairness. Participants not represented
by attorneys shall be allowed to submit written cross-examination questions to
the hearing officer, who shall exercise discretion to direct relevant and non-
duplicative cross-questions to the applicable witness. Cross-questioning of
witnesses will be permitted only during that period immediately following each
witness' testimony.
   (G)   Conduct of the public hearing shall be substantially as follows:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Introduction of the hearing officer;
      (3)   Recognition of the applicant and identification of the request for
site approval;
      (4)   Recognition by the applicant of fees, notices, and date of filing
of the request for site approval;
      (5)   (a)   Recognition of the PCF Committee and other parties wishing to
testify and any other reports, exhibits, maps, or documents of record as filed
pursuant to this chapter, as amended. All parties, including members of the
public, intending to testify or cross-examine must sign in or submit written
notification of said intent to the County Clerk or hearing officer on or before
the first day of the public hearing. Should the public hearing extend beyond
one day, additional parties or members of the public, not of record as of the
first day of the public hearing, will not be allowed to present testimony or
cross-examine, except as authorized by the hearing officer for cause shown,
consistent with fundamental fairness; and
         (b)   Subject to §
156.06(D), any person wishing to comment orally, without being subject to
cross-examination, may do so at the conclusion of evidence, subject to the
hearing officer's discretion;
      (6)   The applicant, the county, and other parties represented by counsel
may make an opening statement;
      (7)   Testimony from the applicant and/or any witnesses the applicant may
wish to call. Upon the close of the applicant's evidence, the county and other
parties may offer expert witnesses and other testimony or evidence they may
wish to present. Members of the public, of record, as set forth in divisions
(F) and (G)(5) above, may then present oral comment. All members of the public
who participate by providing oral comments shall do so under oath. The hearing
officer shall decide the order of presentation of testimony subject to this
subchapter;
      (8)   All witnesses shall testily under oath. Testimony may include the
use of exhibits. All witnesses shall be subject to reasonable questioning as
follows: direct, cross-questioning, redirect, recross, and the like. After all
parties have presented testimony, reasonable rebuttal, surrebuttal, and the
like, may be allowed at the discretion of the hearing officer;
      (9)   Should any issues, facts, data, or other evidence arise during the
course of the public hearing, which were not apparent or reasonably foreseeable
from the request for site approval as filed with the County Clerk, such
situation may constitute grounds for a recess in the public hearing for a
period not to exceed five working days;
      (10)   Summary statements by the applicant, other parties, and the
county, subject to limitations as imposed by the hearing officer;
      (11)   Rebuttal statement, if any, by the applicant, subject to
limitations as imposed by the hearing officer;
      (12)   Proposed findings of fact and recommendation of the parties. Prior
to the close of the hearing, the hearing officer shall fix a date after the
hearing to file the same with the County Clerk; and
      (13)   Hearing closed.
   (H)   If, prior to making a final local siting decision, the County Board
has negotiated and entered into a host agreement with the applicant, the terms
and conditions of the host agreement, whether oral or written, shall be
disclosed and made a part of the hearing record for that local siting
proceeding. In the case of an oral agreement, the disclosure shall be made in
the form of a written summary jointly prepared and submitted by the County
Board and the applicant, and shall describe the terms and conditions of the
oral agreement.
(Ord. 2024-10-A, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.06 PUBLIC COMMENT.
   (A)   The County Clerk shall receive written comment from any person
concerning the appropriateness of the proposed site. Upon receipt of any such
written comment the County Clerk shall date stamp the same and shall file the
written comment and the postmarked envelope in which the comment is received as
part of the record in the siting proceeding.
   (B)   Copies of such written comments shall be made available for public
inspection in the office of the County Clerk. Members of the public shall be
allowed to obtain a copy of any written comment received by the County Clerk
upon payment of actual cost of reproduction.
   (C)   Any written comment received by the County Clerk or postmarked not
later than 30 days after the date of the last public hearing shall be made part
of the record at the public hearing as hereinafter described and the County
Board shall consider any such timely written comments in making its final
determination concerning said request. In the event that the thirtieth day
falls on a Sunday or a federal holiday, the next day on which mail is delivered
shall be considered the thirtieth day for purposes of this division (C).
   (D)   All public comment, oral or written, which is timely submitted, shall
be considered by the County Board. Public comments may not be entitled to the
same weight as testimony which is provided under oath and subject to cross-
examination; while public comment shall be considered, it may be entitled to
lesser weight.
(Ord. 2024-10-A, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.07 RECORD.
   (A)   The County Clerk shall be responsible for keeping the record of said
hearing. The record shall consist of the following:
      (1)   The request for site location approval as described in §
156.02, including proof of notice pursuant to 415 ILCS 5/39.2(b), which shall
be admitted as an exhibit at public hearing;
      (2)   Proof of notice as described in §
156.05(C);
      (3)   Written comments filed by the public and received by the County
Clerk or postmarked within 30 days of the close of the hearing;
      (4)   All reports, studies, exhibits, or documents received into evidence
at the public hearing;
      (5)   The transcript of the public hearing;
      (6)   All written communications between the PCF Committee and the County
Board;
      (7)   Proposed findings of fact and recommendations of the parties, if
any; and
      (8)   The resolution containing the final decision of the County Board.
   (B)   The County Clerk shall be responsible for certifying all copies of the
record of the public hearing.
(Ord. 2024-10-A, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.08 SITE APPROVAL DESIGN.
   (A)   After the public hearing and any continuation thereof, the PCF
Committee shall hold a meeting for purposes of developing a written
recommendation and proposed decision to the County Board on the request for
site location approval. If findings of fact are made, such findings shall be
supported by the record. The written recommendation and proposed decision of
the PCF Committee shall be delivered to the County Board for consideration by
the County Board in making its decision on the request for site location
approval.
   (B)   The County Board's decision on the request for site location approval
shall be based on the following criteria:
      (1)   The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the
area it is intended to serve;
      (2)   The facility is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated
so that the public health, safety, and welfare will be protected;
      (3)   The facility is located so as to minimize incompatibility with the
character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value of
the surrounding property; and
      (4)   (a)   For a facility other than a sanitary landfill or waste
disposal site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year
floodplain, or the site is flood-proofed;
         (b)   For a facility that is a sanitary landfill or waste disposal
site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain,
or if the facility is a facility described in 415 ILCS 5/22.19a(b), the site is
flood-proofed;
      (5)   The plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other operational
accidents;
      (6)   The traffic patterns to or from the facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows;
      (7)   If the facility will be treating, storing, or disposing of
hazardous waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility which
includes notification, containment, and evacuation procedures to be used in
case of an accidental release;
      (8)   If the County Board has developed a solid waste management plan
consistent with the planning requirements of the Local Solid Waste Disposal Act
or the Solid Waste Planning and Recycling Act, the facility is consistent with
said plan; for purposes of this criterion, the SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN
means the County Solid Waste Management Plan; and
      (9)   If the facility will be located within a regulated recharge area,
any and all applicable requirements specified by the IPCB for such area have
been met.
   (C)   The County Board may consider as evidence the previous operating
experience and past record of convictions or admissions of violations of the
applicant (and any subsidiary and parent corporation) in the field of solid
waste management when considering divisions (B)(2) and (B)(5) above.
   (D)   Pursuant to 415 ILCS 5/39.2(a), local siting approval shall be granted
only if the proposed facility meets the criteria cited above.
   (E)   (1)   The County Board shall make a final written decision within 180
days from the date of filing of the site approval request, specifying the
reasons for the decision, which reasons shall be in conformance with 415 ILCS
5/39.2(a).
      (2)   The County Board may conditionally approve of any request for site
approval, provided such conditions are not inconsistent with regulations
promulgated by the IPCB.
      (3)   Any determination by the County Board shall be supported by the
record, which record shall be made available for review by all members of the
County Board.
   (F)   No written determination by the County Board of a site approval
request may be reconsidered.
(Ord. 2024-10-A, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.09 EX-PARTE COMMUNICATIONS PROHIBITED.
   In recognition of the quasi-judicial role of each member of the County Board
and the state's attorney, ex-parte communications with persons other than
members of the County Board or the state's attorney concerning the request for
site approval are prohibited between the date of filing of the request for site
approval and the date of the final decision of the County Board (or the one
hundred eightieth day after said date of filing). Although the members of the
County Board are encouraged not to attend meetings at which the member knows
the request for site approval may be discussed, it is inevitable that due to
their regular legislative duties over the course of time during the
consideration of the request for site approval they may be in attendance at
such meetings (for example, attendance at a municipality's council of
governments meeting, attendance at a local chamber of commerce meeting, and the
like). As such, the member is required to obtain and file a transcript of any
meeting, where such meeting has been transcribed or recorded, or otherwise
disclose such meeting in the public records (such as disclosing it on the
record during the transcribed public hearings or during the written comment
period provided for in §
156.06). The transcript shall not, however, be utilized by the county in
reaching its decision.
(Ord. 2024-10-A, passed 11-19-2024) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.10 ADMINISTRATION OF FEES AND COST; FILING DEPOSIT.
   (A)   (1)   All expenses incurred by the county in conducting the review of
the request for site approval, conducting the public hearing, making the site
approval decision, and responding to any appeal thereof by a person other than
the applicant shall be paid by the applicant, including the costs of any
consultants, attorneys, or hearing officer utilized by the county in connection
with the request for site approval, costs of court reporting, and transcripts
for the public hearing, and witness fees. Said expenses shall be paid from the
application fee.
      (2)   The county shall periodically submit a detailed accounting and
summary of all expenditures and reimbursements, authorized pursuant to division
(A)(1) above, to the applicant for payment.
   (B)   (1)   Each applicant for siting approval of a pollution control
facility in the county must, at the time of filing the application for site
approval, pursuant to 415 ILCS 5/39.2, deposit with the County Board a filing
fee deposit of $75,000. If the proposed facility is intended to be a hazardous
waste disposal site, the filing fee deposit shall be $125,000.
      (2)   Pursuant to the provisions of 415 ILCS 5/39.2(e) and (k), in the
event an applicant files an amended application in the manner allowed by law,
such shall be accompanied by an additional filing fee in the amount of $25,000.
      (3)   The applicable filing fee is intended to defray the reasonable and
necessary costs of processing the application, including, but not limited to,
cost of site inspection, clerical expenses, copying costs, space rental,
hearing officer compensation, court reporter expenses, transcription costs,
staff review expenses, special prosecutor expenses, and consulting fees, such
as charges by engineers, planners, appraisers, and environmental counsel.
      (4)   In the event there are funds remaining in the filing fee deposit
after payment of the county's costs and expenses, such shall be refunded to the
applicant without interest, upon final resolution of the application process,
including any and all types of administrative or judicial review.
      (5)   In the event the county incurred additional costs in excess of the
filing fee deposited, the applicant will be responsible therefor, and shall
promptly pay over such amounts to the county upon request or demand.
      (6)   Upon receipt any and all fees required by the provisions of this
chapter shall be deposited in a special account in the County Treasury to be
paid out by the County Treasurer upon order of the County Board. Such fees
shall not be expended for any purpose not authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-10-A, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2024-10-A, passed 11-19-2024)
CHAPTER 157:
URBAN CHICKENS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d53095237a00b1625eb993db652189a9fc2b0aa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1767.png]Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been ADDED by new
legislation (Ord. 2025-02, passed 10-1-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
      
II.   PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
III.   FUNDS
      
IV.   ZONING MAP MATRIX
      
V.   ENTERPRISE ZONES
TABLE I: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Agreement to participate in the State Public Treasurer’s Investment Pool
-    - -    (IPTIP).
            (Prior Code, § 1-13-1)
            A Host County Agreement between the county and Millennium Waste
-    - -    Incorporated (MWI) for 20 years.
            (Prior Code, Title 3, Chapter 6)
     10-17- Authorization for the County Sheriff to enforce the State Vehicle Code
-    2000   within the Winding Creek Estates, located in Taylor Ridge, Illinois.
            (Prior Code, 5-12-1)
R.-  3-19-  Adopting the revised articles of agreement of the Bi-State Regional
     2013   Commission.
R.-  1-16-  Intergovernmental agreement between the county and the County Public
     2018   Building Commission.
           
 
 
 
TABLE II: PUBLIC PROPERTY
 
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Agreement of the county to improve the surface of certain
-        - -         county roads.
                     (Document, “Agreement,” Agreement No. JN-2-09-019)
                     Establishment of a special services area in the county to
-        4-18-1989   be known as the Silvis Heights Special Services Area.
                     (Prior Code, Title 1, Chapter 16)
R.-      3-21-2012   Transfer of John Deere Entrance Road East to the City of
                     Moline.
R.-      10-15-2013  Classifying County Highway 70 from County Highway 2
                     northerly to County Highway 22 as a Class III Road.
                    
 
 
 
TABLE III: FUNDS
 
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
     1-21-  Establishment of the Arrestee’s Medical Costs Funds, and reimbursement for
R. - 2003   inmate medical costs at the Department of Public Aid rates.
            (Prior Code, Title 6, Chapter 18)
           
 
 
 
TABLE IV: ZONING MAP MATRIX
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        5-16-2023   AG-1 as mapped as Preservation on the 1998 Proposed Land
                     Use Map.
-        5-16-2023   AG-2 as mapped as Low Density on the 1998 Proposed Land
                     Use Map.
                     SE-1 currently SE where no part of the zoned area is
-        5-16-2023   adjoined by Medium Density or a High Density on the 1998
                     Long Range Land Use Map.
                     SE-2 currently SE where any portion of the zoned area is
-        5-16-2023   adjoined by a Medium Density or High Density on the 1998
                     Long Range Use Map.
-        5-16-2023   R-1 currently R-1.
-        5-16-2023   R-2 currently R-2.
-        5-16-2023   R-3 new district.
-        5-16-2023   R-4 new district.
-        5-16-2023   R-5 new district.
-        5-16-2023   R-6 new district.
-        5-16-2023   R-7 new district (Mobile Home Parks currently as SU).
-        5-16-2023   U-1 new district.
-        5-16-2023   C-1 new district.
-        5-16-2023   C-2 new district.
-        5-16-2023   O-1 new district.
-        5-16-2023   B-1 currently C-1.
-        5-16-2023   B-2 new district.
-        5-16-2023   B-3 currently C-2.
-        5-16-2023   B-4 currently C-3.
-        5-16-2023   ORT new district.
-        5-16-2023   I-1 currently M-1.
-        5-16-2023   I-2 currently M-2.
-        5-16-2023   PUD new district.
                    
 
 
 
TABLE V: ENTERPRISE ZONES
 
 
Ord. No.    Date Passed Description
-           - -         Amending Ord. 99-702 concerning the establishment of an
                        enterprise zone.
                        Amending an agreement for an enterprise zone between
R.2012-0515 - -         the county and the Cities of Moline, East Moline, and
                        Silvis, and the Village of Milan.
                        Amending an agreement for an enterprise zone between
R.2014-0514 - -         the county and the Cities of Moline, East Moline, and
                        Silvis, and the Village of Milan.
-           - -2017     Establishing an enterprise zone in the City of Moline.
                       
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
Illinois Compiled Statutes Code Section
Illinois Compiled Statutes Code Section
5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.       31.59
5 ILCS 140/1               36.01
5 ILCS/140/3               36.01
5 ILCS 315/3               30.01
10 ILCS 5/1-3              30.01
10 ILCS 5/9-1.4            30.01
10 ILCS 5/9-3              30.01
20 ILCS 3305/5             32.01
20 ILCS 3305/6(c)(5)       32.04
20 ILCS 3305/8             32.05
20 ILCS 3305/10(a)         32.03
20 ILCS 3305/10(b)         32.01
20 ILCS 3305/13            32.06
20 ILCS 3305/20            32.08
35 ILCS 145/1 et seq.      35.23
35 ILCS 145/2              35.22
35 ILCS 200/21-40          35.03
35 ILCS 200/31-1 et seq.   35.02
40 ILCS 5/7-173(a)(1)      30.20;
                           30.21
40 ILCS 5/7-173(a)(3)      30.20;
                           30.21
40 ILCS 5/7-173.1          30.20;
                           30.21
40 ILCS 5/7.173.2          30.20;
                           30.21
40 ILCS 5/7-173.2          30.22
50 ILCS 750/1 et seq.      31.35
50 ILCS 750/3              31.35
55 ILCS 5/3-10009          34.003
55 ILCS 5/3-11002          34.003
55 ILCS 5/5-12             154.655
55 ILCS 5/5-1022(b)        34.001
55 ILCS 5/5-1052           10.99;
                           52.20
55 ILCS 5/5-1041           153.01;
                           154.610
55 ILCS 5/5-1059           113.01
                           150.15;
55 ILCS 5/5-1063           154.610;
                           154.655
55 ILCS 5/5-1065           150.15
55 ILCS 5/5-1078.5         90.17
55 ILCS 5/5-1113           10.99;
                           52.20
55 ILCS 5/5-1118           52.20
55 ILCS 5/5-6002           150.15
55 ILCS 5/5-6004           150.15
55 ILCS 5/5-39001          34.035
55 ILCS 5/5-41005 et seq.  31.15;
                           31.16
                           31.18;
55 ILCS 5/5-41020          31.19;
                           31.22
55 ILCS 5/5-41025          31.16
55 ILCS 5/5-41035          31.16
55 ILCS 5/5-41040          31.19
55 ILCS 5/5-41050          31.21
55 ILCS 5/5-41055          31.21
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1          34.070
70 ILCS                    152.86
70 ILCS 805/0.001 et seq.  92.06
215 ILCS 134/45.3          31.36
225 ILCS 210               115.06
225 ILCS 210/1 et seq.     115.04
225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.     51.02;
                           51.99
225 ILCS 345               50.02
225 ILCS 605/1             91.002
230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.   110.056
230 ILCS 20/1.1 et seq.    110.056
230 ILCS 40                112.23
230 ILCS 40 et seq.        112.23
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.      112.15
230 ILCS 40/65             112.16
235 ILCS 5/1-1             90.17
                           110.003;
235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.     110.095;
                           113.02
235 ILCS 5/1-3.05          113.03
235 ILCS 5/6-1             110.062
235 ILCS 5/6-2 et seq.     110.056
235 ILCS 5/6-21(a)         110.056;
                           110.057
235 ILCS 5/7-9             110.100
305 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.     33.02
410 ILCS 535/25            34.016
415 ILCS                   152.186
415 ILCS 5                 154.615
415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.       156.01
415 ILCS 5/3.300           156.01
415 ILCS 5/7.1             156.02
415 ILCS 5/22.19a(b)       156.08
                           156.02;
415 ILCS 5/39.2            156.04;
                           156.10
415 ILCS 5/39.2(a)         156.08
415 ILCS 5/39.2(a)(i)—(ix156.02
415 ILCS 5/39.2(b)         156.07
415 ILCS 5/39.2(e) and (k) 156.10
415 ILCS 30                50.02;
                           50.05
415 ILCS 35                50.02;
                           50.04
415 ILCS 55                50.02
415 ILCS 105/4             90.17
425 ILCS 30 et seq.        115.04
425 ILCS 30/1 et seq.      115.05
425 ILCS 35/1              115.01;
                           115.99
                           115.02;
425 ILCS 35/2              115.03;
                           115.04;
                           115.06
425 ILCS 35-2              115.07
425 ILCS 35/3.1            115.08
505 ILCS                   152.186
505 ILCS 100/1 et seq.     90.34
510 ILCS 5/1               91.002
510 ILCS 5/2.04            91.005
510 ILCS 5/2.04a           91.005
510 ILCS 5/2.05            91.005
510 ILCS 5/2.11            91.005
510 ILCS 5/2.16            91.005
510 ILCS 5/2.17            91.005
510 ILCS 5/3               91.005;
                           91.008
510 ILCS 5/7               91.007
510 ILCS 5/8               91.020;
                           91.051
510 ILCS 5/8 et seq.       91.021
510 ILCS 5/9               91.005;
                           91.008
510 ILCS 5/10              91.005;
                           91.008
510 ILCS 5/12 et seq.      91.020
510 ILCS 5/13              91.020;
                           91.037
510 ILCS 5/13 et seq.      91.036
510 ILCS 5/14 et seq.      91.020
510 ILCS 5/16              91.037
510 ILCS 5/24              91.005
510 ILCS 70/1              91.002
510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.      91.085
510 ILCS 70/3              91.086
510 ILCS 70/3.01           91.085
510 ILCS 70/3.03           91.085
510 ILCS 70/30.3           91.085
510 ILCS 72/1 et seq.      91.065
615 ILCS                   152.186
624 ILCS 5/3-616           Ch. 73, Schd. I
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.   92.06
625 ILCS 5/1-146           Ch. 73, Schd. I
625 ILCS 5/1-147           Ch. 73, Schd. I
625 ILCS 5/7-701 et seq.   34.063
625 ILCS 5/11-204          90.17
625 ILCS 5/11-310          90.17
625 ILCS 5/11-311          90.17
625 ILCS 5/11-501          70.02
625 ILCS 5/11-502          90.17
705 ILCS 105/27.1(u)       34.066
705 ILCS 105/27.1b         34.065
705 ILCS 105/27.6          34.036
705 ILCS 105/27.3a         34.069
720 ILCS 5/ et seq.        110.095
720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.     92.06
720 ILCS 5/11-0.1 et seq.  113.18;
                           113.44
720 ILCS 5/24-1            90.17
720 ILCS 5/26-1(a)(5)      90.17
720 ILCS 5/26-1(a)(11)     90.17
720 ILCS 5/28-1            110.056
720 ILCS 5/28-1.1          110.056
720 ILCS 5/28-3            110.056
720 ILCS 57/410            34.067
720 ILCS 550/10            34.067
730 ILCS 5/5-7-6(a)        33.03
730 ILCS 5/5-7-6(b)        33.03
730 ILCS 5/5-7-6(c)        33.03
730 ILCS 125/17            33.02
730 ILCS 125/19            34.067
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.   31.20
755 ILCS 5/7-701 et seq.   34.057
765 ILCS 205/1             153.04
765 ILCS 205/2             154.617
805 ILCS 511.01 et seq.    110.056
805 ILCS 18011-1 et seq.   110.056
                           
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Code Section
Prior Code          Code Section
1-1-1               10.01
1-1-2               10.02
1-1-3               10.03
1-1-4               10.04
1-2-1               10.05
1-2-2               10.06
1-2-3               10.07
1-2-4               10.08
1-3-1               10.09
1-3-2               10.09
1-3-3               10.10
1-4-1               10.99
1-4-2               10.11
1-4-3               10.12
1-4-4               10.13
1-6-2               34.035
1-7-1               35.01
1-9-2               35.21
1-9-3               35.22
1-9-4               35.23
1-9-5               35.24
1-9-6               35.25
1-9-7               35.99
1-9-8               35.20
1-10-1              30.20
1-10-2              30.21
1-10-3              30.22
1-11-2              35.02
1-12-1              90.15;
                    90.16
1-12-2              90.17
1-12-3              90.99
1-13-1              TSO Table I
1-14-1              34.003
1-15-2              35.03
1-17-1              32.12
1-20-2              31.15
1-20-3              31.16
1-20-4              31.17
1-20-5              31.18
1-20-6              31.19
1-20-7              31.20
1-20-8              31.21
1-20-9              31.22
1-20-10             31.23
2-1-2               112.01
                    113.01;
2-3-2               113.02;
                    113.03
2-3-3               113.04
2-3-4               113.15—
                    113.26
2-3-5               113.40—
                    113.44
2-3-6               113.55—
                    113.60
2-3-7               113.61;
                    113.62
2-4-2               114.01
2-4-3               114.02
2-4-4               114.03
3-3-1               153.01—
                    153.05
3-3-2               153.08
3-3-3               153.20—
                    153.23
3-3-4               153.06;
                    153.07
3-3-5               153.35;
                    153.36
                    151.01;
3-4-1               151.02;
                    151.03
3-4-2               151.15
3-4-3               151.16
3-4-4               151.17
3-4-5               151.18
3-4-6               151.19
3-4-7               151.20
3-4-8               151.99
3-4-10              151.21
3-7-3               90.01;
                    90.03
3-7-4               90.02;
                    90.99
4-1-2               117.01
4-1-3               117.02
4-1-4               117.15—
                    117.19
4-1-5               117.30
4-1-6               117.31
4-1-7               117.32
4-1-8               117.33
4-1-9               117.34
4-1-10              117.35
4-1-11              117.36
4-1-12              117.37
4-1-13              117.38
4-1-14              117.99
4-1-15              117.39
4-4-2               51.01
4-4-3               51.02
4-4-4               51.03
4-4-5               51.04
4-4-6               51.05
4-4-7               51.06
4-4-8               51.07
4-4-9               51.08
4-4-10              51.09
4-4-11              51.10
4-4-12              51.11
4-4-13              111.01
4-4-14              111.01
4-4-15              111.02
4-4-16              51.12
4-4-17              51.13
4-4-18              51.14
4-4-19              51.99
4-4-20              51.15
4-5-2               52.01
4-5-3               52.02
4-5-4               52.03
4-5-5               52.04
4-5-6               52.05
4-5-7               111.15
4-5-8               52.06
4-5-9               111.16
4-5-10              52.99
4-5-11              52.07
4-6-1               130.01;
                    130.99
4-7-1               90.04
4-8-2               34.015
5-1-1               91.001—
                    91.004
5-1-2               91.005
5-1-3               91.020;
                    91.021
                    91.035;
5-1-4               91.036;
                    91.037;
                    91.038
5-1-5               91.050
5-1-6               91.051
                    91.006;
5-1-7               91.065—
                    91.073
                    91.085;
5-1-8               91.086;
                    91.087
5-1-9               91.999
5-1-10              91.007
5-1-11              91.008
5-2-2               115.01
5-2-3               115.02
5-2-4               115.03
5-2-5               115.04
5-2-6               115.05
5-2-7               115.06
5-2-8               115.07
5-2-9               115.08
5-2-10              115.09;
                    115.99
5-4-1               130.02;
                    130.99
                    116.01—
5-5-1               116.04;
                    116.99
5-6-1               70.01;
                    70.99
5-8-1               33.01;
                    33.99
5-10-1              31.35—
                    31.40
5-12-1              TSO Table I
5-13-1              33.03
5-14-1              70.02
6-1-1               35.04
6-2-1               35.05
6-3-1               34.066
6-4B-1              34.036
6-6-1               34.067
6-7-1               34.068
6-8-1               35.06
6-12-1              34.016
6-12A-1             34.017
6-12B-1             34.017
6-13-1              34.018
6-15-1              154.057
6-16-1              34.020
6-17-1              34.069
6-17-2              34.069
6-20-1              33.02
7-1-1               71.01;
                    71.99
7-3-1               Ch. 73, Schd. I
7-4-1               Ch. 73, Schd. I
8-1-1               92.01
8-1-2               92.02
8-1-3               92.03
8-1-4               92.04
8-1-5               92.05
8-1-6               92.06;
                    92.99
8-1-7               92.07
Title 1, Chapter 16 TSO Table II
Title 3, Chapter 6  TSO Table I
Title 4, Chapter 3  34.004
Title 5, Chapter 11 32.01—
                    32.11
                    34.037—
Title 6, Chapter 5  34.065;
                    34.070;
                    34.072
Title 6, Chapter 6  34.067
Title 6, Chapter 14 34.019
Title 6, Chapter 18 TSO Table III
Title 6, Chapter 19 33.02
Title 7, Chapter 2  Ch. 73, Schd. I
Title 7, Chapter 5  Ch. 73, Schd. I
Title 7, Chapter 6  Ch. 73, Schd. I
Title 7, Chapter 7  Ch. 73, Schd. I
Title 7, Chapter 8  Ch. 72, Schd. I;
                    Ch. 73, Schd. I
                    
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.  Date Passed Code Section
-         - -         33.04
-         - -         30.35—
                      30.52
-         - -         36.02
2012-0515 - -         TSO Table V
2014-0514 - -         TSO Table V
-         4-19-1977   112.01
                      151.01;
                      151.02;
-         5-20-1986   151.03;
                      151.15—
                      151.21;
                      151.99
-         10-21-1986  70.02
-         3-21-1989   34.067
-         11-21-1989  30.23
-         8-20-1991   34.035
                      113.01—
                      113.04;
                      113.15—
-         3-16-1993   113.26;
                      113.40—
                      113.44;
                      113.55—
                      113.62
-         4-21-1993   34.036
                      153.01—
                      153.08;
-         10-18-1994  153.20—
                      153.23;
                      153.35—
                      153.40
95-909    9-19-1995   34.003
                      153.01—
                      153.08;
-         4-21-1998   153.20—
                      153.23;
                      153.35;
                      153.36
-         10-19-1999  35.06
-         1-21-2003   TSO Table III
2003-0129 1-21-2003   33.02
-         4-15-2003   34.019
-         9-16-2003   34.067
-         3-17-2004   34.015
-         4-19-2005   154.057
-         1-17-2006   34.068;
                      34.069
-         2-17-2009   32.14
-         3-21-2012   TSO Table II
-         3-19-2013   TSO Table I
-         5-21-2013   30.02
-         10-15-2013  TSO Table II
                      150.01;
-         2-18-2014   150.15—
                      150.22;
                      150.99
-         6-17-2014   32.13
-         - -2018     30.05
-         1-16-2018   TSO Table I
-         11-27-2018  31.01
2024-01   12-19-2023  34.005
                     
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.   Date Passed Code Section
                       152.001—
                       152.005;
                       152.020—
                       152.027;
                       152.040—
                       152.051;
                       152.065—
                       152.067;
                       152.080;
                       152.081;
                       152.095;
                       152.110—
                       152.114;
                       152.125—
-          - -         152.127;
                       152.140—
                       152.142;
                       152.155—
                       152.169;
                       152.180—
                       152.189;
                       152.200—
                       152.209;
                       152.220—
                       152.235;
                       152.250—
                       152.259;
                       152.270—
                       152.272;
                       152.999
-          - -         34.002
-          - -         TSO Table V
-          4-20-1976   34.004
-          7-1-1984    30.20—
                       30.22
-          1-16-1985   35.03
                       52.01—
                       52.07;
-          4-16-1985   52.99;
                       111.15;
                       111.16
-          1-21-1986   35.02
-          1-20-1987   34.066
                       117.01;
                       117.02;
                       117.15—
-          4-21-1987   117.19;
                       117.30—
                       117.39;
                       117.99
-          8-18-1987   34.004
-          2-16-1988   31.35—
                       31.40
                       114.01;
-          4-1-1988    114.02;
                       114.03
-          9-20-1988   34.020
-          4-18-1989   TSO Table II
                       35.20—
-          5-15-1990   35.25;
                       35.99
                       114.01;
-          4-16-1991   114.02;
                       114.03
-          8-20-1991   Ch. 73, Schd. I
-          11-19-1991  71.01;
                       71.99
                       52.01—
                       52.07;
-          4-21-1992   52.99;
                       111.15;
                       111.16
                       51.01—
                       51.15;
-          6-16-1992   51.99;
                       111.01;
                       111.02
                       117.01;
                       117.02;
                       117.15—
-          8-18-1992   117.19;
                       117.30—
                       117.39;
                       117.99
-          6-15-1993   Ch. 73, Schd. I
-          2-15-1994   33.01;
                       33.99
                       90.01—
-          7-19-1994   90.03;
                       90.99
                       51.01—
                       51.15;
                       51.99;
                       52.01—
                       52.07;
                       52.99;
                       111.01;
                       111.02;
-          3-21-1995   111.15;
                       111.16;
                       117.01;
                       117.02;
                       117.15—
                       117.19;
                       117.30—
                       117.39;
                       117.99
-          11-21-1995  33.03
-          12-19-1995  Ch. 73, Schd. I
-          3-18-1997   Ch. 73, Schd. I
                       117.01;
                       117.02;
                       117.15—
-          12-16-1997  117.19;
                       117.30—
                       117.39;
                       117.99
                       116.01—
-          10-20-1998  116.04;
                       116.99
                       51.01—
                       51.15;
                       51.99;
                       52.01—
-          12-22-1998  52.07;
                       52.99;
                       111.01;
                       111.02;
                       111.15;
                       111.16
-          1-19-1999   31.35—
                       31.40
                       114.01;
-          2-16-1999   114.02;
                       114.03
                       90.15—
-          4-20-1999   90.17;
                       90.99
-          8-17-1999   130.01;
                       130.99
1999-1006B 10-19-1999  31.15—
                       31.23
                       115.01—
99-1110    11-16-1999  115.09;
                       115.99
-          10-17-2000  TSO Table I
2000-10    10-17-2000  70.01;
                       70.99
-          9-18-2001   35.01
-          4-16-2002   Ch. 73, Schd. I
2003-0101A 1-21-2003   34.018
2003-0101B 1-21-2003   34.016
2003-0305B 3-18-2003   34.017
-          4-15-2003   35.04;
                       35.05
-          5-20-2003   130.02;
                       130.99
-          7-15-2003   32.01—
                       32.11
                       51.01—
                       51.15;
                       51.99;
                       52.01—
                       52.07;
                       52.99;
                       111.01;
                       111.02;
-          8-19-2003   111.15;
                       111.16;
                       117.01;
                       117.02;
                       117.15—
                       117.19;
                       117.30—
                       117.39;
                       117.99
-          12-17-2003  Ch. 72, Schd. I
-          12-17-2003  Ch. 73, Schd. I
2005-08    9-20-2005   34.017
                       91.001—
                       91.008;
                       91.020;
                       91.021;
                       91.035—
                       91.038;
2005-1116  11-15-2005  91.050;
                       91.051;
                       91.065—
                       91.073;
                       91.085—
                       91.087;
                       91.999
                       34.037—
-          - -2006     34.065;
                       34.070;
                       34.072
-          2-16-2010   117.15,
                       117.38
-          10-16-2012  112.15—
                       112.25
-          4-16-2013   Ch. 72, Schd. II
                       30.01—
                       30.04;
-          5-21-2013   30.99;
                       31.55—
                       31.59;
                       31.99
-          10-15-2013  34.020
-          11-19-2013  34.018
                       152.004;
                       152.065;
-          1-21-2014   152.180;
                       152.181;
                       152.182;
                       152.234
                       112.40—
-          7-15-2014   112.48;
                       112.99
-          10-18-2016  34.001
                       50.01—
-          - -2016     50.13;
                       50.99
                       90.30—
-          - -2016     90.39;
                       90.99
-          1-19-2016   Ch. 72, Schd. II
-          - -2017     TSO Table V
-          - -2017     34.071
-          - -2023     52.20—
                       52.27
                       154.001—
                       154.006;
                       154.020—
                       154.023;
                       154.035—
                       154.057;
                       154.070—
                       154.076;
                       154.090—
                       154.095;
                       154.110—
                       154.115;
                       154.130—
                       154.135;
                       154.150—
                       154.155;
                       154.170—
                       154.175;
                       154.190—
                       154.194;
                       154.205—
                       154.209;
                       154.220—
                       154.224;
                       154.235—
                       154.239;
                       154.250—
                       154.254;
                       154.265;
                       154.280—
                       154.286;
                       154.300;
                       154.301;
                       154.302;
                       154.315—
-          5-16-2023   154.318;
                       154.330—
                       154.335;
                       154.350—
                       154.355;
                       154.370—
                       154.374;
                       154.385—
                       154.390;
                       154.405—
                       154.410;
                       154.425—
                       154.430;
                       154.445—
                       154.450;
                       154.465—
                       154.470;
                       154.485—
                       154.489;
                       154.500—
                       154.515;
                       154.530;
                       154.545—
                       154.555;
                       154.570—
                       154.575;
                       154.590—
                       154.599;
                       154.610—
                       154.621;
                       154.635—
                       154.644;
                       154.655—
                       154.662;
                       154.675—
                       154.678;
                       154.999; TSO Table IV
                       110.001—
                       110.004;
                       110.015;
                       110.016;
                       110.030—
                       110.035;
2024-03-A  3-21-2024   110.050—
                       110.069;
                       110.075—
                       110.083;
                       110.095—
                       110.101;
                       110.997—
                       110.999
2024-04-A  4-16-2024   154.057
2024-05    5-23-2024   Adopting Ordinance
2024-06-A  6-18-2024   110.057
2024-07-A  7-16-2024   110.060
2024-08-A  8-20-2024   130.01
2024-09    10-15-2024  130.10—
                       130.21
                       156.01—
2024-10-A  11-19-2024  156.10;
                       156.999
2024-12-A  12-17-2024  34.002
                      
 
 
